GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
February 1981* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSIONS 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Monday, 22 September 1980, at 10.35 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. SETHNA (India) 
President; Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal 
Republic of Germany) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 

— 
Opening of the session 1 — 3 
— 
Election of the President 4 — 17 
2. 
Message from the Secretary-General 18-2 7 
of the United Nations 
1 Election of officers and appointment 28 - 29 
of the General Committee 

3 Statement by the Director General 30 - 75 
5 Voluntary contributions to the 76 - 79 
Technical Assistance Fund for 1981 

— 
Arrangements for the General Conference 80 — 8l 
6 
General debate and annual report 82-13 8 
for 1979 

Statements by the delegates of: 


United States of America 82 - 106 
Netherlands 107 - 118 
Japan 119 - 138 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 26 September 1980, 
**/ GC(XXIV)/626. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in documents 
GC(XXIV)/INF/l93/Rev.3, 193/Rev.3/Mod.1 and 193/Rev.3/Mod.2. 


80-6271 



GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 2 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the twenty-fourth regular session of 
the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed the delegates, observers, representatives 
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and representatives of 
other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. He said he would 
like to convey their gratitude to the Government of Austria for once again 
making available the Hofburg Palace. He also thanked everyone present for the 
co-operation they had extended to him during his presidentship of the twenty-third 
session of the General Conference and expressed his Government's gratitude for 
the messages of appreciation received after the session in New Delhi. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of President 
of the Conference. 
5. Mr. PECQJJEOR (Prance) said that, as co-president of the West European 
group, he had great pleasure in proposing Mr. Haunschild, delegate of the 
Federal Republic of Germany and State Secretary of the Federal Ministry for 
Research and Technology, as President of the twenty-fourth regular session of the 
General Conference. At a time when the world was facing a serious energy crisis, 
it was important that the meetings of the Conference be presided over by a man of 
experience and international standing. Mr. Haunschild, who had been active in 
various Federal posts and also in the Agency, EDRATOM, the OECD and CERN, amply 
met those retirements. 
6. Mr. COSTA-ALONSO (Mexico), speaking on behalf of the Latin American 
group, said it gave him great pleasure to support the nomination of 
Mr. Haunschild. 
7. Mr. NIMPJTO (Indonesia) said that he believed Mr. Haunschild was the 
right person to ensure the success of the present session of the General 
Conference. On behalf of his delegation and the Asian regional group, he 
expressed support for his nomination. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219Page 
3 

8. On behalf of the North-American regional group, Mr. SMITH (United States 
of America) said he was happy to second the nomination of Mr, Haunschild. 
9. Mr. OSZTROYSZKI (Hungary) supported the nomination on behalf of the 
European socialist countries. 
10. Mr. Haunschild (Federal Republic of Germany) was elected President of 
the General Conference for its twenty-fourth regular session by acclamation. 
11. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT said that on behalf of everyone present he 
extended congratulations to Mr. Haunschild. Mr. Haunschild was no stranger to 
the Agency and the international community as he had led the delegation from the 
Federal Republic of Germany to the General Conference for many years. The success 
of the present session was assured in his safe and capable hands. 
12. Mr. Haunschild (Federal Republic of Germany) took the Chair. 
13. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for electing him as President of the 
General Conference and expressed his appreciation to the distinguished delegate 
of France for his kind words and to the delegates of Mexico, Indonesia, the 
United States and Hungary for their support. 
14. In taking the Chair he was aware of the high standard set by so many 
outstanding predecessors, in particular Dr. Homi Sethna, who had acted as both 
host and President to the previous session of the General Conference. On behalf 
of all delegates, he wished to thank him and his country once more for their 
gracious hospitality in New Delhi. 
15. The energy question remained a topic of the highest importance for all 
economies. Nuclear energy continued to be recognized as one of the few energy 
sources available which could make a meaningful and even an essential contribution 
to meeting world energy needs in the decades to come. The Agency had played an 
important role for almost a quarter of a century in fostering the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and had become a forum for the international debate on questions of 
nuclear policy, particularly with regard to the assurance of supplies and the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It was gratifying that the Agency, through 
the wise and determined use of its possibilities, had acquired world-wide 
recognition and confidence. At a time when Member States were striving for the 
renewal of consensus in international nuclear relations, it was good to know that 
such a solid platform existed. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 4 

16. The programme and budget of the Agency underlined traditional priorities 
but also showed a growing awareness of the importance of nuclear safety. Technical 
assistance as well as safeguards would continue to be among the priority 
tasks of the ilgency. The reports of the Board of Governors on the financing of 
those activities would greatly facilitate the Conference's work on those issues, 
which had been left open at the previous session of the General Conference. 
While concentrating on those topics, the Conference should not, even in times of 
budgetary constraint, lose sight of the many other promotional activities of the 
Agency which were of high quality and of considerable importance to many Member 
States. 
17. In the last two years the Agency had made significant contributions to the 
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (iNFCE) which had ended the previous 
February. That truly international exercise had resulted in a comprehensive 
data base and a great number of suggestions regarding ways of making nuclear 
energy available throughout the world while minimizing the dangers of proliferation. 
The Agency was now called upon to play a major role in following up the 
suggestions of INFCE. Discussions on particular institutional arrangements and 
technical developments had already been taking place within the Agency for some 
time. The establishment of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was an 
important new step in the Agency's efforts to arrive at mutually acceptable 
solutions with the participation of all interested parties. The Agency was well 
equipped to serve as the focal point of those discussions. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

18. The PRESIDENT welcomed the representative of the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations, Mr. Cottafavi, and invited him to take the floor. 
19. Mr. COTTAFAVI said he wished to convey a message to the General 
Conference from the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. 
20. When the Conference had met in New Delhi in 1979, Mr. Waldheim noted, he 
had underlined the importance of finding ways to spread the benefits of the 
peaceful application of nuclear energy without increasing the risk of nuclear 
proliferation. That complex issue continued to be a major concern of the 
international community. 
21. The Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) held recently in Geneva, had once 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
Page 5 

again demonstrated that, to be workable, any scheme developed to meet that objective 
would have to present an equitable balance between the rights and obligations 
of the States involved. In a world of increasing interdependence, the responsibility 
of those amply endowed with technological resources to allow developing 
nations a share of the benefits of those resources was no longer in dispute, fy 
the same token, the recipients of that technology were obliged to refrain from 
using it for any but peaceful purposes. 

22. The world economy was passing through a critical phase in which every effort 
had to be made to end the current predominant reliance on petroleum-based energy. 
The goal of the transition should be to ensure the availability of energy to all 
countries, particularly the developing ones, whose economic growth would 
necessarily entail increasing energy consumption. In the search for new and 
renewable sources of energy, the potential of nuclear energy could not, of course, 
be ignored. However, it would require the concerted thought and effort of 
scientists, technicians, planners and policy-makers to establish the necessary 
conditions of confidence in its exploitation. 
23. The results of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (iNFCE) should 
be noted in that connection. It was to be hoped that profound and careful evaluation 
of a large number of options would help in choosing the most effective 
approaches regarding the use of nuclear energy while reducing the risks of 
proliferation to a minimum. 
24. Those risks were increasingly a source of concern. No new nuclear-weapon 
powers had emerged since the first review of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, but, 
there were reports that several nations might be capable of manufacturing nuclear 
weapons. The effective widespread application of the Agency's safeguards system 
was therefore of the highest importance in combating the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
25. The international community was now at the crossroads. Decisions of a 
fundamental and far-reaching nature were required on the future course of 
nuclear power, non-proliferation and disarmament. Nuclear energy could be used 
on the one hand to improve the global economic situation, but on the other, to 
endanger the very existence of life on the planet. Until the nuclear arms race 
was halted or reversed, the world would continue to be confronted with evergreater 
risks of a nuclear war. 

GC(XXTV)/OR.219 
page 6 

26. The International Atomic Energy Agency had a critical role to play as a 
forum for examining many of the issues involved in the use of nuclear energy. 
The Second MPT Review Conference had clearly shown, once again, the importance 
of both the Agency's promotional and regulatory activities. 
27. Under the effective and experienced leadership of Dr. Sigvard Eklund, the 
Agency had fulfilled the increasingly challenging task placed upon it by the 
international community, and he wished to express his best wishes to the General 
Conference for the success of its endeavours. 
ELECTIOIT OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

28. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that further informal consultations 
would be required regarding the composition of the General Committee; he 
therefore proposed that the Conference should proceed to item 3 of the provisional 
agenda, "Statement by the Director General". 
29. The General Conference accepted the President's proposal. 
STATEMENT BT THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

30. The PRESIDENT invited the Director General of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, Mr. Sigvard Eklund, to take the floor. 
31. The DIRECTOR GENERAL, after congratulating the President on his 
election and commenting on his valuable contributions to the Agency's work as 
leader of his country's delegation, recalled that the previous year the General 
Conference had enjoyed the generous hospitality of the Government of India, and 
those attending had had the opportunity to become acquainted with the remarkable 
development of nuclear energy in that country. The present General Conference 
session was the first in Vienna since the Agency had moved to the Vienna 
International Centre (VIC) the previous autumn. General Conference sessions in 
Vienna would continue to be held in the Hofburg until the new Conference Centre 
at the VIC was ready in the mid-1980s. 
32. 
Slightly more than a week before, the World Energy Conference had concluded 
5000
a meeting in the Federal Republic of Germany attended by some participants. 
Having attended that meeting, he might be expected to be able to give an accurate 
account not only of the world-^wide status of nuclear power but also of its 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 7 

foreseeable development in the future. It would, indeed, be easy to describe the 
present status of nuclear power. Statistics on plants in operation, under construction 
or planned were provided in the Agency's annual report. The contribution 
that nuclear power would make by 1985 could also be predicted with reasonable 
certainty. However, the view into the more distant future, ten or twenty years 
hence, was obscured by deep and growing uncertainties. 

33. Many nations seemed to be in the midst of a re-assessment of the fundamental 
values which had provided a basis of the industrial society for more than a 
century. Those values had been based on the assumption that, by exploring the 
secrets of nature, it would be possible to tame and use the natural resources and 
thereby eliminate the drudgery of manual or repetitive work and raise living 
standards everywhere - in short, to make material progress possible on a large 
scale. 
34. In a number of industrial countries, it was thought that a level of material 
satiety had been reached and that further high technology was not needed. Ideas 
of that kind had shown themselves to be contagious, spreading throughout the 
affluent sections of industrialized society and sprouting out into pressure 
groups, sometimes with considerable political influence. The advocates of those 
ideas had come to regard nuclear energy as the archetypical example of high 
technology which was not required since they seemed to be content with their 
present condition and quite oblivious of the lot of the vast majority of mankind, 
numbering some two thousand million people, who could barely afford the 
necessities of life, let alone a reasonable standard of living. 
35" One was thus faced with the paradox of hostility to nuclear energy at a time 
when the present industrial pattern was consuming oil so quickly that the world 
ran the risk of exhausting its reserves within a few decades, and when the 
rising price of oil was causing grave imbalances in the world economy. 

36. Seven of the world's leading statesmen had issued a joint statement in 
June 1980, at their summit meeting in Venice, to the effect that: 
"We underline the vital contribution of nuclear power to a more secure 
energy supply. The role of nuclear energy has to be increased if world 
energy needs are to be met. We shall, therefore, have to expand our 
nuclear generating capacity." 

The reality, however, was that OECD countries had just scaled down their nuclear 
projections by some 30$ and, in the country which had pioneered nuclear energy 


GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 8 

for three decades, there was even talk of "retiring" nuclear power plants in an 
orderly manner. What future could, therefore, he foreseen at the global level 
for the promotion of nuclear energy, the task for which the Agency had been 
established twenty-three years previously? 

37• Even in the country which had acted as host to the World Energy Conference, 
the result of a detailed study by a parliamentary commission had been a 
recommendation for only a very limited expansion of nuclear energy, while 
decisions on fundamental issues were deferred. In Sweden, the recent referendum 
had approved the completion of a twelve-reactor programme, but had simultaneously 
recommended the gradual phasing-out of nuclear power by the year 2010 and it s 
replacement by other, mainly renewable, domestic energy sources. 

38. To balance the picture, it should be added that Prance's remarkably dynamic 
nuclear energy programme was intended to provide half of that country's 
electricity production by 1985 through the steady ordering of some 5000 MH of 
nuclear capacity each year, and that the programmes of the countries belonging to 
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CHEA) were aimed at no less than 
100 000 KW by 1990. 
39. It might be asked whether the World Energy Conference had cast any light on 
that confused situation. There had been overwhelming agreement on the need to 
use nuclear energy in order to diminish the consumption of oil. There had also 
been discussions on the need for nuclear power in the developing countries, whose 
energy problems had been one of the main themes of the Conference. There had been 
stern reminders of the environmental and even global consequences of burning 
large quantities of fossil fuel. One participant had even expressed a sense of 
urgency in the words: "We have energy, what we lack i s time", when he had 
referred to the transition from fossil to nuclear fuel. However, no plan of 
action had emerged from the Conference, and no suggestions had been made as to 
how to overcome the impasse which much of the world seemed to have reached in 
dealing with the irrational opposition to nuclear energy. 
40. Until there was a resurgence of demand for new nuclear electric capacity, 
the fundamental question would remain: how and how long could the nuclear 
industry hibernate or even survive without new orders? Hot only was the nuclear 
industry itself affected, but there were also signs that there might be an 
ominous decline in the professional manpower needed to service the industry. 
Universities in the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany and Sweden 
GC(XXIT)/OR.219 
page 9 

were reporting that professorships in nuclear topics were being transferred to 
other disciplines owing to a diminishing interest by students who sensed a 
declining market for nuclear skills. 

41. It might seem a pessimistic view, but until the electorate of the 
industrialized countries of the West fully realized that nuclear energy was 
immediately available to solve many of their environmental and economic problems, 
care would have to be taken to see that nuclear energy, at least in those 
countries, was not strangled while stil l in it s infancy. That risk existed not 
only because of the pressure of anti-nuclear groups, but also because of the 
actions of those who, though with the best intentions, inhibited the growth of 
nuclear energy by regulatory requirements far beyond the scope of the relevant 
provisions of the Ifon-Proliferation Treaty. 
42. In view of the establishment of an Agency safeguards system, and the 
Tlatelolco and iron-Proliferation Treaties, it was very regrettable that the 
confidence that had fostered nuclear development in the sixties and early 
seventies had been eroded. Concepts such as prior consent and good nonproliferation 
credentials were also a cause of uneasiness since, when carried to 
logical conclusions, they might create situations where customers and consumers 
alike felt the need to shake off dependence on outside enrichment and 
reprocessing services by establishing facilities of their own. 
43. It was his personal conviction that every advanced form of energy 
technology, including nuclear energy, would be required for survival in a world 
which, within decades, would have to support 5°$ more people than today and 
also be confronted with steadily diminishing natural resources and raw materials. 
44. There had been a time when public awareness had perhaps been lulled into a 
false sense of security - a time when oil was cheap and plentiful and solar and 
other forms of soft energy seemed to offer quick and easy solutions. In many 
countries there was now a growing movement towards energy conservation and an 
incipient realization that each form of energy production possessed both 
advantages and drawbacks - an attitude that should be encouraged. 
45. The Agency could make its contribution to restoring confidence in nuclear 
power by promoting programmes for the dissemination of objective information, by 

GC(XnV)/OR.219 


page 10 


expanding its work on ensuring the highest nuclear safety standards, by its 
contribution to non-proliferation and by its help in stabilizing and clarifying 
the world nuclear supply system. Ultimately, however, it was up to 
the Governments of Member States of the Agency to bear the political responsibilities; 
the Agency itself could only serve to implement their wishes and 
decisions. 


46. To an impartial observer, the record of the last two years in nuclear 
power terms had surely been bewildering. The price of oil had nearly doubled 
in 1979, while that of steam coal had risen by 40$. A recent report by the 
British Central Electricity Generating Board had shown that the cost of 
electricity produced by the newest coal-fired stations would be 5O5S above that 
of the AGR reactors, while oil-fuelled power was nearly three times more 
expensive. Furthermore, it was increasingly clear that the new, renewable 
energy sources would not make a significant contribution before the end of the 
century. 
47. Regarding the environment, there had been growing international concern 
about the effects of acid rain, together with far-reaching climatic changes, 
that might result from the increasing carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere. 
Both those phenomena were caused by "the burning of coal and oil and other fossil 
fuels. There was a great deal of objective evidence that properly operated 
nuclear power plants presented significantly lower overall risks than other 
available formB of power generation. One might have thought that the rational 
reaction to that fact in favour of nuclear power would be a rapid expansion of 
nuclear capacity, and at first sight that seemed to be the case. For example, 
on 1 June 1980, 125 000 MW of nuclear power was providing 8% of the world's 
electricity, and a further 210 000 MW was under construction in nearly 30 
different countries. But those comforting statistics hid a confused and discouraging 
picture. In 1979, the total amount of nuclear power plant on order 
decreased by about 10 000 MW. Eight new orders had been placed, but 16 previous 
ones had been cancelled. That trend had continued during the first half of 198O 
and nine plants with a total capacity of 8600 MW had been ordered in Western 
Europe, while ten plants with a capacity of 11 000 MW had been cancelled - all 
in the United States. 
48. The word that most closely described the nuclear industry in North America 
and most of northern Europe was stagnation. In the United States, which still 
led the world in nuclear capacity, not a single new unit had been ordered 
since 1978. On the other hand, there were countries, like Japan or Spain, where 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 11 


construction of three previously ordered plants had been approved earlier in the 
current year, despite opposition. The sharpest contrast was, however, afforded 
by France and the socialist countries. Also to be mentioned was the fact that 
the world's largest fast breeder reactor had come into operation in the Soviet 
Union earlier in the year, and that the first commercial breeder - the Super 
Phenix, with a capacity of 1200 MW(e) - was expected to be put into operation 
in 1983. 


49. It was worthy of note that the oil supply crisis, coal problems and the 
economic and environmental advantages of nuclear energy were factors that applied 
with almost equal force to nearly all countries. Economic factors such as 
recession and inflation affected almost all free-market industrial countries, 
and also some of the socialist countries. Hence, the differences between 
national nuclear plans could not be explained away in those terms, and the answer 
lay rather in the actions of political decision-makers and questions of public 
confidence. 
50. In any event, the nuclear industry in those countries which had pioneered it 
now faced an uncertain future. If the uncertainty continued, it would affect 
even those countries where nuclear power was still forging ahead, thereby 
jeopardizing the prospects of nuclear power in developing countries, and the 
Agency itself would suffer from the repercussions. 
51. In the developing countries the picture was equally discouraging. Although 
Argentina had ordered a new power reactor in 1980, and although Bangladesh, the 
People's Republic of China and Greece were, it was said, considering their first 
plants, delays had taken place in the Brazilian and Philippine programmes, and 
one country, Iran, had terminated its nuclear power programme. 
52. The size of the standard nuclear unit was still an obstacle to the introduction 
of nuclear power in the developing countries. Estimates showed that not 
more than ten of the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America would 
be operating nuclear plants by 1990, and only ten developing countries now had 
firm plans for operating such plants by the end of the century. 
53. An important element in any nuclear power programme was the availability of 
uranium. Together with the Huclear Energy Agency of OECD, the Agency continued 
to publish reports on uranium resources, production and demand. The latest 
report (1979) showed that estimates of reasonably assured resources at a cost 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 12 page 13 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 

of up to US $80 per kilogram had increased between 1977 and 1979 by about 
200 000 tonnes to a total of 1.9 million tonnes. Those of uranium in the range 
of US $80-130 per kilogram had likewise gone up by about 200 000 tonnes to a 
total of 0.7 million tonnes. Those figures, which did not include the socialist 
countries, gave a reasonable assurance of about 2.6 million tonnes of uranium; 
that would be sufficient to ensure a lifetime's supply of fuel for all reactors 
scheduled for construction by the year 2000. And if breeders came into common 
use at a later stage, the supplies would be ample for the foreseeable future. 

54« Present production capacity was sufficient for current needs and the uranium 
resources available would permit an increase in annual production if there were 
economic incentives and stability. But unfortunately that was not the case. 
There had been instances of uranium mines closing down because of the uncertainties 
prevailing in nuclear power. It had to be borne in mind that from commencement 
of uranium exploration to the first substantial production the lead-time was 
now of the order of 10-15 years. 

55» The Agency's role in nuclear safety had been considerably broadened and in 
that connection mention had to be made again of the extremely good safety record 
of the nuclear industry. It was astonishing that the media never referred to the 
fact that there had been not one radiation-induced fatality in nearly 2000 reactoryears 
of operating experience at 235 commercial nuclear power plants. Pew other 
industries, and certainly no other energy industry, could claim a comparable record 
Nevertheless, the nuclear industry had lost no time in drawing lessons from the 
Three Mile Island accident. There was now greater emphasis on operational safety 
and improved training in recognition of the important part played by the human 
factor. In the United States there had been established an Institute for Nuclear 
Power Operations and a Nuclear Safety Analysis Centre to ensure that adequate 
attention was given to those and related matters. 

56. Also worthy of note was the growing scepticism in the scientific community 
with regard to the risks of low-level radiation. The International Commission on 
Radiological Protection had discussed the possible relaxation of certain standards, 
and epidemiological studies had recently been made in China on the incidence of 
cancer in population groups exposed to very different levels of natural radiation 
without differential effects being detected. Furthermore, the third report of the 
United States National Research Council on the Biological Effects of Ionizing 
Radiation had cut by half the already low figure for possible cancer deaths 
associated with low-level radiation. However, it would be prudent not to relax 
any standards until more evidence was available. 

57- As was known, the Agency had reached an advanced stage in preparing the most 
up-to-date internationally agreed safety standards for nuclear power plants. Some 
twenty of the sixty documents envisaged had already been published. Fourteen 
requests for visits by safety experts had been received from Member States with a 
view to assistance to their national authorities in applying the standards and, 
under the technical assistance programme, there had been in 1980 four nuclear 

safety training courses, each of six weeks' duration. 

58. The major International Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety 
Issues, to be held in Stockholm from 20 to 24 October 1980, would afford an 
opportunity for a thorough evaluation of the safety standards being applied by 
the nuclear industry, and for assessment of possibilities for closer international 
and regional co-operation in safety matters. It would also provide a forum for 
discussion of the transfrontier aspects of nuclear energy, an issue raised by 
the Austrian Government. 

59. In the area of waste management, the Agency had expanded its programme and 
was now co-operating closely with NEA; it was also working with the United 
Nations Environment Programme (UKEP), the United Nations Scientific Committee on 
the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) and WHO to assess the health and 
environmental impact of various energy sources. In addition, the Agency's regulations 
for the safe transport of nuclear material, recently comprehensively 
reviewed, were now being applied in almost all countries under the relevant 
international conventions. 
60. Agency safeguards and the problem of proliferation had been discussed at 
length at the Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Nbn-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons a few weeks previously. Many participants 
had expressed confidence in the Agency's safeguards system and called for further 
strengthening of the safeguards programme, which was recognized as an important 
contribution to international security. No effort should be spared, in his 
opinion, in strengthening the non-proliferation regime in the next five years. 
More specifically, an early conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty would 
be a major step in making the NPT regime universally acceptable. Unlike NPT, a 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 14 


comprehensive test ban treaty would apply equally to nuclear-weapon and 
non-nuclear-weapon States, thus preventing charges of discrimination. If all 
nuclear-weapon States could accept such a treaty, it should be acceptable to 
those important "threshold™ countries that now refused to join HPT on the grounds 
that it was discriminatory. It would serve the purpose of preventing the testing 
of any nuclear explosive that such "threshold" countries might possess or acquire, 
as well as to some extent putting a brake on vertical proliferation. 

61. Turning to the issue of those nuclear-weapon States that were operating or 
constructing unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, he wished to point out that the 
majority of facilities concerned were "sensitive" and that it was impossible to 
escape the political fact that the operation of an unsafeguarded reprocessing or 
enrichment plant automatically created a fear of plana to acquire nuclear 
explosives. The destabilizing effect of such apprehensions in the regions 
concerned was abundantly clear. It would perhaps be naive to expect in such cases 
that the nuclear problem could be resolved in isolation from the broader political 
problems surrounding it. But it had to be stressed that by adding a nuclear 
dimension to such political problems one was more likely, far from enhancing 
national security, to pose a threat to security and unravel the whole fabric of 
non-proliferation that had been woven with such effort, patience and statesmanship 
during the past two decades. On the other hand, acceptance of full-scope 
safeguards by those countries would be a major contribution to the security of the 
regions to which they belonged and to the establishment of additional nuclearweapon-
free zones. 
62. Lastly, all countries were urged to remove obstacles that stood in the way of 
effective application of Agency safeguards. The Board of Governors had been 
informed, on a number of occasions, of the growing problems faced by the Agency 
in the designation and acceptance of inspectors. Although it was the right of 
every State to reject an individual whom it considered personally unacceptable, 
the practice of rejecting whole categories of inspectors on political, linguistic 
or ethnic grounds was growing and inevitably led to retaliatory discrimination, 
thereby hindering the effective use of scarce and costly manpower. 
6j. As far as positive developments in the safeguards programme were concerned, 
the Agency had set up its first safeguards field office in Canada and was making 
similar arrangements for the stationing of inspectors in Japan so as to reduce 
long-distance travel and increase inspection man-days in the field. 

0C(XXIV)/OR.219 

page 15 

64. Since December 1978, a group of experts from twenty-five States and EURATOM 
had been endeavouring to develop an international Plutonium storage system, and 
had now reached the stage of drafting some of the relevant legal instruments. 
A similar group had been reviewing the problem of spent fuel management, which 
was increasingly difficult from the technological and economic standpoint for 
many States in the light of delays in expanding their reprocessing capacity. 
65. Further points to note were the renewed interest shown at the HPT Review 
Conference in continuing and expanding the Regional Fuel Cycle Centre Study, and 
the fact that Subsidiary Arrangements under the Safeguards Agreement with the 
United Kingdom had come into force in August 1980; moreover, the Agreement with 
the United States had been approved by the Senate in July and would enter into 
force by the end of the present year. 
66. The Board's decision on a target of $13 million for the technical assistance 
programme in 1981, and on planning figures of $16 million for 1982 and 
$19 million for 1983, was encouraging. Despite the target increase, however, the 
gap between resources and needs was gradually widening. It had been possible to 
put into effect in the 1979 programme only one third of the projects that were 
technically sound but for which no funds were available. 
67. The Agency's regular technical assistance prolamine provided many examples 
of small projects that served as "catalysts" for larger national or UHDP projects. 
For example, a small interregional project carried out by the Agency in 1978 had 
led to the planning of a $5 million UNDP project for the industrial application 
of nuclear technology; that had been possible under the Regional Co-operation 
Agreement (RCA) in Asia, which was now substantially supported by Australia and 
Japan. 
68. The developing countries had been severely affected by rising energy costs, 
and it had now become imperative for them to limit the consumption of some of the 
products that made possible the "green revolution" but which, unfortunately, 
required high energy inputs, such as artificial nitrogen fertilizers and 
pesticides. The Joint FAO/lAEA Division, which had accordingly shifted the 
emphasis of its work, had begun a co-ordinated research programme, in collaboration 
with the Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA), aimed at 
maximizing the biological fixation of atmospheric nitrogen. 

GC( XXIV)/OR.219 
page 16 


69. The work of the International Tokamak Reactor (INTOR) Workshop was progressing 
and the survey of the present status of tokamaks, designed to determine the greatest 
step forward that could reasonably he planned for the early 1990s as an 
international project, had been completed. The next phase, which was to produce 
a conceptual design for an operating device, was scheduled for completion in 
July 1981. 
70. Turning to a matter he believed should engage the Agency's greatest 
endeavours, he said that discussions at the HPT Review Conference had shown how 
essential it was to work for greater security in the supply of nuclear materials, 
plant and technology while still strengthening assurances against proliferation. 
In 1979, he had suggested that the Agency should set up a committee for that 
purpose and the relevant action had been taken by the Board in June. The first 
meeting of the new committee (CAS) would be held the following week and there 
was a real possibility of finding mutually acceptable solutions. Assurance in 
the supply of nuclear fuels was doubly important in view of the insecurities 
surrounding the supply of other energy sources. If the challenge was not met, 
the alternative could well be nuclear autarchy, with all the proliferation risks 
that went with it. 
71. In conclusion, there were some budgetary matters to be mentioned. In 
deference to wishes expressed by many Member States, the Secretariat had drawn 
up a zero real growth budget for 1981, amounting to 888.7 million, and the Board 
had recommended its approval. It was not possible, or desirable, however, to 
freeze every programme, hence zero-growth programmes resulted of necessity in the 
reduction of certain Agency activities. More especially, some of the programmes 
of the Department of Research and Isotopes and of the Division of Nuclear Power 
and Reactors of interest to developing countries had had to be retrenched. 
72. Furthermore, the needs of developing countries, like the requirements of the 
Agency's own safety and safeguards programmes, did not remain static. Hence zero 
growth could only be a transitory phase if the Agency's programmes were to reflect 
its statutory obligations and the needs of Member States. But although technical 
programmes would continue to require a reasonable budgetary growth in the years 
ahead, they would be kept under constant review, especially in cases where the 
priority assigned had diminished. For example, the Agency's laboratories at 
Seibersdorf and Monaco would be subject to a fresh appraisal in terms of the 
scope and requirements of the relevant programmes in 198l; at Monaco the 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 17 


laboratory premises and equipment had become inadequate, while at Seibersdorf 
there were activities which could probably now be turned over to national 


laboratories. 


73. While energy itself might be short, there was no shortage of meetings on 
that subject. A number of steps had been taken to streamline and reduce the 
cost of the Agency's symposium programme on the basis of experience gained over 
the last two decades. 
74» The Agency had often paid tribute to the generosity shown by the Austrian 
Government and was aware of the tremendous capital expenditure borne by it in 
connection with the construction of the VIC. At the same time, the Agency had to 
be constantly on the look-out to avoid situations in which its budget was 


increasingly consumed by housekeeping expenses. Also, there were still uncertainties 
with regard to the cost of operation, maintenance and repair work at 
the VIC, but it was hoped that a more stable period of financial planning was in 
the offing. 


75. It might be appropriate, in summing up, to repeat some of the thoughts that 
he had expressed at the end of his address to the General Conference in 
New Delhi in 1979» namely that far from being at the end of industrialization, 
the world was at the beginning of it. One had to acknowledge how far the world 
had progressed since the Second World War in making the lives of human beings 
easier, healthier and more productive through continuing scientific and technological 
developments. The present nuclear debate was not the most important 
issue that mankind had ever faced; there were many other, more important ones 
such as how to maintain world peace and how to help the hundreds and millions of 
people who were starving. Yet, to feed those people and to better their lot, 
industrialization was needed, and that in turn required a supply of cheap, 
reliable energy. That was where nuclear energy could make a substantial contribution. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FUND FOR 1981 


76. The PRESIDENT, after thanking the Director General, said that he would 
like to make some remarks concerning the importanceof voluntary contributions to 
the Technical Assistance Fund. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 

page 18 

77. Technical assistance to developing countries was one of the main tasks of the 
Agency under its Statute. The decision by a country whether to embark on a 
nuclear energy programme was a basic political decision requiring an independent 
assessment of that country's particular situation. Developing countries therefore 
needed to acquire the means for carrying out such assessments. It was also important 
for developing countries contemplating nuclear energy programmes to develop 
a human, scientific, technical, industrial, and institutional infrastructure that 
would permit the necessary preparations for the construction and operation of 
nuclear facilities. By providing equipment and expertise, the Agency played a 
valuable role in helping countries to make a start in the nuclear field and thereby 
contributed to the solution of the energy problem. The Agency's technical assistance 
programme had increased considerably over the years, but its volume continued 
to be a point of intensive debate between Member States. Since the twenty-third 
session of the General Conference, the Board had been actively examining that 
question and considering methods of financing the programme. 

78. Considerable efforts had been made to achieve greater predictability and 
stability in the technical assistance budget, and thus to facilitate planning and 
the evaluation of Member States' requirements in the light of the resources 
expected to be available to the Agency over a period of some years. The report of 
the Board of Governors on that matter would be discussed at a later stage. 
79« Regarding the programme for 1981, it was most important for the Agency to 
know at an early stage whether the target adopted for the forthcoming budgetary 
year would actually be met. He therefore urged countries to pledge their voluntary 
contribution as soon as possible, so as to permit an early assessment of the 
total sum of money available for the next year. He was aware that some countries, 

for internal legal reasons, could not yet make any financial commitment, but he 
urged all delegations in a position to do so to pledge their countries' voluntary 
contributions before the end of the session so that he could report to the 
Conference, before it adjourned, that a large percentage of the target figure 
for 1981 had been reached. 

ARRANGEMENTS TOR THE GENERAL CONFERENCE 

80. The PRESIDENT, recalling his earlier statement that further consultations 
would be necessary before the General Committee could be appointed, suggested that, 
since Article V.E.4 of the Statute required the General Conference to consider the 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 19 

annual report irrespective of decisions on the rest of the provisional agenda, the 

Conference should waive the provision in Rule 42(a) of the Rules of Procedure, 

according to which the General Committee must consider the provisional agenda at 

the beginning of each session of the General Conference, and proceed immediately 

with the general debate, 

81. The General Conference accepted the President's suggestion. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1979 

82. Mr. SMITH (United States of America) after congratulating the President 
on his election and thanking the Government of Austria and the City of Vienna for 

their hospitality, read out the following message from the President of the 

United States: 

"I am pleased to extend the best wishes of the United States to all 
participants in this twenty-fourth meeting of the IAEA General Conference. 

"This year has seen important developments, for example, a greater 
appreciation for the need to cut down the use of oil for electric power, 
the conclusion of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation, and the 
publication of the report regarding the accident at Three Mile Island. 
There has been an increasing awareness of the importance of nuclear power 
and of the need to develop it in ways to reduce the risks of proliferation 
and to ensure safe, reliable operation of nuclear facilities. The CommuniquS 
at the Venice Summit Conference this year stated that, 'The role of nuclear 
energy has to be increased if world energy needs are to be met.' 

"As States share a common interest in inhibiting the spread of nuclear 
weapons, so do they share an interest in seeing that all nuclear activity 
is carried out as safely as possible. Applying safeguards of the IAEA to all 
peaceful nuclear energy activities is widely recognized as an important 
means of advancing the security of all States. But continuing efforts both 
to support the safeguards program and to reduce the risk of spread of 
nuclear weapons are essential. By the same token, States can only benefit 
from continuing international co-operation in nuclear safety. 

"Through implementation of safeguards, safety and technical assistance 
activities and the work of expert advisory groups, the IAEA represents the 
most important international instrument to promote peaceful nuclear development 
safely and securely. The United States hails the accomplishments of 
the Agency and will continue full support for its important work." 

83. The Agency made a vital contribution in the field of technical assistance to 
developing countries, where it played a special role in promoting peaceful uses of 

nuclear energy. He announced that, for 1981, the United States would pledge a 

voluntary contribution of $3.25 million for technical assistance. 

84. The need to expand nuclear energy had also been acknowledged at the conclusion 
of INPCE and at the Second NPT Review Conference, but there was a need to 


GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 20 


ensure that nuclear development proceeded in a manner which reduced the risks of 
nuclear proliferation to a minimum and complied with the highest safety standards. 


85. Most nations of the world clearly recognized the common danger to all mankind 
from a further spread of nuclear weapons. For example, exactly one year before, 
an unexplained event in the South Atlantic had led to fears and speculation. 
Although his Government had concluded that it was probably not a nuclear explosion 
that triggered the United States satellite's warning device, the incident had 
been a sobering reminder of a real danger. Similarly, although the safeguards 
system seemed to be working reasonably well and no diversions of material for 
military purposes had been reported, there had been some other disturbing 
indications which suggested that concerns about proliferation were not unfounded. 
86. In his view, the attitude of most nations to the danger of proliferation was 
a responsible one. However, there were no grounds for complacency. All Agency 
Member States should resolve anew to do their best to ensure that no civil nuclear 
programmes were misused for the purpose of manufacturing explosive devices. 
Indeed, the ability of States to make full use of nuclear power and to co-operate 
with each other might depend on the efficacy of non-proliferation throughout the 
world. 
87. It was recognized that IAEA safeguards were an essential means of achieving 
that end. But other factors were also important; for example, IHFCE Working 
Group 3 had concluded in its report that there was a strong positive relationship 
between the non-proliferation commitments of States and their ability to obtain 
nuclear supplies on a timely and reliable basis. United States policy and law 
supported this view, and Section 101 of the United States non-proliferation law 
stated: 
"The United States, as a matter of national policy .... will provide 
a reliable supply of nuclear fuel to those nations and groups of nations 
which adhere to policies designed to prevent proliferation." 


That provision was sometimes overlooked by some who focused only on United States 
export controls, and it therefore needed to be stressed. Since non-military 
nuclear co-operation first began, the United States had been a major supplier of 
nuclear technology, equipment and material to co-operating nations. While 
recognizing that the tightening of nuclear export controls in recent years had 
caused some concern in other nations, the United States believed that its 
policies and those of other countries were coming closer. Although there were 


GC(XXIV)/OR.219page 
21 


still differing views on the most desirable approaches to be followed, he sensed 


a growing recognition that certain special measures relating to the production 


and handling of weapons-usable materials were necessary if the international 
community was to have confidence that nuclear energy was not being misused. 
General international support for a reduction in reliance on highly-enriched 
uranium in research reactors provided an illustration of that trend. At the 


same time, co-operation must not be allowed to suffer as a result of a breakdown 


in mutual trust, and legitimate energy needs must be met. 


88. His Government was giving careful attention to the views expressed at the 
Second MPT Review Conference, and his impression was that there continued to 
be widespread support for KPT and a desire that other countries join it. There 
also appeared to be growing awareness among many States of the serious dangers 
which proliferation entailed. However, although there was strong support for 
the Agency, many States were concerned that their access to the benefits of 
peaceful uses of atomic energy should not be constrained by their nonproliferation 
commitments. Considerably more attention needed to be paid in order 
to ensure that such benefits were accessible to those States, and there was in 
any case a growing recognition of the need for increased confidence, reliability 
and predictability in nuclear supply. 
89. By drawing on the results of IHFCE, the United States had been giving 
increased attention to ways in which it could contribute to greater reliability 
in nuclear trade, and was well aware that consumers would judge suppliers more by 
their actions than by their words. His Government was trying to introduce 
greater predictability into its own export procedures in various ways. 
90. First, the United States Agreement with the IAEA had been renegotiated 
in 1979, primarily in order te include provisions that had become standard 
conditions imposed by the United States, since it was thought that it would 
expedite transfers through the Agency if the criteria applied by his Government 
were spelled out in advance. Since the renegotiation of the Agreement, the 
United States had concluded IAEA supply arrangements with three Member States, 
and two more were to be completed soon. The process of reaching agreement was 
becoming a routine one, and such a pattern was proving to be beneficial, since it 
increased confidence and timeliness where that process was concerned. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 22 


91. Secondly, for purposes of bilateral agreements, the United States now granted 
export licences for up to five reloads of reactor fuel for States party to KPT, 
and the issuing of general licences had been approved for components for power 
reactors in KPT States supplied by the United States and, in the case of some 
reactors, by other countries also. Congress had also recently approved the 
lifting of ceilings on possible transfers of low-enriched uranium under bilateral 
agreements with States party to KPT. In addition, his Government was continuing 
to participate in consultations about the establishment of an international 
nuclear fuel bank. 
92. His Government would continue to try to improve the procedures it followed. 
Adherence to KPT remained a central plank of its nuclear policy, and participation 
in the Tlatelolco Treaty and acceptance of "full-scope" safeguards by its 
trading partners were also important considerations. 
93. Additional supply assurances might be required, and it was expected that 
some of those would be identified by the recently established IAEA Committee on 
Assurances of Supply and in further consultations. The United States would 
participate constructively in the Committee's work, and hoped that the Committee 
would concentrate on practical steps to improve the security of supply in the near 
term, thus clearing the way for international consensus on conditions for supply 
over the longer term. 
94. His Government would continue to participate actively in the groups of 
experts working on international Plutonium and spent fuel storage. If adequately 
designed, an international plutonium storage system could provide a useful 
contribution towards non-proliferation in the future. It would, however, need to 
incorporate rigorous criteria for the storage and release of plutonium. Improved 
international co-operation in spent fuel management should also help overcome 
shortages in storage capacity and restore confidence in the nuclear fuel cycle. 
95. One important finding of IKFCE had been that the proliferation of nuclear 
explosives was a serious problem requiring attention in the development of future 
nuclear power programmes. While recognizing that the abuse of nuclear power might 
not be the way in which nuclear explosives were most likely to be acquired, he 
believed that each fuel cycle entailed risks which should be taken into account in 
nuclear power planning. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
Page 23 


$6. IHFCE had also concluded that improved international safeguards were essential. 
Facilities should be designed to make safeguards more effective and to simplify 
safeguards implementation. Progress in the design and application of safeguards 
was essential to the expansion of nuclear power. The United States was also 
trying to identify other useful non-proliferation techniques. The reduced pace 
of nuclear power development in recent years offered additional time to work out 
improved and internationally acceptable approaches. 

97. His Government shared the Director General's conviction that the cause of 
non-proliferation would be greatly furthered if all non-nuclear-weapon States with 
nuclear programmes accepted IAEA safeguards on all their nuclear activities and 
believed that a large majority of States agreed with his view; that belief was 
borne out by the fact that there were now one hundred and fourteen parties to KPT. 
A number of important States had, however, not yet accepted safeguards over their 
entire programmes, and he urged them to join the majority and thereby benefit 
fully from international nuclear co-operation while contributing to both regional 
and world stability. 
98. Noting that Congress had recently approved ratification of the United States 
Agreement with the IAEA providing for implementation of his Government's voluntary 
offer to accept IAEA safeguards on its peaceful nuclear facilities, he said that 
the application of IAEA safeguards to those facilities should show that the 
acceptance of international safeguards was not unduly onerous. 
99. The United States proposed to continue to support strengthened physical 
protection measures and had noted with satisfaction that the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Huclear Materials had been opened for signature on 
3 March 1980. The United States was taking steps to ratify that instrument and 
hoped that other nations would also do so. 
100. The international nuclear community must constantly be concerned with 
nuclear safety. The accident at Three Mile Island (TMl) had given all Member 
States cause to reflect. It had demonstrated that a serious nuclear accident 
could produce severe repercussions in other nations and had shocked experts 
into recognizing the consequences of such an event. It was to be hoped that the 
accident had eliminated complacency. TMI had made it more necessary to probe and 
to question, to check and double-check, to improve contingency planning, to take 
nothing for granted and to make every effort to ensure that nuclear power 
stations were built and operated safely. It also provided a valuable lesson in 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 24 


the organization and implementation of effective nuclear safety programmes, and 
in dealing with the public in a responsible manner. 


101. Many were still analysing the results of TMI studies. A number of American 
organizations had launched a programme aimed at learning as much as possible 
about the TMI accident, and the information derived would be made widely 
available. The United States Department of Energy was sponsoring a seminar on 
21 and 22 November in Washington in order to put proposals before the international 
community for research and development tasks and in order to provide a forum for 
discussion. Participation by the Agency and Member States would be welcomed. 
102. More trained personnel would be needed as nuclear power expanded. Risks 
could not be eliminated entirely, but they should be manageable if it remained 
possible to attract highly trained people to that field. The United States 
applauded the Agency's vigorous efforts to strengthen its nuclear safey programme 
and congratulated it for sponsoring the International Conference on Current 
Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues, to be held in Sweden in October 1980. 
103. Both advanced and developing countries were making increasing use of the 
Agency's health and safety services. Some Member States had begun to incorporate 
codes and guides drawn up under the Agency's nuclear safety standards programme 
into their national regulations. That was a welcome development which reflected 
the succcess of the programme. Safety advisory missions had proved successful in 
several countries, and the Agency's reputation for reliable advice continued to 
grow. Some of those tasks had been undertaken within the framework of the 
technical assistance programme, which was of importance to a large number of 
developing Member States. The United States was continuing to provide strong 
support for such activities, for example, by the assignment of cost-free experts 
to work with Agency staff for periods of one year and by the provision of funds 
for a nuclear safety seminar and for future manpower development activities. 
104. Although nuclear power was undergoing a difficult period, the continued broad 
support which the Agency commanded was encouraging, and no international organization 
had accomplished more than it. Thus, efforts should continue to be made to 
strengthen the Agency, to promote an effective world-wide non-proliferation 
regime acceptable to all and to ensure that nuclear power plants were constructed 
and operated safely. The United States would work closely with the Agency and with 
all Member States in order to achieve those objectives. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 25 


105. In conclusion, he said that the Agency was an effective instrument for 
promoting and guarding atomic power, which was coming under man's control at the 
same time as it was being realized that petroleum would not be available for 
many more decades. The Agency was a unique international structure, and it was 
necessary to preserve it for its original purposes, and to prevent it from 
becoming merely a politicized body where debate and confrontation prevailed 
rather than concrete achievement, 
106. Finally, he paid a special tribute to the Director General, who had served 
the Agency and all Member States with dedication for nineteen years. 
107. Mr. de BOER (Netherlands) said the annual report showed that the 
Agency's activities in such important matters as safeguards, technical assistance, 
reactor safety and waste disposal had been carried out in an efficient and 
businesslike manner. His delegation welcomed the efforts of the Agency in 
connection with nuclear safety and was looking forward to the International 
Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues to be held at Stockholm 
in October 1980. 
108. The continued slowing down during the past year in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, particularly for the generation of electricity, demonstrated how 
important it was to find solutions to the problems of safety and radioactive 
waste disposal as soon as possible. If they were not found, public opinion in 
many industrialized countries, which was already rather unfavourable to nuclear 
power, woulddefinitely turn against that potentially important source of energy. 
109. The Netherlands Government had taken a decision in principle to build two 
additional nuclear power plants. That decision would be subject to an intensive 
public debate before being implemented. 
110. In the context of nuclear safety, the physical protection of nuclear materials, 
too, was an essential consideration and for that reason his country had signed the 
Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials. Together with the other 
Member States of EURATOM, it hoped to ratify that instrument in the near future. 
111. Prom the point of view of non-proliferation, two international events stood 
out during the past year: the conclusion of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle 
Evaluation (INFCE) after more than two years of study and the Second Review 
Conference of the Parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, ten years after the 
entry into force of that Treaty. 

GC(XXEV)/OR.219 
page 26 


112. INFCE foremost had been a technical exercise. Several aspects of the 
different fuel cycles, such as economics and energy efficiency, had been evaluated, 
but the non-proliferation aspect had undoubtedly been the most important. The 
existence of serious concern regarding the possible spread of nuclear weapons and 
other nuclear explosive devices had been one of the main reasons for launching the 
study and consequently it had sometimes been inevitable that political factors 
should have played a prominent part in the discussions. IHFCE could be considered 
an effort of the international community to reach a common view on a number of 
important non-proliferation questions. At its inception the views on the 
technical and political safeguards measures required to minimize proliferation 
risks had differed considerably. Although IHFCE had not resulted in common 
positions on all the important issues involved, it could surely be said that it had 
produced a better mutual understanding of national fuel cycle policies. It had 
also heightened awareness of the danger of proliferation and stressed the need to 
develop common approaches. 
113. INFCE had concluded that technical measures alone could not prevent the 
spread of nuclear weapons, but that did not mean that attempts to reduce the 
existence of significant quantities of materials that could be used directly in 
building nuclear weapons would be meaningless. In that connection his delegation 
saw special merit in further studies on such measures as co-conversion and 
co-processing. 
114. Apart from technical measures, joint political measures were necessary for 
an adequate non-proliferation policy. The most important political instrument in 
that connection was, of course, the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The fact that it 
had not been possible to reach a consensus on a final document at the end of the 
Second HPT Review Conference should therefore be considered a rather serious 
setback. Although it was too early to assess the consequences of the situation, 
there was some risk that the Treaty would become less attractive to potential 
adherents and even, in the long run, that Member countries might turn away from it. 
115. The most important obstacle to reaching a consensus was the lack of progress 
in nuclear disarmament. But even in the absence of consensus, it had nevertheless 
proved possible to reach agreement, even though informal, on major parts of the 
text for a final document, namely, on the Articles III (implementation of Agency 
safeguards), IV (peaceful nuclear collaboration) and V (peaceful nuclear explosions). 
With reference to the informal document distributed on the last day of the 
GC( XXIV)/OR.219 
page 27 


Review Conference, the Netherlands considered the Agency Committee on Assurances 
of Supply of nuclear equipment and technology, the establishment of which was 
welcomed by the Conference, to be a most suitable and, it was to be hoped, productive 
instrument for a continued dialogue on nuclear co-operation. It was 
desirable that the impetus of IHFCE should be maintained. 


116. Another subject of the informal document which deserved special attention 
was the early establishment by the Agency of an international plutonium 
storage (IPS) scheme. His Government welcomed the unanimous support for such a 
scheme at the Review Conference. It believed that the establishment of IPS would 
greatly facilitate the development of a new international consensus on peaceful 
nuclear co-operation, A basic element of that new consensus should be the 
application of Agency safeguards to all peaceful nuclear activities in importing 
and in exporting States. 
117. At the two international conferences to which he had referred, the role of 
the Agency in the implementation of the safeguards system had received unanimous 
support. It was gratifying to learn from Agency reports that safeguarding 
techniques had been further improved and that the number of full-time inspectors 
had been increased to 138. However, his Government realized that the safeguarding, 
particularly of the sensitive parts of the fuel cycle, had to be further 
developed and it was ready to co-operate fully in attempts to improve the 
effectiveness and credibility of that part of the system. It was seriously 
concerned about what the Director General had said on several occasions regarding 
a growing tendency to reject certain categories of inspectors on political, 
linguistic and other grounds. For an international agency that was an 
unacceptable situation. 


118. The budget for 1981 presented a satisfactory and clear picture of developments 
in the Agency's programmes. It was a source of satisfaction that more 
resources had been allocated to such vital programmes as nuclear safety, safeguards, 
technical assistance and training. The amounts for technical assistance 
had grown substantially in the year just past. The Netherlands Government was 
aware of the need for continuity in that branch of the Agency's activity. For 
that reason it considered the increase to be realistic and agreed upon the 
indicative planning figures presented by the Board. 
119. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan) said that one of the major tasks in the 1980s was 
to ensure the supply of adequate energy at appropriate prices in order to sustain 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 

page 28 

world economic growth. Ever since the "oil crisis", all countries had teen 
endeavouring to secure a stable supply of energy over a long period. Efforts 
were being directed not only towards energy conservation but also towards 

increased and improved use of coal and developing the technology of solar and 
other renewable sources of energy, nevertheless, nuclear power was indispensable 
for the solution of the energy problem since it was the most promising alternative 

source of energy. 

120. Nuclear power was especially important for Japan, which had few indigenous 
energy resources. Having embarked on nuclear energy development in the midfifties, 
it now had 21 nuclear power reactors in operation with a total generating 
capacity of approximately 15 million kW(e), accounting for about 12$ of the 
country's total capacity. Nuclear power capacity was planned to be raised to 
53 million kW(e) by 1990. 
121. With a view to the maximum utilization of the potential energy of uranium, 
Japan had from the very beginning been trying to develop the advanced thermal 
reactor and the fast breeder reactor so as to be able to use plutonium. In the 
area of spent fuel reprocessing the Tokai-mura Reprocessing Plant was shortly 
to go into full operation and preparations were in hand for the construction in 
the private sector of a new reprocessing plant large enough to meet the country's 
future needs. In addition, the pilot plant at Nin-gyo-toge was already producing 
enriched uranium in small quantities and the technical prospects for commercialscale 
enrichment were bright. 
122. His Government was sparing no effort to accelerate the development of nuclear 
energy, for on it depended the future of Japan. 
123. One of the major problems involved in nuclear energy development was nuclear 
safety, to which Japan had always attached importance. After the accident at 
Three Mile Island in the United States it had increased its efforts in that area 
and had taken steps to strengthen its systems for operational control and 
supervision and to review its safety standards. At the same time, contingency 
measures to be taken in the event of an accident had been reinforced. 
124. In that connection, his country hoped that the International Conference on 
Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues to be held in October in Stockholm 
under the auspices of the Agency would lead to improved safety measures in all 
countries and, at the same time, to greater international co-operation in research 
on nuclear safety. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 29 

125« It was needless to say that Japan was developing nuclear energy within the 
framework of its nuclear non-proliferation policy. However, as nuclear energy 
development made rapid progress throughout the world, there was growing concern 
among nations over the danger of possible nuclear proliferation. Measures were 
therefore being explored to ensure accelerated development of nuclear energy 
while preventing nuclear proliferation. 

126. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) which had been an 
exercise in that direction, had helped in forming common perceptions regarding 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in narrowing the hitherto existing gap 
between views on the nuclear fuel cycle by deepening the mutual understanding of 
other countries' needs in promoting nuclear energy development. Such activities 
must be encouraged and, whenever new problems arose, they should be resolved by 
discussion. The Agency could play a control role in the matter. 
127. He hoped that efforts would be made to improve the Agency's safeguards, which 
played a key role in ensuring nuclear non-proliferation, and to make them more 
efficient and effective. It was necessary for that purpose to promote research 
and development related to safeguards, in which field Japan was engaged and 
proposed to make further efforts. 
128. For the Agency's safeguards as a means of ensuring nuclear non-proliferation 
to be more effective, they must be accepted by all nations, regardless of whether 
they were nuclear-weapon States or non-nuclear-^weapon States and whether or not 
they were party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (HPT). 
In that connection, it was important to recall that at the Second NPT Review 
Conference appeals had been made to all States not party to NPT to accept fullscope 
safeguards and to nuclear-weapon States that had not yet concluded voluntary 
submission agreements to accept Agency safeguards. 
129. As part of efforts aimed at establishing an international framework 
following INPCE, studies were already being conducted under the Agency's auspices 
on international plutonium storage and international spent fuel management; 
Japan was participating in those studies. If those two concepts were to contribute 
to the ultimate objective of nuclear non-proliferation, the results of 
the studies should be fully acceptable to the countries concerned and should 
help in facilitating the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 30 

130. Another major problem was supply assurance, and it had now been accepted as a 
general principle that supply assurance and nuclear non-proliferation were two 
sides of the same coin. After the establishment by the Board of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply it was hoped that the problem would be discussed in depth and 
that mutual trust among nations would be strengthened so as to make meaningful 
contributions to the smooth progress of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
131. His country was endeavouring to improve the system of physical protection of 
nuclear material, which was also important from the point of view of preventing 
the dangers which might result from the misuse of nuclear material. 
132. Japan's national policy in nuclear matters was based in the "Three Non-nuclear 
Principles", namely, not to possess nuclear weapons, not to manufacture them and 
not to permit their entry into Japan; also, Japan had faithfully carried out its 
obligations under HPT since ratifying it in June 1976. Its policy was dictated 
by the wishes of the Japanese people, who would like to see nuclear weapons abolished. 
His country had devoted itself exclusively to the welfare of its people 
and of mankind in general by pursuing the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, 
and urged all countries to join it in abolishing nuclear weapons. 
133. At the Second NPT Review Conference, Japan had strongly advocated the 
promotion of nuclear disarmament, including a comprehensive test ban. Although a 
substantive final declaration had not been adopted at the Conference, it was 
encouraging that no country had questioned the validity or the importance of HPT 
and that all countries had recognized the need for maintaining and strengthening 
the KPT regime. There was no doubt that KPT continued to provide a very 
important legal framework for promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy while 
preventing nuclear proliferation. His country would be actively participating 
in that activity. 
134. The Japanese Government was in favour of increasing technical assistance in 
the nuclear area to developing countries, especially that provided by the Agency, 
for the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be available to all. 
To that end, Japan had, among other things, provided experts and granted 
fellowships. It would continue to make voluntary contributions at least equal to 
its assessed share for the Regular Budget to finance the Agency's technical 
assistance programmes. It must, however, be emphasized that the spirit of 
self-reliance on the part of recipient countries was very important if they were 
to reap greater benefits from the technical assistance received. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.219 
page 31 

135» He was happy to note that programmes under the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology (RCA), to which Japan had become a party in 1978, were being 
implemented with enthusiasm. Japan was assisting the participating countries 
in the use of radiation and isotopes in food preservation, in industry and in 
the bio-medical field. In particular, it had assumed a leading role in a project 
on food irradiation. 

136. In order to make the RCA activities more effective, the participating 
countries were studying the feasibility of setting up an Asian Regional Centre for 
Research and Training, and it was expected that the survey mission which Japan 
had dispatched to other countries to study future RCA activities would contribute 
also to the feasibility study on the Centre. 
137. At no time in it s history had the International Atomic Energy Agency faced 
so many diverse problems as it did today in carrying out its work, nor had so much 
ever been expected from its activities. It was gratifying to note that in the 
Agency there had never been a confrontation even when there had been conflicts of 
interests among the Members and that solutions had been explored from the 
standpoint that all participating countries shared the same problems. That 
valuable tradition must be maintained, for it would stand it in good stead in 
carrying out the role expected of it in the future. 
138. In the present-day world economic situation the manpower and financial 
resources available to the Agency would naturally be limited. That ought not to 
deter the Secretariat from persisting in fulfilling the objectives of the 
Statute. At the same time, Member States should be more conscious of their 
obligation to co-operate so that the Agency could contribute more to the welfare 
and prosperity of mankind. 
The meeting rose at 12.50 P.m. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
February 1981* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 22 September 1980, at 3.10 p.m. 

President; Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 

General debate and annual report for 
1979 (continued) 92 


Statements by the delegates of: 
France 1-11 
Iraq 12 - 16 
Federal Republic of Germany 17 - 22 
India 23 - 33 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 34-6 0 
United Kingdom 61 - 74 
Zaire 75 - 79 
Australia 80-92 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 15 October 1980. 
**/ GC(XXIV)/626. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in documents 
GC(XXIV)/INF/l93/Rev.3, 193/Rev.3/Mod.1 and 193/Rev.3/Mod.2. 

80-6275 


GC(XXIV)/0H.22O 
page 2 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1979 (continued) 

1. Mr. PECQJJEUR (Prance) said that the current energy crisis, the gravity of 
which had been emphasized by the eleventh World Energy Conference, made nuclear 
power even more indispensable. Decisions should be taken without delay to resolve 
that crisis instead of resigning oneself to the almost general slowing-down of 
nuclear programmes which was paradoxically taking place. As early as 1973 
analyses had shown that all available energy resources must be utilized. The 
action taken at that time had been inadequate, and since 1979 the world had been 
suffering the consequences of a second oil crisis. Although they were affected m 
different ways, all countries should co-operate and mobilize their resources to 
satisfy the world's need for energy, which was expected to increase by 80$ by 
the year 2000. 
2. Oil would remain the primary source of energy. However, there was a danger 
that oil production would not increase as quickly as the demand because of constraints 
due to prices or production level limitations imposed by the exporting 
countries. The consequences of that shortfall might place a heavy strain on 
national economies and international economic relations. 
3. Energy saving was another means of reducing the gap between supply and demand, 
and it had already shown some effect. However, wastage could not be suppressed 
indefinitely, and energy savings, which should not be taken to include those 
associated with economic decline, would call for ever greater investments as the 
number of possibilities decreased. 
4. Thus, something must be found to replace oil. Although solar energy and 
biomass were promising, they could not provide real solutions before the end of 
the century, even if more funds were made available for research. Coal, in view 
of the size of the reserves and the production capacity, could constitute an 
important energy source, but constraints connected with the environment, the 
setting-up of infrastructures, financing problems and the sluggishness of demand 
were serious obstacles to an increase in production. 
5. It was mainly nuclear power which could offer a solution. The installed 
nuclear capacity was already considerable, amounting to 122 GW(e) in the Western 
countries. It should be possible to increase its share in world energy production 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 3 

to 15$ by the end of the century, and even to 30$ in certain industrialized 
countries such as Prance. Moreover, nuclear power was immediately available and 
competitive. Nevertheless, for several years, under the pressure of irrational 
arguments, the progress of world nuclear power generation had been slowing down. 
It was up to the industrialized countries - which in respect of nuclear energy bore 
a responsibility toward the developing countries comparable to that of the 
oil-exporting countries in relation to oil - to develop nuclear energy. 

6. The French nuclear power programme showed that the production of nuclear 
energy could be expanded, since the installed capacity would reach 13 000 MW(e) by 
the end of 1980 and the share of nuclear power in total energy consumption 
should increase from 2$ in 1975 to 20$ m 1985. Vigorous programmes were being 
carried out in various fields. In that of breeder reactors, which offered 
independence of uranium supplies, the fast breeder Phe'nix, which had produced 
over 7500 million kilowatt-hours since start-up, and the prototype Super Phe'nix, 
the construction of which was half completed, deserved to be mentioned, as did 
technical and economic studies for other breeders which had already made much 
progress. As to fuel enrichment, EURODIF had recently attained a production 
capacity of 6 million separative work units (sWUs) per year, and construction of 
the last unit, which was to raise the annual capacity to 10.8 million SWUs in 1982, 
was being continued. Research on the ohemical enrichment process had progressed, 
and it had shown that the method could compete with other techniques in 
small-scale facilities. Finally, spent fuel reprocessing was being carried out at 
Marcoule and La Hague under excellent conditions. The cycle of the Phe'nix plant 
had been closed, since the plutonium from the reprocessed fuel had been re-used 
in the Cadarache fuel assembly fabrication plant. In order to ensure optimum 
management of spent fuel, two light-water fuel reprocessing facilities of 
800 tonnes per year each and high-level waste conditioning facilities modelled on 
the Marcoule vitrification plant were to be constructed at La Hague. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 4 

7. Nuclear power production could not be developed unless those responsible for 
it had confidence in that type of power. It was the .Agency's task to create and 
maintain conditions under which nuclear power could develop without diversion to 
military purposes. Prance, true to its principles and aware of the role that 
nuclear power might play in world economic development, confirmed its intention to 
take part in that development and to oppose the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
Prance was in favour of research on non-proliferative techniques, respect for 
national decisions justified on technical and economic grounds, development of an 
organized nuclear market which would assure users of a guaranteed supply at a 
reasonable price, and the peaceful use of transferred items. 
8. France fully supported the Agency's activities. In particular, it was taking 
part in the Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage which, it was hoped, 
would establish a storage system strengthening the application of safeguards to 
Plutonium. The new Committee on Assurances of Supply should make it possible 
to establish a more stable regime in which national non-proliferation policies could 
be applied to exports and imports in a manner acceptable to both producer and 
consumer countries. 
9. Confidence could not be strengthened by imposing supplementary conditions on 
the supply of uranium to user countries, as that would encourage the users to 
look for sources of supply not under such control, and thus introduce distortions 
into the uranium market. The essential thing was for both suppliers and users to 
accept institutional measures which would guarantee supplies and at the same time 
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
10. The French Government attached great importance to the Agency's safeguards 
activities and hoped that the agreement concluded between France, the European 
Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) and the IAEA would lead to the application of 
Agency safeguards to those French facilities which it intended to place under 
safeguards. His Government was in favour of developing and improving the 
Agency's safeguards system and continued to submit its nuclear exports to that 
system. Problems relating to non-proliferation should be discussed in the 
Agency objectively, with the sole purpose of preventing international nuclear 
co-operation from being diverted towards military appli cations. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 5 

11. With regard to financial questions, the French Government commended the 
Agency on the spirit of restraint in which the budget for 1981 had been prepared. 
A permanent search for cost reductions was necessary to balance the expansion of 
the Agency's activities in the two priority areas of safeguards and technical 
assistance. In view of that spirit of restraint the French Government would 
contribute to the Technical Assistance Fund in proportion to its rate of assessment, 
subject to parliamentary approval. The French Government had also made efforts to 
increase its contribution in the form of experts' services and equipment. It 
had organized two international courses at the Saclay Research Centre and an 
international symposium on biomedical dosimetry. It had also welcomed eight 
groups of experts. The Secretariat, whose work was highly valued by the 
French Government, should seek to ensure that the Agency's activities did not 
duplicate those of other organizations. 

12. Mr. AL-ASHIMI (Iraq) stated that his country had adopted an ambitious 
economic programme based on science and technology and the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy in particular. As part of that programme, it had undertaken to 
develop nuclear research facilities and the applications of nuclear energy in 
medicine, agriculture, biology, physics and materials science, and had decided 
to build its first nuclear plant. Iraq regarded nuclear energy as one means of 
resolving current energy problems. It was not, however, unaware of the problems 
which it might encounter as regards safety and supplies. 
13. The Iraqi Government, which attached great importance to international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, had concluded co-operative 
agreements with a number of Member States. In 1980, in Buenos Aires, it had taken 
part in a meeting of non-aligned countries devoted to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, and would work to realize the aims of that group. The Iraqi 
Atomic Energy Commission, in collaboration with other bodies, had already 
organized several conferences and seminars, and in 1981 would act as host to an 
international symposium on nuclear power plant safety in the developing countries. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 6 

14. Iraq had. been one of the first countries to ratify the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), despite the discrimination introduced 
by that Treaty, Although the non-nuclear-weapon States party to NPT had fulfilled 
their obligations, the arras race had continued at such a pace that at the Second 
HPT Review Conference the parties entrusted with examining the operation of the 
Treaty had been unable to reach a consensus. Iraq, which had already clearly 
explained its views at that Conference, recalled the position of the Group of 77 
regarding the two racist regimes in South Africa and in occupied Palestine, which, 
having refused to sign BPT, had acquired nuclear arms and established an increasingly 
close collaboration between themselves which had been condemned by the 
United Nations General Assembly. In accordance with a resolution passed by the 
General Assembly, the Group of 77 had requested all the nuclear-weapon States 
no longer to collaborate with those two regimes unless they subjected all their 
nuclear activities to Agency safeguards. The Iraqi Government hoped that the 
recommendations made by a number of working parties at the Review Conference could 
be applied. In particular, countries which wanted to obtain supply guarantees 
should not be required to satisfy conditions other than those stipulated in 
Article III of NPT. 

15. The Iraqi Government had always given its full support to the Agency's activities 
with respect to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the control of 
proliferation. It attached particular importance to the Agency's promotional 
activities and technical assistance, and wished to pass one or two comments on that 
subject. Firstly, the budget for 1981 was inadequate; technical assistance 
should be financed from the Regular Budget. Also, countries which wished to 
increase their contributions would not be inclined to do so while the Agency 
continued to assist countries with policies based on aggression and the constant 
violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Second, it was regrettable 
that the Agency did not possess sufficient funds to meet all justified requests 
for technical assistance. Third, it was vital that measures be taken to ensure a 
fairer distribution of seats on the Board of Governors. In the fourth place, 
activities relating to international plutonium storage and spent fuel management 
should not lead in the final analysis to the introduction of additional controls. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 7 

16. All countries were entitled to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
without which the developing countries would not be able to catch up with the 
industrialized ones. The measures taken by the Iraqi Government regarding the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy were under continuous attack from the Zionist 
regime and its supporters. The Iraqi Government was asking the Agency and all 
countries to denounce those attacks, to refrain from giving direct or indirect 
support to the campaign of vilification and to stop trying to convince it (Iraq) 
that it was not fulfilling its obligations with respect to NPT. Iraq, which had 
proved itself capable of defending its interests both inside and outside its 
territory, would continue its work to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
in accordance with the obligations it had assumed under NPT. 
17. Mr. LOOSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) recalled that, since the last 
session of the General Conference, the energy crisis had been one of the key 
topics of international political debate and had underlined the necessity of 
nuclear energy programmes. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany had 
tried to reduce its dependence on oil. Accordingly, it had decided not to authorize 
the construction of any new oil-fuelled power stations and had taken action to 
reduce energy demand, to increase the efficiency of energy utilization and to 
generate more electricity from coal, the production of which had been stabilized, 
though at prices which were higher than those on the world market. It had also 
launched a large-scale programme for producing synthetic fuels from coal. The 
share of nuclear energy, which had been 14% in 1979, would continue to grow when 
the plants under construction had been completed. There had, however, been only 
a few applications for new licences over the past few years. The overall generating 
capacity at the present moment showed a relative surplus, priority was being 
given to coal and, in addition, nuclear energy had become a controversial issue. 
It was important to note in that regard that a special commission on nuclear energy, 
which had been set up by Parliament and had recently submitted an interim report to 
it, had succeeded in reconciling the opponents and supporters of nuclear energy by 


GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 8 

simultaneously advocating stringent energy conservation measures and continued 

investment in the nuclear sector; it was stated in the commission's interim 

report that the situation should be reviewed in 1990. The Government had taken 
measures necessitated by the adoption of a new fuel cycle, and had decided to 
build two intermediate storage facilities for spent fuel; it had also set in 
motion the licensing procedure for a reprocessing plant and had initiated drilling 
work with a view to the underground storage of nuclear waste. Finally, it was 

studying alternative solutions for the final stages of the fuel cycle. 

18, The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany felt that the Agency should 
play a major role in the nuclear field. The safety of nuclear plants was 
essential if a social and political climate conducive to the development of nuclear 
energy was to be created. The Agency could promote the exchange of scientific and 
technical knowledge to benefit developing countries by providing experts and 
sending safety missions. Among its main activities one could cite the Nuclear 
Safety Standards (NUSS) programme, the forthcoming International Conference on 
Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues in Stockholm and co-operation projects 
for reactor safety research. 

19. The Agency had acquired an excellent reputation with respect to technical 
assistance. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany noted that over the 
years the resources available for technical assistance had increased appreciably. 
After a discussion on the financing of the technical assistance programme, it had 
been decided that the target would be set at $13 million for 1981 and that, in 
order to take account of the concerns of many developing countries, indicative 
figures would be set for the following years. The delegation of the Federal 
Republic of Germany hoped that that decision would enable the establishment of 
the technical assistance programme to be improved. It should be kept in mind, 
however, that the voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund were 
more than doubled by other budgetary and non-budgetary resources. The Government 
of the Federal Republic of Germany would pay an amount corresponding to its share 
of the assessed budget for 1981 and would also organize courses, provide fellowships 
and lend assistance for additional projects and co-ordinated research 
programmes such as protein improvement, nitrogen residues in fertilizers, 
hydrology and tsetse-fly control. Subject to the approval of Parliament, that 
would bring its total voluntary contribution to around $2 million. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 9 

20. The Agency's safeguards activities had increased substantially because of 
the growing number of nuclear plants and amounts of nuclear material covered by 
safeguards. As in previous years, the conclusions of the Safeguards Implementation 
Report (SIR) had been reassuring, and the Second NPT Review Conference had confirmed 
the value of the Agency's safeguards system; that should not only generate 
support for the Agency's safeguards operations but also facilitate the reaching 
of understandings on international co-operation and exchange in the nuclear field. 
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany supported the study and further 
development of safeguards techniques and instruments and the discussion of safeguards 
approaches, with a view to improving both the efficiency and the costeffectiveness 
of safeguards and to minimizing cost and operational impacts. Also, 
it attached great importance to containment and surveillance measures. It was 
on such improvements in safeguards techniques and technology that the safeguards 
R&D support programme agreement concluded between the Government of the Federal 
Republic and the Agency concentrated. In supporting the Agency's safeguards 

efforts his delegation could speak from experience, as a considerable part of 
the Agency's inspection activities was devoted to verification operations in 
EURATOM countries, particularly in the Federal Republic of Germany. 

21. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) had produced very 
satisfactory results because it had created a climate of better understanding 
conducive to the joint solution of problems, particularly with respect to reprocessing 
and fast breeders. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany 
felt that the outcome of INFCE had confirmed its international nuclear energy 
policy, which aimed at integrating as many countries as possible into a system 
of co-operation both for sharing the benefits of nuclear energy and for joint 
responsibility in keeping its use exclusively peaceful. Control of proliferation 
was essentially a political problem and could not be solved by purely technical 
means. It was not possible to make a general judgement valid both now and in 
the future that one fuel cycle was more susceptible to proliferation risks than 
another. That was why the choice of a fuel cycle - determined by many other 
factors, such as economics, assurances of supply, environmental protection and 
the state of the art - might and would legitimately differ from one country to 
another. One of the main results of INFCE had been the setting up of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), in which the delegation of the Federal 
Republic of Germany would take an active part. The Government of the Federal 
Republic hoped that all interested countries - industrialized and developing 
nations, supplier and recipient nations, and countries in different stages of 

GC(XXIV)/OR.22O 
page 10 

nuclear energy programmes and of international non-proliferation commitments would 
participate in its discussions. Also, the Second NPT Review Conference 
had stressed the usefulness of such a committee. The task of CAS called for 

great patience and a gradual approach. In its discussions, the complementarity 
of assurance of supply and assurance of non-proliferation should be recognized. 
CAS*s advice would he essential in restoring confidence in international nuclear 
relations. The international storage of excess plutonium (IPS) under 
Article XII.A.5 of the Agency's Statute might become a test case for reaching 
mutually acceptable solutions. Only an IPS scheme that was operative under 
reasonable conditions and took into account the importance of fuel assurance 
would be generally acceptable. In that connection, it should be borne in mind 
that IPS could draw on the established system of Agency safeguards, thereby 
avoiding a duplication of measures. 

22. The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany had stated two years before 
and at the previous session of the General Conference that only a set of coordinated 
and gradual measures could lead to a consensus by which each State 
could freely take decisions according to the technical, economic and political 
conditions operating in its own territory, while at the same time observing 
the rules established by - and for - the international community. That was 
where the Agency could play a fundamental role by using its experience to provide 
technical assistance and foster international co-operation with a view to 
increasing safety and reinforcing security through its functions in the nonproliferation 
field. 
23. Mr. SETHNA (India) pointed out that his country had begun to take an 
active interest in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy at a time when that field 
had been still very new territory, even for the developed countries. Since then, 
India had remained faithful to its undertaking to use nuclear energy solely for 
peaceful purposes and had consistently maintained that all States had the 
inalienable right to implement their own nuclear programmes for the purposes of 
economic and social development, according to their priorities and needs, since 
the use of nuclear energy for electricity generation was fully justified for 
some of the developing countries. Against that background, India had been 
watching with some concern the developments which had taken place since 1979. 
Decisions of the greatest importance for the Agency's future were being contemplated, 
and a good number of those decisions would need to be approved at the 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 11 

present session of the General Conference. In that regard, it was important to 

remember that the Agency had a central role to play in the development of inter


national co-operation and the dissemination of information relating to nuclear 

energy. 

24. India would continue to support all the Agency's promotional activities, as 
they were far and away the most important part of its work and also the basis from 
which its regulatory activities were derived. It was regrettable, therefore, that, 
despite the repeated requests of an overwhelming majority of the Agency's Members, 
the imbalance between promotional and regulatory functions, far from being 
corrected, had actually become worse. Thus, although India had decided to accept 
no further technical assistance from the Agency for the reasons explained at the 
last session of the General Conference, it was continuing to provide technical 
assistance to other developing countries: in 1981 its voluntary contributions 
would reach a total of 879 300, and it would grant 12 fellowships to developing 
countri es • 
25. A provisional solution to the problem of financing technical assistance had 
been found as a result of informal consultations: a target of $13 million had 
been set for voluntary contributions for 1981, and indicative planning figures 
had been agreed for I982 and 1983. While approving those arrangements, India 
felt that the targets were still far from being adequate to meet the needs of the 
developing countries, and the provisional solution in no way changed its conviction 
that technical assistance should be financed from the Regular Budget. Finally, 
it was regrettable that the provision of technical assistance was still subject to 
conditions. 
26. It was quite appropriate that the Agency should be concerned with the 
crucial matter of assurances of supply, and the decision taken by the Board of 
Governors to set up a Committee to examine that question had long been overdue. 
India would take part in its work and hoped that it would result in a definition 
of responsibilities and obligations of suppliers and consumers, and would also 
lead to the formulation of binding commitments regarding the assurance of supplies; 
without such commitments, consumers might be forced to absolve themselves of 
their existing obligations. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.220 

page 12 

27. He noted with satisfaction that through the revised arrangements adopted for 
the financing of additional safeguards expenses, the latter would he met by the 
developed countries. That need not imply that it was impossible to make economies 
in the running of the Safeguards Department. The question of the allocation of 
• and indirect costs of safeguards activities should also he examined 
bot h directmore thoroughly in due course. 

28. Furthermore, it seemed rather pointless to pay for the application of limited 
safeguards to certain supposedly civilian plants in nuclear-weapon States; that 
amounted in effect to subsidizing national accounting and control systems. Such 
discrimination between nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States, 
together with the refusal to consider in their true perspective the real threats 
posed by existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons and the theoretical threat posed 
by the development of nuclear weapons by those countries which did not possess 
them, was an obstacle to disarmament. Vertical and horizontal proliferation 
should be approached simultaneously and in the same way. 
29. Regarding the budget for 1981, he was particularly concerned about the 
concept of zero growth, which would obviously be applied to technical programmes 
and would hamper activities aimed at meeting the needs of the developing countries 
That was totally irreconcilable with the Agency1s aims. 
30. Concerning the amendment of Article VI.A,2 of the Statute, he recalled that 
his country had consistently supported the principle of equitable geographical 
representation on the Board. He hoped that a universally acceptable formula would 
be worked out in due course. 
31. In the excellent annual report for 1979» stress was quite rightly laid on 
activities relating to nuclear plant safety. India welcomed the fact that the 
International Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues was to be 
held shortly. However, the report totally misrepresented the safeguards situations 
while it referred to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities in non-nuclearweapon 
States, there was no mention of such facilities in nuclear-weapon States. 
In reality, unsafeguarded facilities and material in nuclear-weapon States were 
greater by many orders of magnitude. That misrepresentation should be 
rectified in the report for 1980. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 13 

32. India continued to take a very active part in activities relating to the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related 
to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA). At present most of the promotional 
activities relating to RCA were gradually reaching the stage of semi-commercial 
operations, which called for a higher level of financing from bodies such as the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Swedish International 
Development Authority (SIDA). However, he was concerned about the recent trend 
towards linking some operations under RCA to the technical assistance programme. 
33. Finally, he announced that negotiations with the Agency regarding the 
subsidiary arrangements for the power reactor fuel reprocessing plant at Tarapur 
had been successfully completed. The Agency had come to the determination that 
safeguards could be satisfactorily implemented when the plant was reprocessing 
power reactor fuel. The subsidiary arrangements had recently entered into 
effect, and India was ready to commence the reprocessing of power reactor fuel. 
34. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the General 
Conference had to examine a number of important questions which would influence 
the Agency's work in coming years and to take decisions regarding those questions. 
The Soviet delegation hoped that the decisions at the present session would 
enable progress to be made in international co-operation on the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy in the interests of Member States and would 
reinforce the nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime and the effectiveness of 
safeguards. 
35. It should be borne in mind that the Second Review Conference of States party 
to NPT had finished just before the opening of the present session of the General 
Conference. The Soviet delegation wished to make some comments on the results 
of the Conference which concerned the problems with which the Agency was faced. 
It had every reason to welcome the candid and useful discussions which had taken 
place at that Second Review Conference; they had demonstrated a similarity of 
views on many questions concerning the examination of NPT. The main conclusion 
his delegation had drawn was that the Conference had confirmed the vitality and 
effectiveness of NPT. It had been pointed out that the nuclear weapons nonproliferation 
regime set up by the Treaty had created optimum conditions for 
international co-operation, in a way which would effectively prevent the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons while fostering the widespread use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful development. The participants had unanimously called upon 
those countries which were not yet parties to the Treaty to accede to it as soon 
as possible. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 14 

36. Considerable attention had been paid not only to the control of nuclear 
weapons proliferation but also to the cessation of the arms race, especially 
where nuclear weapons were concerned, and to disarmament. Serious concern had 
been expressed with regard to the present situation. The Soviet delegation was 
convinced that all the conditions needed for detente to remain a key element in 
world politics had been fulfilled, so that a renewal of the arms race could be 
avoided and specific measures adopted in that sphere. As had been stated by 
Mr. Brezhnev, the Soviet Head of State, in his message to participants at the 
Second HPT Review Conference, the Soviet Union considered it essential, especially 
in present conditions, that the provisions of the Treaty relating to the adoption 
of effective measures with a view to halting the nuclear arms race and disarmament 
be applied. The Soviet proposals relating, among other things, to ending the 
manufacture of nuclear weapons, to the destruction of such weapons and to the 
complete banning of nuclear weapons tests were well known. The Soviet Union 
would continue to do all it could to ensure that steps were taken quickly. 
Halting of the arms race and disarmament were the concern of all countries, and 
if those objectives were achieved in the near future, broad opportunities 
would clearly be opened up for the development of co-operation in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. 

37. No participant at the Conference had contested the obvious fact that the 
Treaty had provided a solid basis for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and had 
brought about an atmosphere of mutual confidence between States, which was essential 
for genuinely widespread international co-operation in the nuclear sphere. The 
Agency had been highly praised by participants for the work it had done in all 
its spheres of activity. They had concluded, notably, that in the performance of 
its safeguards functions the Agency was respecting the sovereign rights of States 
without hampering the economic and technical development of States party to the 
Treaty and without causing any obstacle to international co-operation in the 
applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
38. During the discussions criticisms, sometimes quite far-reaching, had been 
made in connection with the application of certain provisions of the Treaty and 
with matters which closely concerned the Agency's activities. In particular, 
different views had been expressed about nuclear export policies and principles. 
It was, however, remarkable that, even among participants who had demonstrated 
more or less plainly their dissatisfaction with the situation relating to nuclear 
exports or the transfer of nuclear technology, hardly anyone had called into 
GC(XXIV)/OR.22CI 
page 15 

question the value of a fundamental understanding on the main outlines of a nuclear 
export policy. In that connection an important role would be played by the 
committee of the whole which had been set up at the Board's meetings in June 
and which would be responsible for studying problems of the assurance of supplies 
of nuclear fuel, of the transfer of technology and equipment and of the provision 
of nuclear fuel cycle services. Similarly, criticisms made of the Agency in 
connection with its safeguards system had related to an increase in the effectiveness 
of safeguards, their universal application and the development as soon as 
possible of ways of applying safeguards to all facilities pertaining to the nuclear 
fuel cycle. 

39. After examining carefully the evolution of international co-operation in the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy, the participants at the Review Conference 
had in effect reached the conclusion that such co-operation could not develop 
successfully unless the nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime was reinforced by 
all possible means, with all the relevant provisions of the Treaty being adhered to 
strictly. It could, therefore, be concluded that the work of the Conference at 
Geneva constituted a new step towards reinforcement of the nuclear-weapons 
non-proliferation regime in conditions enabling all States to have access, without 
any discrimination, to the applications of nuclear energy and technology for 
peaceful purposes under effective international control in accordance with the 
principles of the Agency, 
40. Nuclear energy was becoming an important factor in the economic and social 
development of many countries in the world. For various reasons, some objective 
and some subjective, that development was not proceeding in a regular fashion, 
but it was already irreversible. That being so, co-operation among countries in 
the search for solutions to energy problems was becoming increasingly important, 
and the important role played by the Agency in the organization of that co-operation 
deserved appreciation. The Soviet Union had supported and would continue to support 
the Agency's scientific and technical programmes. His delegation noted with 
satisfaction that the Agency's activities in that sphere were being carried out 
with due account for the needs of developing countries; that was in fact directly 
reflected in almost all its scientific and technical programmes. The Department 
of Research and Isotopes provided an example: data available on activities 
over the past five years showed that the developing countries had received 
technical assistance worth some $11 million in areas for which the Department was 
responsible. The Department of Technical Operations constituted another example. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 16 

41. Each year, the voluntary contributions of Member States to the Technical 
Assistance Fund were increasing. In accordance with the principles which it 
applied to technical assistance to developing Member States, the Soviet Government 
had decided to raise its voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance 
Fund to 1 050 000 roubles in national currency, which represented an even more 
generous rate of contribution than that recommended by the Secretariat. As in 
previous years, those resources could be used by the Agency for the acquisition 
in the USSR of equipment, small quantities of nuclear material for research 
purposes and fuel elements containing low-enriched uranium for research reactors, 
and for organizing scientific visits to the USSR by specialists from developing 
countries. Where the training of professionals was concerned, the Soviet Union 
was spending, in addition to the sum already mentioned, 100 000 roubles for the 
organization of technical activities. At the twenty-second session of the 
General Conference it had said that it would donate to the Agency over a period 
of five years 50 kg of uranium-235 in order to contribute to the Agency's 
activities in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It intended to supply those 
materials, which were to be used as fuel for research reactors, with an enrichment 
not exceeding 20$ uranium-235. 
42. In order to respond to the wishes of a number of developing countries the 
Soviet Union had decided not to oppose the setting of indicative figures for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund for 1982 and 1983 of 
$16 and $19 million respectively, but its understanding was that the principle 
of a voluntary fund using the national currencies of Member States would remain 
unchanged. The Soviet Union was prepared to continue its technical and economic 
assistance to interested developing countries in the future, but his delegation 
felt bound to point out that such assistance was being provided and would continue 
to be provided only within the limits of what the Soviet Union could do, and in 
the forms which had already proven themselves. 
43. Broad utilization of nuclear energy for the good of humanity as a whole 
depended to a large extent on results obtained in that sphere at the national level 
At present, the experience of a few countries was in process of becoming the 
common possession of a large number of others, and the contribution of many 
countries to the achievements of nuclear science and technology continued to 
increase. A good example of that was provided by the results of INFCE. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 17 

44. Turning to the development of nuclear power in his country, he stated that 
that source of energy was widespread in the Soviet Union and that it would 
necessarily have a very great impact on the national economy; its preferential 
development in the European part of the USSR made it possible to solve fuel and 
energy production problems in the most economical way. 
45. At present, the total installed power of nuclear stations in the USSR was 
approximately 13 million kW. The unit output of individual reactors was gradually 
increasing, as was the total installed power at a given site. Economic and 
technical calculations showed that for the USSR the optimum size of nuclear power 
stations was of the order of 4-6 million kW(e) and that of individual reactors 
1-1.5 million kW(e). The first nuclear power station - and so far the largest which 
had reactors of the RBMK type was the Leningrad power station, the third 
unit of which had been connected to the grid on 7 December 1979; the commissioning 
of the fourth and last unit was foreseen for late February 1981, when the total 
power of the station would be 4 million kW. A nuclear power station which was 
currently under construction at Ignalinsk would have RBMK reactors with a unit 
power of 1.5 million kW, and its total output would be 6 million kW. The installed 
capacity of stations with reactors of the WWER type with a unit power of 
1 million kW would be of the same order. The first reactor of that type, construction 
of which had been completed during the present year, had been put into 
operation at a new site. 

46. An important event had occurred during the spring of 1980 when a fast reactor 
of the BU-600 integral type had gone critical. Operation of that reactor and of 
a BH-35O loop-type reactor should provide important information for the future 
development of commercial fast reactors in the Soviet Union. 
47. The USSR was actively engaged in work on the utilization of atomic energy for 
urban heating. The first units of heat-producing nuclear power stations with a 
unit output of 500 000 kW were already under construction in the towns of Gor'kij 
and Voronezh; that type of application was expected to become widespread in the 
future. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 18 

48. In the immediate future the USSR proposed to increase its installed nuclear 
capacity considerably. Its nuclear power industry was at present putting units 
with an aggregate output of approximately 2 million kW into operation each year 
and by the end of the decade some 5 million kW would probably be going into service 
annually; by the end of the century that figure would rise to some 10 million kW 
per year, which was equivalent to the present rate of increase in all electrical 
power being installed in the USSR. All nuclear fuel cycle operations would expand 
at the appropriate rate in support of the growth in nuclear power generating 
capacity. 
49« In studying and solving the problems presented by the development of nuclear 
power and its fuel cycle, the Soviet Union gave high priority to the operating 
safety of nuclear power stations and other facilities. It greatly appreciated the 
Agency's activities involving the drawing up of safety codes and guides for 
nuclear power stations and was participating actively in that work. 

50. While developing its own nuclear power industry, the Soviet Union was also 
engaging in very extensive international co-operation in that sphere both on the 
bilateral level and within the framework of the Agency. The achievements in 
nuclear science and technology of Soviet specialists were being made known to all 
countries through publications and papers presented by Soviet scientists at 
international conferences and symposia and also through the participation of 
Soviet specialists in the Agency's activities. 
51. Effective co-operation in science and technology had become established with 
the member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). Some 50 
industrial groups and enterprises from eight socialist States were combining their 
efforts to produce equipment of high complexity. Among them were the Soviet 
factory "Atommash" at Volgodonsk, the Czechoslovak "Skoda" group, the machine-tool 
complex for heavy industry at Magdeburg (German Democratic Republic), the 
Hungarian "Chemimash" group, the Polish "Zemak" company and so on. Through joint 
measures aimed at intensifying the development of nuclear power, the CMEA member 
countries were making considerable progress towards the achievement of the longterm 
objectives adopted in 1978 at the twenty-second session of CMEA, concerning 
co-operation between member states of the Council in relation to energy, fuels 
and raw materials. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 19 

52. Parallel to the development of conventional nuclear power based on the fission 
of heavy nuclei, extensive studies and research were in progress in the Soviet Union 
with a view to constructing facilities of the next generation, i.e. thermonuclear 
fusion reactors. The Soviet Union was participating actively in the IHTOR project, 
under which an international fusion reactor was to be constructed under the 
auspices of the Agency, and, as in the past, it would continue to give that project 
all necessary support. 
53. For many countries, long-term nuclear power programmes faced the problem of 
the assurance of fuel supplies. The concerns of those countries about the nuclear 
fuel problem had given rise to the Board's decision in June to set up a committee 
of the whole which would be given the task of examining problems of the assurance 
of nuclear supplies linked with effective non-proliferation measures. 
54. The Soviet Union, aware of the needs of developing countries and of their 
desire to see a stable and reliable nuclear materials and equipment market become 
established, had decided to participate in the work of that committee. It 
guaranteed long-term supplies of nuclear fuel for the nuclear power stations which 
were being or had been constructed with its technical co-operation, and it also 
offered enrichment services, the uranium supplied by customers being enriched to 
a maximum of 5$ in uranium-235. However, in the interests of an effective system 
of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the Soviet Union was guided strictly by 
the agreements in force which related to the control of nuclear exports. Its 
decision to participate in the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
was subject to the understanding that that Committee would take the agreements in 
force in that sphere fully into account. It was only on that basis that 
conditions appropriate for the elaboration of a reliable system of nuclear fuel 
supply assurances, which would not lend itself to the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and other nuclear explosive devices, could be created. 
55. He recalled that an essential instrument of the nuclear weapons 
non-proliferation regime was the system of safeguards applied by the Agency to the 
nuclear materials of non-nuclear-weapon States which had submitted all their 
nuclear activities to its control. However, not all non-nuclear-weapon States had 
yet placed their nuclear activities under Agency safeguards. At the Second HPT 
Review Conference in Geneva concern had been expressed about the intention of 
Israel and South Africa to manufacture their own nuclear weapons, which would 

GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 20 

destabilize the international situation and undermine the foundations of the 
nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime as it was at present. It was necessary 
at all costs to ensure that those countries placed all their nuclear activities 
under Agency safeguards and thereby contributed to international efforts aimed at 
reinforcing the nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime. 

56. The Soviet Union considered the Agency's safeguards activities to he very 
important. It noted with satisfaction that, as in previous years, in 1979 there 
had teen no diversion of safeguarded nuclear materials for the manufacture of 
any nuclear weapon, or to further any other military purpose, or for the manufacture 
of any other explosive device. 
57. In recent years the volume of the Agency's safeguards activities had 
increased considerably, and complex facilities such as reprocessing plants, uranium 
enrichment plants and mixed-oxide fuel fabrication facilities had been placed under 
safeguards. For the Agency that had resulted in a number of tasks which it had to 
perform in order for its safeguards to be as effective as was desirable. The 
Soviet Union considered that the following were included in those tasks: 
standardization of safeguarding procedures and techniques; refinement of methods 
of applying safeguards to "sensitive" stages in the nuclear fuel cycle and 
systematic improvement of the equipment of the Department of Safeguards; and 
rationalization of the processing of the safeguards data provided by inspectors. 
It was also important that the Department of Safeguards should have the number of 
staff established in the Agency's budget and that thorough training should be given 
to recently recruited inspectors, including on-site training in key nuclear 
facilities. 
58. The Soviet Union was participating actively in scientific and technical 
studies designed to ensure the proper functioning of the Agency's safeguards 
system; work relevant to that purpose was in progress at the main scientific 
research centres of the USSR. In order to help the Agency train recently recruited 
inspectors, the USSR was offering courses and study tours for them, during which 
they were able to study in detail the organization of effective safeguards at 
nuclear power stations using reactors of the HWER type. In the context of such 
training, test inspections had taken place at the Hovovorenezh power station, 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 21 

during which accounting documents had been verified and fresh and irradiated fuel 
had been measured using non-destructive techniques, whereby measuring equipment 
belonging to the Agency and demonstration devices made in the Soviet Union had 
been used. The Soviet Union would continue to give its full support to the 

Agency's safeguards activities. In that respect it should be noted that for the 
years 1980-82 the Soviet Union had earmarked one million roubles for carrying out 
technical support activities for safeguards in the USSR; the programme for those 

activities was being drawn up. 

59. With regard to the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the 
application of safeguards measures, the delegation of the Soviet Union wished to 
emphasize the important role played in that sphere by the Agency and its 
Director General, to whom it expressed its deepest gratitude. 
60. In conclusion, his delegation was convinced that the present session of the 
General Conference would further the development of international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy on the basis of equal rights and in conditions 
which effectively prevented the proliferation of nuclear weapons; it would 
thereby contribute in a more general way to the strengthening of mutual confidence 
between States and to dltente, and acordingly to the peace and well-being of all 
States and peoples. 
61. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) felt that the events which had taken 
place in the world since the last session of the General Conference had underlined 
the necessity of being able to count on assured, adequate supplies of 
energy. The participants at the Venice Summit had stressed that all countries 
should conserve fossil fuels and endeavour to depend as little as possible on oil 
imports; and they had emphasized the increasing role which nuclear energy would be 
called upon to play in that regard. 
62. The United Kingdom, for its part, was pursuing a dynamic nuclear policy. In 
addition to confirming an order for two advanced gas-cooled reactors (AGR), the 
authorities had announced their intention of placing orders for at least 15 000 MW 
of installed nuclear capacity over a period of ten years from 1982 onwards. Thus, 
by the end of the century, roughly one third of the United Kingdom's electricity 
would be generated by nuclear plants. The Government had also announced that, 
subject to the necessary safety clearances and licences and after a public 
enquiry, the first of those new plants would be equipped with a pressurized water 

GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 22 

reactor (PWR). In addition, -the United Kingdom was engaged in a review of its 
fast breeder policy in the light of advice from the nuclear industry. The 
authorities were studying the various options open to them in that area and 
considering, in particular, the construction of a full-scale fast reactor power 
station. They were also studying the extent to which such a plant - if that were 
the course chosen - could be constructed in collaboration with other countries. 

63. The United Kingdom was actively pursuing its policy of fuel reprocessing on 
the grounds of both cost-effectiveness and the efficient management of radioactive 
waste. The reconstruction and reinforcement of the Windsoale plant, along with 
design and development work for a new reprocessing plant, were under way: 
preparation of the site had already begun. Regarding waste disposal, vitrification 
had been proved an absolutely safe method of storing highly active waste. The 
construction of the full-scale plant would begin within about three years and 
would make it both easier and less costly to store highly active waste, pending 
decisions on ultimate disposal. 
64. In 1979, a decision had been taken to increase further the capacity of 
URENCO's Capenhurst and Almelo centrifuge uranium enrichment plants. Those programmes 
had made good progress despite the fact that the slower rate at which 
nuclear plants were being built throughout the world had decreased the demand for 
enriched uranium. Development work on gas-cooled reactors was going ahead 
satisfactorily. 
65. Much of the work on the pressurized water reactor (PWR) was oriented towards 
safety, and the proposals to be submitted to the public enquiry would have to meet 
all the safety requirements. Major advances had been made in the development of 
fast breeders, and research in that area had confirmed the results previously 
obtained on the prototype fast reactor at Dounreay, thus further strengthening 
confidence in the safety of that system. In addition, the fast reactor fuel 
reprocessing plant had been commissioned and was currently reprocessing irradiated 
Plutonium fuel: when the latter had been returned to the fuel fabrication plant, 
before the end of the year, the complete fuel cycle of a fast reactor would have 
been closed for the first time. 
GC(3OIV)/OR.220 
page 23 

66. Buclear safety was the key factor determining the rate of construction of 
nuclear plants throughout the world: they could not contribute towards meeting 
energy needs unless they satisfied the most rigorous safety standards and unless 
the public at large perceived that they did so. No country could place itself 
outside that requirement. The United Kingdom Government and the country's nuclear 
industry had always considered that question to be paramount and were making sure 
that the existing standards were not only fully applied, but improved wherever 
possible. Furthermore, while the United Kingdom believed that each country should 
accept responsibility for the safety of its own nuclear facilities, it was also 
convinced that it was vital to study the question of safety on an international 
level. It would continue to participate fully in international exchanges of 
information relating to safety, and fully supported the Agency's work in that 
area. He particularly welcomed the role played by the Agency in organizing the 
International Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues to be held 
shortly in Stockholm, in which his country intended to take an active part. 
67. The Agency was fulfilling admirably one of its main tasks, namely that of 
promoting the use of nuclear energy for peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world, and particularly in the underdeveloped regions. In its desire to 
support the Agency's work, the Government of the United Kingdom had committed 
itself not only to pledging its full voluntary contribution for 1981 to the 
Technical Assistance Fund, but also to contributing one million dollars for 
technical assistance over the next four years to developing Member States which 
were either party to HPT or had accepted similar obligations in other ways. 
That money should help to provide experts and equipment for projects which could 
not be financed from other sources. It would be additional to the contributions 
made available each year by the United Kingdom for the provision of training 
fellowships. 
68. The United Kingdom attached no less importance to the Agency's safeguards 
activities. The agreement signed by the United Kingdom, EURATOM and the Agency 
which would enable the Agency to apply its safeguards to nuclear materials in 
United Kingdom facilities had come into force in 1978, and measures were 
currently being taken to implement that agreement. The application of safeguards 
under that agreement would allow the Agency to gain valuable experience with 
respect to facilities of advanced design such as the Dounreay plant. In addition, 

GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 24 


the United Kingdom was continuing to give the Agency practical help to enable it 

to improve the effectiveness of safeguards procedures, 'by organizing training 

courses for inspectors and providing the services of an expert on fast reactors. 
The Government had also decided to make available to the Agency a sum of 

£500 000 in each of the next three years as aid for its safeguards programme. 
That money was to be used in areas where the Agency felt financial support was 
most needed. 

69. The effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards was vital for the success of 
efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. He was pleased to read 
in the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1979 that no diversion of significant 
quantities of nuclear material had been detected and that, consequently, nuclear 
material under Agency safeguards continued to be confined to peaceful activities. 
That was extremely important. However, the system had still failed to achieve 
that universal application which would be in the interests of the whole 
international community. 
70. At the beginning of 1980 the Agency had published the report of the 
International Huclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (IHPCE). The work carried out under 
IMPCB had led to a better understanding not only of the risks of proliferation 
but also of the contribution that nuclear energy could make to resolving world 
energy problems. The pressure on traditional energy sources was growing 
relentlessly and could only aggravate international tensions. While any expanded 
use of materials which could be employed in weapons inevitably entailed certain 
risks, it should nonetheless be borne in mind that nuclear energy could 
contribute greatly to world peace. The main task ahead was, therefore, to follow 
up the conclusions of the IHFCE report, the most important of which was perhaps 
that proliferation was essentially a political problem. 
71. Although it was regrettable that the Second KPT Review Conference had not 
been able to adopt a final declaration based on consensus, it had nonetheless 
obtained some positive results: all the Parties had confirmed their commitment 
to the principles and objectives set down in the Treaty, and Articles III and IV 
had given rise to a thorough and constructive exchange of views. The Agency's 
role in operating the safeguards system had been universally approved and there 
was broad agreement on the way the Parties should approach nuclear trade in the 
years ahead: what had been said on that subject at the Conference should be 
taken into consideration when the question was examined in greater detail. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 25 

72. The United Kingdom had taken an active part in formulating the resolution 
of the Board of Governors setting up the Committee on Assurances of Supply, which 
was to meet very shortly, and it would also take an active part in the Committee's 
work. The issues involved were complex, and great patience would be needed to 
reach the consensus desired by all parties. He hoped that, in the long term, it 
would be possible to find a more predictable way of operating the non-proliferation 
regime. The application of more uniform arrangements would present many 
advantages over case-by-case controls: in particular, countries would be less 
inclined to seek their own independent fuel cycle, and the universal application 
of safeguards could provide a basis for international nuclear trade. Developing 
a more reliable regime would take time and involve bilateral as well as multilateral 
discussions: the Committee on Assurances of Supply would have a vital 
part to play in that regard. 
73. In that connection, the development of a new international plutonium 
storage system would be particularly useful; he hoped that such a system could 
be developed by the expert group convened to examine that question and approved 
by the Board of Governors. It should form a logical extension of the safeguards 
system and be based on Article XII.A.5 of the Statute. The United Kingdom hoped 
that the work of the expert group would continue to make good progress, as 
plutonium was an energy source which could last hundreds of years, and specification 
of the conditions required for the storage and utilization of plutonium 
was thus a matter of high priority deserving the support of all countries. 
74. In conclusion, he felt that priority should be given, in following up the 
work of INFCE, to reaffirming the importance of safeguards and HFT and also the 
work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply and the Expert Group on International 
Plutonium Storage - their common aim being to develop a safer and more solid 
non-proliferation regime. The Agency was the place for such work, not only 
because of its Statute, but also because it had succeeded in gaining universal 
confidence. 
75. Mr. MGONGO KAMAHDA (Zaire) noted that in 1980, as in preceding years, 
Africa had been under-represented on the Board of Governors and the Secretariat 
of the Agency; yet the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had still not 
been adopted. The past year had been marked by three political events which were 
important from the point of view of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXI7)/0E.220 
page 26 

The first was the conclusion of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation 
(INFCE). Although the cost of that evaluation had perhaps teen excessive 
compared with the final result, the latter was nonetheless far from negligible. 
While it was quite a good idea to set up a special committee to look into ways 
of providing fuel cycle equipment, technology and services with a greater degree 
of assurance and reliability, it would clearly he more useful still to ask that 
committee to consider what the Agency's role and responsibilities ought to be 
in that connection. 

76. The second event had been the opening for signature of the Convention on 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, to which the Government of Zaire 
subscribed fully. It was important, however, not to place an undue burden on 
the procedures regulating international trade in nuclear services and materials, 
since that might cancel out the Agency's efforts to help Third-World countries 
acquire a civilian nuclear industry. 
77. The third event was the tenth anniversary of the date on which the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons had come into force. It was 
appropriate on the present occasion to point out, at the risk of stating a 
commonplace, that nuclear non-proliferation should be vertical as well as 
horizontal: the fact that in ten years not one of the non-nuclear-weapon 
States party to NPT had manufactured nuclear explosive devices, although many 
of them possessed the technical resources to do so, should not divert attention 
from the fact that endeavours to reduce vertical proliferation had met with 
little success. Nevertheless, NPT had succeeded in diminishing to some extent 
the fears of that section of the international community which regarded nuclear 
energy as an unnecessary evil. 
78. In that regard, he felt that more could be done by the Agency and its Member 
States to dispel the "nuclear phobia" which the popular press was creating 
throughout the world. The Agency should explore all possible means of placing 
nuclear energy in a more balanced and calmer perspective. He was afraid that the 
supplementary nuclear safety programme introduced the year before for that 
purpose, which was to be financed from voluntary contributions, had not received 
sufficient funds to achieve its aims. That programme should be integrated into 
the Agency's Regular Budget. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 27 

79. The same applied to the technical assistance programme, also financed from 
voluntary contributions, which, since 1972, had palpably been slowing down. 
Those developments were especially worrying as the restrictive policies of a 
number of States supplying nuclear materials and equipment were, on the one hand, 
resulting in the stagnation of voluntary contributions in real terms, and, on 
the other, prompting a great many States to seek an independent fuel cycle, which 
would increase the danger of proliferation. Consequently, many Third-World 
countries, including Zaire, were requesting that the technical assistance 
programme should be funded entirely from the Agency's Regular Budget. Experience 
demonstrated that long-term planning was impossible for a programme financed by 
voluntary contributions, a fact which was, moreover, implicitly recognized in 
the proposal of the Secretariat and Board of Governors to integrate the 
supplementary nuclear plant safety programme into the Regular Budget from 1981 
onwards. 
80. Mr. WILSON (Australia), recalling that the General Conference was being 
held two weeks after the end of the Second NPT Review Conference, said his 
delegation wished to underline the positive results obtained by the Conference 
regarding Articles III, IV and V of NPT concerning co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy - results which would be of great help in furthering the 
examination of those questions, particularly in the Agency. 
81. The year 1980 had also been marked by the conclusion of the International 
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation. That evaluation had confirmed that governments 
were expecting nuclear energy to assume increasing importance over the next 
50 years and were accordingly anticipating that the Agency would have an ever 
greater part to play in promoting peace and prosperity throughout the world. 
Moreover, the fact that INPCE had succeeded in producing a report which was 
not content with merely defining the problems, but also put forward methods of 
resolving them, augured well for the future of international co-operation. INPCE 
had concluded that it was necessary to provide international nuclear co-operation 
with a framework guaranteeing stable and mutually advantageous trade relations 
with respect to nuclear supplies, a framework which would simultaneously minimize 
the risk of proliferation. The conclusion reached by INPCE that assurances of 
supply also constituted a guarantee of non-proliferation encapsulated the viewpoint 
of the Australian Government. Australia was keenly aware of the desire of 

GCtXXIV)/OR.220 
page 28 

consumer countries for greater stability with respect to supplies, as it had 
demonstrated on many occasions. It would continue to supply nuclear material on 
fair commercial terms, if it could he assured that such material could not be 
diverted for the manufacture of nuclear explosive devices. 

82. Through INFCE, the international community had laid the foundations of a new 
and more effective structure for nuclear co-operation. The Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the work on international plutonium 
storage and spent fuel management were also part of that structure, which should 
be built gradually and systematically. 
83. Significant progress had been made in 1979 in the study on international 
plutonium storage, to which Australia continued to attach great importance. 
However, it might well take a long time to develop a system meeting the concerns 
of suppliers, consumers and the international community as a whole. The Committee 
on Assurances of Supply was to begin its work very shortly. Many of the problems 
involved had already been examined by Working Group 3 of INPCE, whose report should 
serve as a basis for the work of the new Committee. In such an extremely complex 
area, a definition of common approaches could only be achieved by gradual stages: 
oversimplifying the problems or not taking account of the diversity of the 
interests represented on the Committee would distort its work from the outset. 
Australia would adopt a constructive attitude towards the Committee by seeking 
co-operation and avoiding confrontation. 
84. Those complex and contentious issues should not be allowed to push the 
Agency's technical programme, which was fundamental, into the background. It was 
through that programme that the Agency was seeking to achieve its aim of 
increasing the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. Because of the economic problems encountered by its Member 
States, the Agency was finding it difficult to maintain the dynamism of its 
technical programme. In real terms, the growth rate of the budget for 1981 was 
already zero, but the Agency had to face up to the possibility that its resources 
might not increase fast enough even to keep pace with its inflating operating 
costs. It should, however, find a way of enlarging its contribution towards 
achieving the aims set down in the Statute, by constantly seeking to increase its 
efficiency through wise and firm management. The administrative services and 
maintenance of the Headquarters buildings should not be allowed to absorb funds 
meant for technical activities, and donor Governments should be able to demonstrate 
GC(XXIV)/OH.220 
page 29 

to the public in their own countries that the money they were providing was being 
channelled to the developing countries alone. The Agency should strive harder 
than ever to achieve those objectives, if it was to overcome the problems facing 
it at the present moment. 

85. With regard to the financing of technical assistance from voluntary contributions, 
Australia had noted the concerns expressed by the developing countries. 
It recognized that the provision of technical assistance was one of the Agency's 
key responsibilities, since the developing countries often lacked the technological 
basis which would enable them to assimilate nuclear techniques quickly and introduce 
a nuclear power programme. Australia would continue to lend its full support to 
the Agency's programme by contributing to the Technical Assistance Fund and 
providing aid (in the form of training, in particular) under the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement(RCA) and bilateral programmes. Australia attached 
particular importance to the Regional Co-operative Agreement and was pleased to 
report on the progress made in the RCA project on isotope hydrology and 
sedimentology. The programmes begun in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the 
Republic of Korea would continue in 1981. Australia was encouraging direct 
co-operation between participating Member States. It would also support the 
regional project on the industrial application of isotopes and radiation 
technology, which should do much to create nuclear expertise and further the use 
of nuclear techniques in the region. In 1980 a substantial training programme had 
also been organized in Australia for Malaysian personnel who would be operating 
Malaysia's first research reactor. That programme was going ahead, and Australia 
had also decided to help the Philippines through a five-year training programme 
in uranium exploration. It also intended to continue making its nuclear facilities 
available to scientists from countries in the region which were party to BPT. 

86. In taking stock of the Agency's technical assistance programme, greater 
attention should be given to its impact than to the expenses it entailed. He 
hoped that the Director General and the Secretariat would continue to seek more 
effective ways of enabling the recipient countries to derive maximum benefit from 
the funds available for technical assistance. 
87. In the annual report for 1979 the Director General had concluded that the 
nuclear material placed under safeguards had remained in peaceful activities or 
else was otherwise accounted for satisfactorily. Australia congratulated the 
Director General and his Secretariat on the way they had implemented the Agency's 

GC(XHV)/OR. 220 
page 30 


safeguards programme, which Australia considered to 'be the corner-stone of 
international co-operation in the nuclear field. In view of the high cost of 
that programme and the growing number of safeguarded facilities, the strictest 
possible financial management was essential. It was clear that, soon, when large 
plants handling special nuclear materials in bulk were placed under safeguards, 
the Agency would have to confront new types of problems. Australia therefore 
welcomed the fact that the Agency had started gaining experience in safeguarding 
reprocessing plants as well as conversion and fabrication plants. Some Member 
States were providing the Agency with extra-budgetary aid with a view to 
developing new cost-effective methods of applying safeguards to such plants. For 
its part, Australia intended to begin a research and development programme 
relating to enrichment plants. It would also endeavour to contribute to the 
design and development of safeguards equipment and instrumentation. The 
Australian Government was also studying the practicability of establishing a 
uranium enrichment industry in Australia, and a group of Australian companies had 
decided to carry out a feasibility study. The Government was currently looking 
into the question of whether such a plant could be set up under some multinational 
arrangement. The definition of a common approach regarding multinational arrange


ments was therefore of paramount concern to Australia. 

88. The Agency was also engaged in a whole range of technical activities from 
providing information on the fuel cycle to the Nuclear Safety Standards 
(NUSS) programme and the publication of safety guides. The Director General and 
the Board should ensure that those activities were always in line with the Agency's 
aims and that they made a real contribution towards achieving them. Where the 
Agency's work was on a small scale compared with that of other bodies, as in 
marine biology for example, the Agency should perhaps leave the field to those 
more directly involved. 
89. The Agency's nuclear safety standards activities, which were obviously 
international by nature, were of great importance to the Australian Government, 
which hoped that efforts could be increased to encourage the implementation of 
the safety documents and standards established under the MUSS programme. In that 
regard, consideration might be given to the organization of further Agencysponsored 
missions and training courses. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.220 
page 31 

90. In view of the Agency's budgetary difficulties, it was particularly 
important that it should co-operate closely with other international organizations 
engaged in related activities, particularly regarding predictions of the demand 
for and supply of nuclear energy and fuel and nuclear fuel cycle services. 
91. In conclusion, his delegation welcomed the fact that the Agency was working 
to expand the applications of radioisotopes and nuclear techniques in the 
developing countries. That was an area where the value of the nuclear contribution 
was widely recognized and where the Agency's work could only enhance its 
credibility. The Agency should continue to provide expert advice on radioisotope 
applications wherever practical results could clearly be expected within reasonable 
periods of time. 
92. Finally, he stressed that throughout 1981, which promised to be as busy as 
1980, the Agency could count on Australia's full support. 
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
March 1981* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr, 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Tuesday, 23 September 1980, at 10.50 a.m. 
President: Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisionalagenda** 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annualfor 1979 (continued) 
report 
1 105 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Argentina 
Belgium 
Switzerland 
Finland 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
1-3 0 
31 49 
50-5 9 
60 72 
73 86 
87 105 


*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 30 September 1980, 
**/ GC(XXIV)/626. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in documents 
GC(XXI7)/INF/l93/Rev.3, 193/Rev.3/Mod.1 and 193/Rev.3/Mod.2. 

80-6279 


GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1979 (continued) 

1. Br. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina), congratulating the President on his 
election, said that since the last session of the General Conference considerable 
progress had been made with the Argentine nuclear programme. First, an order 
had been placed for the third Argentine nuclear power station, Atucha II, with 
a reactor of the pressurized-water type using uranium and heavy water. The 
power station would not be a turnkey project, since the Rational Atomic Energy 
Commission (CNEA) would take charge of directing the project, for which purpose 
it had been decided to form an engineering company to be in charge of the 
architect engineering of the power station. The company would be owned 75$ tiy 
the CHEA and 25$ *y *&« Kraftwerk Union (KWO) Company, which was to provide the 
imported nuclear and conventional components which could not be manufactured 
in Argentina. With the engineering company it was hoped to consolidate the 
experience already acquired by the CNEA, which had acted as principal contractor 
for the assembly of the nuclear components of the Eabalse nuclear power station, 
and to enable national industry and engineering organizations to participate as 
fully as possible in projects. 
2. Another important step had been the signing of a contract with the Swiss 
company Sulzer Brothers for the construction of a heavy-water production plant 
with a capacity of 250 tonnes per annum. The plant, which was scheduled to be 
in operation in 1984, would meet the needs of Argentina's nuclear power 
programme. 
3. In addition, a contract had been signed with an Argentine-French 
consortium for the construction and operation of a plant producing uranium 
concentrates at the Sierra Pintada deposit, which would increase the CNEA's 
present U,Og production from 200 to 700 tonnes per annum from 1984. Under the 
contract private organizations would be assured of participation in what was 
to be an important and productive nuclear activity. 
4. Further efforts had been made in other CNEA activities, including the 
setting up of a fuel element fabrication plant which, with a planned capacity 
of 250 tonnes of clad uranium per annum, was to begin producing fuel elements 
for the Atucha I power station in 1981; in addition, a Zircaloy tube rolling 
plant was at an advanced stage of construction and was to come into operation 
in 1983. 
5. All those activities were designed to fulfil the two basic objectives of 
the nuclear programme: the completion of the fuel cycle in Argentina and the 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 3 

acquisition of industrial and engineering capacity needed for constructing, with 

as high a degree of national participation as possible, the nuclear power 

stations which would be needed to satisfy electrical energy requirements towards 
the end of the century. As was essential for the success of the programme, the 
work described had been accompanied by considerable research and development 
efforts. In addition, Argentina's activities in the sphere of nuclear safety 
and in the production and application of radioisotopes and radiation had also 
continued to develop in a most satisfactory manner. 

6. The year 1980 had seen much multilateral co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. Where the Agency was concerned, in addition to renouncing 
a share of the benefits from the voluntary fund for technical assistance, 
Argentina had increased by 20$ the number of man-months it provided in the form 
of fellowships, which were organized in such a way as to be as productive as 
possible. As in the previous year, Argentina had offered to pay for the 
implementation of three projects for which funds had been requested by Latin 
American countries but which the Agency had not been able to finance. The 
number of Argentine experts providing services under the technical assistance 
programme continued to be the highest in the region. Moreover, as in previous 
years, his Government was able to pledge a voluntary contribution to the 
Technical Assistance Fund for 1981 in accordance with its assessed percentage. 
7. His country was continuing to provide active support to the Inter-American 
Nuclear Energy Commission and was spelling out the details of offers which it 
had made to the Commission during its Xlth Ordinary Meeting held in Santiago 
de Chile in July 1979. 
8. The first regular meeting of non-aligned co-ordinating countries on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, held in Buenos Aires between 30 June and 
4 July 1980, had been particularly auspicious, with a significant number of 
developing countries represented in that group, which also included Argentina. 
The final communique' of the meeting showed that there was full agreement about 
important aspects of the international situation, including the position of 
non-aligned countries as regards international organizations and conferences. 
9. With regard to the Second DPT Review Conference, the co-ordinating group 
had proposed calling for strict observance of the Treaty, as that would guarantee 
the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and an immediate halt 
to the nuclear arms race. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 4 

10. While the group had recognized that the Agency played an important role and 
that the technical assistance it gave to non-aligned and developing countries was 
useful, it had concluded that a proper balance needed to he reached between the 
Agency's promotional and regulatory activities, that a proper balance was also 
needed-in the representat ion of different regions both in the policy-making 
organs and on the Professional staff and that no distortion of the Statute 
should be allowed, especially where regulatory activities were concerned. 
11. Attention had been paid at the meeting in Buenos Aires to problems of bilateral 
relations and to the negative effects of the conditions imposed by the 
"London Club" and other supplier countries on international co-operation and 
exchange in the peaceful nuclear field. The problems resulting from unilateral 
decisions applied retroactively, from claims to the right of "prior consent" 
and from undue restrictions on the transfer of technology had received particular 
attention. 
12. A promising start had also been made at the meeting towards the establishment 
of a co-operation programme, and specific areas had been identified for 
co-operation in research and development, exploration and mining, the production 
of radioisotopes and radiation sources, studies on radiation protection and 
nuclear safety, nuclear power production and fuel cycle activities. Possible 
mechanisms for such co-operation, within a multilateral and/or a bilateral 
framework or by means of projects with multilateral support, including the 
establishment of technology centres, had also been explored. 
13. It was intended that the co-operation programme should involve not only nonaligned 
countries but all developing countries. At the meeting Argentina had 
put forward a proposal for co-operation covering a wide range of activities 
involving the peaceful uses of nuclear energy; such co-operation would be open 
to all developing countries without the imposition of discriminatory clauses or 
political conditions which affected the sovereignty of States. 
14. At the bilateral level, considerable progress had been made in the design 
and construction of a nuclear research centre in Peru within the framework of 
co-operation between Peru and Argentina. On 4 February 1980 the foundation 
stone had been laid for the centre, at Huarangal, signalling the end of the 
conceptual engineering stage and the beginning of the civil engineering and 
detailed engineering stage. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 5 

15. He announced with particular satisfaction the recent signing with Brazil of 
a wide range of instruments which gave legal and political weight to nuclear cooperation 
activities already in existence. Those agreements were particularly 
welcome, because the substantial increase in co-operation that was to ensue would 
provide a clear demonstration of the fallacy of suggestions relating to a nuclear 
arms race between the two countries which had been made for the purpose of 
limiting the nuclear development of both of them. 
16. Other causes for satisfaction had been, in one case, the signing and, in 
others, the beginning of negotiations of new co-operation agreements and the 
extension of existing agreements with countries having a greater or lesser 
degree of technological development and representing almost all regions. 
Although Argentina concentrated particularly on Latin America, it was prepared 
to co-operate closely with all countries within a framework of mutual respect in 
order to enable all peoples to have access to the benefits of nuclear energy. 
17. Argentina was dedicated to peace and, in accordance with its well-known 
policies in relation to the transfer of technology, it had embarked upon 
negotiations with a view to submitting the research reactor at the Bariloche 
Unclear Centre, the Atucha II nuclear power station and the industrial heavy 
water plant, all of which were under construction, to Agency safeguards during 
1980. 
18. In addition, Argentina had agreed to amend the safeguards agreement signed 
with the Agency in relation to the fabrication of fuel elements for the 
Atucha I power station (see document IHPCIRC/250) in such a way that uranium 
dioxide for the plant would be subject to safeguards immediately it came under 
Argentine jurisdiction. 
19. negotiations with the Secretariat relating to a safeguards agreement under 
Article 13 of the Tlatelolco Treaty were continuing with a view to ensuring that 
it was entirely in accordance with the spirit and letter of the Treaty. 
20. Turning to the Agency's activities since the last General Conference, he 
noted with satisfaction the Secretariat's efforts - the results of which were 
evident - to solve the problem of balances in non-convertible currencies, and 
he hoped that that positive trend would be maintained in future years. 
21. However, although it was gratifying that the funds available for technical 
assistance had seen an increase, albeit a modest and insufficient one, he wished 

GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 6 


t• o register his concern and dissatisfaction at the fact that conditions that did 
not devolve from the Statute had started to be imposed on the provision of that 
assistance. 

22. Nor had the gap occurring in the past between the funds available and the 
needs of requesting countries been filled, and the number of technically sound 
projects for which funds were not available was alarming. In fact, approximately 
one third of the total technical assistance requested by Member States 
for 1980 could not be provided. Despite the fact that technical assistance was 
one of the Agency's most important activities, it did not expand with requirements, 
whereas the safeguards programme continued to be extended in a way that 
had never been foreseen. His delegation believed that the shortfall in funds 
for technical assistance was excessive and all possible steps should be taken to 
solve that problem. 
23. Where the .Agency's safeguards responsibilities were concerned, Argentina 
had already in the Board expressed its gratification at the fact that, as in 
previous years, no diversion of safeguarded nuclear material had been detected. 
He also welcomed the Secretariat's efforts to improve equipment and to use 
inspectors more effectively. He believed that priority should be given to the 
inspection of "sensitive" facilities and to direct-use materials and that further 
use needed to be made of computer systems. 
24. At a time of great insecurity where nuclear supplies were concerned, the 
establishment by the Board of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was to 
be welcomed. The Committee would assist States to achieve a climate of mutual 
confidence between suppliers and recipients, which was necessary if normal conditions 
for the exchange of equipment, materials and technology were to prevail. 
25. The Agency's safeguards system should be applied in a rational manner and 
at the level of complexity required for each stage in the fuel cycle. Bo other 
controls should be applied, since that would make it more difficult to bring 
about the atmosphere of confidence and harmony, to the restoration of which all 
needed to contribute. 
26. With regard to the Agency's international plutonium storage (IPS) activities 
its concern to define its responsibilities under Article XII.A.5 of the Statute 
was opportune, since the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (IMPCE) had 
demonstrated that plutonium fuel cycles would definitely be needed for nuclear 
power in the future. Similarly, any efforts made by the Agency in the context 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 7 

of its international spent fuel management (ISFU) activities to help solve the 
problem of spent fuel storage for those countries which did not have plans for 
appropriate facilities deserved support and were in keeping with its Statute. 

27. The termination of the Second MPT Review Conference without a consensus 
having been achieved on the wording of a final declaration demonstrated the 
great differences in opinion between HPT parties, in particular between developing 
countries on the one hand and non-nuclear-weapon industrialized States and the 
depositories for the Treaty on the other. The difficulties experienced by the 
Conference in reaching consensus reinforced the position of the Agency, within 
which all matters relating to assurances of supply and to verification and 
control measures designed to prevent the diversion of special fissionable 
materials for military purposes should be resolved, in order to ensure that the 
functions set forth in Article IH of the Agency's Statute were carried out. 
Argentina believed that steps taken by a State or group of States to impose 
conditions on others without listening to their arguments and the non-fulfilment 
of obligations under treaties and international agreements constituted an 
erroneous policy which would produce results opposite to that which all wished 
to see achieved, namely, genuine horizontal and vertical non-proliferation as an 
initial step towards complete nuclear disarmament. 

28. The Agency had produced positive results in other spheres, such as food and 
agriculture, life sciences and physical sciences. However, Argentina was concerned 
by the fact that, although all those activities had a promotional 
character and provided a very useful type of technical assistance to developing 
countries, in future they would be subject to restrictions in order for a nearzero 
growth in the budget to be achieved. Although Argentina supported the 
latter objective, it believed that savings should be sought in the safeguards 
programme through the optimum development of equipment and the rational use of 
staff, not by the reduction or elimination of promotional activities. 
29. On the other hand, he gave his delegation's full support to the increase in 
the nuclear safety and environmental protection programme and to the continuation 
of the Nuclear Safety Standards (MUSS) programme at a suitable level. Any 
efforts made in those activities and in those related to the management of 
radioactive wastes would benefit the future development of nuclear power. He 
further wished to state his Government's appreciation of the activities of the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 8 


30. Finally, he congratulated the Director General and the Secretariat on their 
work, in recognition of which he pledged his Government's full support for all 
the Agency's activities. 
31. Mr. SMOLDEHEH (Belgium) congratulated the President on his election, 
for which his long experience in international co-operation made him particularly 
well qualified. He also praised the Agency's Secretariat and the Director 
General for the work they had done during the past year. Dr. Eklund had shown 
great skill, devotion and impartiality, often in difficult circumstances. 
32. He was sorry that the Second MPT Review Conference, which had taken place 
recently in Geneva, had teen unable to reach final agreement on a set of recommendations 
- or indeed even on statements - after its thorough examination of 
the Treaty and its Preamble. While the Review Conference had seemed unanimous 
in its desire to maintain and consolidate the Treaty, its participants had held 
differing views about how to do so. 
33. Regarding Articles III and IV, which were particularly important for the 
Agency as they concerned safeguards and the development and peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy, the problem in reaching a consensus was due to differences of 
interpretation and practice with respect to the supply of nuclear material and 
equipment and of nuclear technology applied or developed unilaterally or by 
groups of countries without prior consultation with all the States party to KPT. 
His delegation was therefore delighted at the establishment of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply, an open-ended committee set up in June 1979 by the Board 
of Governors which should enable a solution to be found to the problem of 
guaranteed nuclear supplies, the most difficult aspect of which was the application 
of unanimously accepted safeguards in line with the provisions of HPT. 
Belgium intended to take an active part in the work of that Committee and would 
continue its efforts to reconcile the two goals of non-proliferation and the 
development of civilian nuclear research and industry on the basis of nondiscrimination 
between nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States. 
34. Bon-discrimination was a precondition for attaining non-proliferation. 
Restrictions on the development of the peaceful nuclear activities of nonnuclear-
weapon States were inadmissible, even where advanced sectors and sensitive 
technology were involved, provided that the latter were subject to the 
safeguards stipulated in HPT - which meant, essentially, the Agency's fullscope 
safeguards. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 9 

35. That situation had been recognized when MPT was being concluded, that is, 
at a time when a number of non-nuclear-weapon States were already developing 
their activities in sensitive sectors of the nuclear fuel cycle. And that was 
why the system known as full-scope safeguards - which was different from the 
Agency's previous safeguards system - had been inaugurated to prevent the 
diversion of produced materials, whether enriched uranium or plutonium, to the 
manufacture of weapons or prohibited nuclear explosive devices. 
36. The States party to MPT had also, apart from accepting full-scope safeguards, 
given sufficient political guarantees regarding their intentions. Reinforcing 
safeguards with respect to those countries would be totally unjustified, unfair 
and absurd. Any further measures to strengthen controls aimed at preventing 
horizontal proliferation should be taken primarily with regard to countries 
which were not party to SPT or any equivalent international treaty but had 
nonetheless developed significant nuclear programmes. 
37. At the MPT Review Conference the Belgian delegate had said that, in order to 
reduce the discriminatory elements in the Treaty, the nuclear-weapon States 
should submit their civilian plants to the same safeguards regulations as the 
non-nuclear-weapon States, adding that such voluntary action would serve as an 
example and reassure the international community that the nuclear-weapon States 
did not have ulterior motives as regards civilian nuclear developments and 
transactions in nuclear materials. The Belgian delegate had welcomed the 
fact that the United Kingdom had submitted to the safeguards system imposed on 
the other E0RAT0M Member States party to HPT, and that the United States of 
America had given a similar undertaking, the agreement concluded with the 
Agency to that effect having just been ratified by the United States Senate. 
The Belgian delegation at the Review Conference had not been able to suppress 
some disappointment that the other nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty 
was still refusing to follow suit. 
38. Belgium could not share the view held by some that international safeguards 
in nuclear-weapon States were an expensive luxury, since such controls would 
serve as an example. Moreover, elimination of the discrimination implicit in 
Article III of MPT should have reassured those at the Review Conference who 
were worried by allegations that significant amounts of special fissionable 
material had gone missing in one of the nuclear-weapon States party to the MPT. 
Finally, such a measure could be considered the first stage in attaining international 
safeguarding of nuclear activities; in other words, it should pave 

GC(XOT)/OR.221 
page 10 

the way to the later stage, for which there was worldwide demand, namely 
cessation of the vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons and the complete 
cessation of -underground tests. 

39. What had been possible during the drawing up of the E0RAT0H Treaty, which 
provided for the safeguarding of all civilian nuclear activities of Member 
States, whether or not they had developed nuclear weapons, should also be possible 
on a world scale. Thereafter, the argument based on discrimination used by 
countries refusing to accede to NPT would have no foundation. 
40. The fact that a number of countries - and not the least significant ones 
either - had so far stayed outside the Treaty was deplorable. However, if one 
were serious about reinforcing the universality of the system, then making 
conditions more favourable for those who had stood aloof than for signatories or 
maintaining all manner of discriminatory distinctions between the military 
powers and others would only strengthen the position of the non-signatory 
countries and hinder the task of making the system universal. 
41. Per the second year running the Agency had complained about the vetoing of 
inspectors by certain countries which, for example, allowed no inspections on 
their territory or were too selective in accepting inspectors. However, one 
must not lose sight of the fact that in international relations reciprocity 
was a basic principle. A country which rejected an inspector was not necessarily 
practising discrimination but might, as was often the case, be trying to 
end it: the veto would be lifted when the home countries of rejected inspectors 
themselves agreed to be inspected. Inspections should be serious and 
impartial; they should not be used to maintain military privileges or to 
further industrial espionage. Also, the Agency should be mindful of the 
special relations existing between some States or groups of States, a reality 
which might complicate its work but must nonetheless be recognized. 
42. Belgium welcomed the opening in Canada of the first regional safeguards 
office and hoped that a second office, in the Par East, could soon be opened. 
The opening of regional offices would undoubtedly help to make safeguards 
more effective and, in the long term, reduce the inspectors' travelling 
expenses. 
43. After the occasionally excessive budgetary growth of recent years the 
Agency had made a real effort to keep the increase in its 1981 budget within 
reasonable limits. It should continue that policy in the future and, in 
GC(XXI7)/OR.221 
page 11 

particular, look into ways of reducing the running costs of the VIC. With one 
year's experience behind it, it was in a position to estimate costs more 
precisely and avoid.all unnecessary expense. That was particularly vital in 
view of the fact that some countries had adopted very stringent budgetary 
measures to reduce all kinds of costs in 1981. Belgium had set a limit of 
6.125? on its budgetary growth. 

44. Belgium could not yet forecast its 1981 contribution to the General Fund 
but hoped that, circumstances permitting, its contribution would be as high as 
in previous years. The Belgian delegation had noted that the target figures 
cited for 1982 and 1983 were meant as a rough guide only; that was especially 
important since it was difficult to predict how circumstances would change. 
Thus it was more important than ever that contributions should continue to be 
voluntary and subject to the approval of national Governments. 
45» The difficult period the Agency was going through in no way diminished 
the importance attached by the Belgian delegation to the technical assistance 

programme. Apart from it s voluntary contribution to the General Fund, each 
year Belgium was increasing the number of fellowships i t offered to Third World 
graduates wishing to acquire greater expertise in order to help put into effect 
their countries' plans for peaceful nuclear development. Those fellowships, 
which in 1978 had amounted to 36 man-months, had increased to 59 man-months 

in 1979 and 90 man-months in 1980. Since 1977 Belgium had also given 
B.Fr. 2 million a year for a research programme at the Seibersdorf Laboratory 
being carried out in collaboration with other Governments to help control 

insect-borne diseases. The project was being conducted in Nigeria, but it 
was hoped that its results might contribute to improving overall health in 

several other African countries. 

46. With regard to reactor safety and environmental protection, the Agency's 
role should be to formulate recommendations, establish internationally accepted 
levels of protection, review the latter periodically to make any necessary 
adjustments and stimulate the preparation of international agreements. 
47. That was the spirit in which the nine EEC countries, together with the 
European Commission, had signed the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material (CPNM) on 9 June 1979. He hoped that many other countries, 
especially those which might have international responsibilities in that 

GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 12 

connection, would follow suit. Such conventions could achieve their aims only 
if they were supported by the largest possible numbers of countries. 

48. On the invitation of the Belgian Government, the Eighth Conference on 
Controlled Huclear Fusion had been held in the summer of 1980 in Brussels. Over 
500 scientists from 36 countries, along with scientists attached to the 
European Community and the Agency, had taken part in the meeting, which had been 
an inspiring example of international co-operation. By organizing that 
conference, Belgium had demonstrated its interest in a future technology which 
might lead to new forms of power generation. 
49. The energy crisis of the past decade, which would become increasingly serious 
towards the end of the century, called for the massive mobilization of all 
available energy resources and the speedy development of new technology. At the 
Eleventh World Energy Conference, held in Munich from 3 to 12 September, it had 
been pointed out that such action was absolutely necessary for industrial and 
social progress, for the development of the Third World and for world peace. 
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of the Federal Republic of Germany had stated 
unreservedly at that conference that, second only to the preservation of peace, 
energy was the most important problem facing the world at present. In that 
context, despite campaigns to sway public opinion away from it in some countries, 
atomic energy seemed to be an indispensable complement to other forms of energy, 
national authorities would, of course, bear full responsibility for the choices 
they made, but the Agency would still have a major part to play with respect to 
information, co-ordination, promotion and safeguards. He hoped that the Agency 
would be able to fulfil that role with the efficiency and skill it had shown 
during the twenty-four years of its existence, qualities which most of the 
participants at the HPT Review Conference, moreover, fully appreciated. 
50. Mr. ZA8GGER (Switzerland) said he would first like to commend the 
Director General on having drawn up what was virtually a zero real growth budget 
for 1981, in full conformity with the austerity required by the uncertainties 
prevailing in world economic trends. It was hoped that the same approach would 
be adopted in years to come. To achieve that purpose it would be necessary to 
make a thorough analysis of all the Agency's activities, with a reassessment of 
priorities and the pruning of programmes where necessary. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 13 

51. Financing for technical assistance - one of the most important Agency 
activities - would have to be increased and put on a more predictable basis. 
Hence the adoption of a method of yearly planning that envisaged a target for 
the coming year and indicative figures for the next two years seemed most 
appropriate. Since, however, a planning procedure of that kind should permit 
considerable increases in technical assistance in future years, national 
administrations would have to be given the means of justifying the requests for 
funds that they submitted each year to their own Governments. In other words, 
it would have to be shown that the planning was based on a sound multi-year 
programme indicating that the envisaged projects were worthwhile. Furthermore, 
there would have to be, for each project, an evaluation of the results and of 
the services rendered to the recipient country so as to demonstrate the usefulness 
of the development aid. Information on project planning itself and on 
the evaluation of results should be included in the Agency's annual report on 
technical assistance. 
52. In its statement to the General Conference in 1979, the Swiss delegation 
had presented an overall picture of the development of nuclear energy in 
Switzerland. Inasmuch as no great changes had taken place since that time, 
the details could be found in the relevant record. There were, however, a few 
points that could be added. Following the commissioning of the GSsgen Power 
Station at the beginning of 1980, nuclear power now accounted for roughly one 
third of Swiss electricity generation. In the field of research and development, 
the Federal Reactor Research Institute had continued its studies of hightemperature 
reactors, gas-cooled fast breeders and the relevant technical 
services. 
53. Mention should also be made of the fact that the public acceptance of 
nuclear energy in Switzerland was just as much a fundamental problem as in many 
other countries. Hence the Agency's achievements in that field - both in the 
past and in the future - were generally appreciated. Public acceptance of 
nuclear energy would be greatly facilitated as soon as it was clearly demonstrated 
that its risk/social benefit ratio favourably compared with other conventional 
and new energy sources, and as soon as the final disposal of highlevel 
waste in suitable geological formations could be successfully demonstrated 
somewhere or other in the world. The Agency would do well to give particular 
attention to those two topics. 

OC(XXIV)/OR.221 

page 14 

54» As far as the problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was concerned, 
there was not the slightest doubt that the matter was at present 
passing through a transition phase, accompanied by a certain disequilibrium 
normal in such circumstances. As an illustration of the lack of balance, the 

International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (HSFCE) had ended with the 
adoption of a consensus report, whereas the Second Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Man-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons had not done 

so. INFCE had been a technical exercise, whereas the HPT Review Conference 
had been a political one, which illustrated clearly that the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons was primarily a political problem and could not be solved 

solely by technical means. No combination of technical or institutional 
measures aimed at preventing non-proliferation could be considered an adequate 
alternative to political action aimed at eliminating the reasons for which 
nuclear weapons were manufactured. 

55« The recent HPT Review Conference had not, of course, cast doubt upon the 
value of the Treaty itself, but it had led to a deeper awareness of the 
different opinions prevailing with regard to the fulfilment of the various 
commitments entered into in the civil and military domains and to the question 
of an overall equilibrium in respect of those commitments. The Conference had 
drawn up a balance of the existing opinions that oould serve as a basis for 
shifting the emphasis of activities in the years to come. 

56. In the civil domain, it was gratifying to see that the discussions and the 
efforts to draft a final communique at the HPT Review Conference had pinpointed 
specific recommendations, of which some would give the Agency added responsibilities. 
A particular instance was the yearly meeting of the States party to the 
Treaty to discuss the application of Article IV relating to co-operation, 
particularly within the context of Article III. 
57. Furthermore, the Conference had confirmed the importance of the responsibilities 
devolving upon the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and of the 
studies on institutional arrangements for organizing multilateral operations in 
certain parts of the fuel cycle - International Plutonium Storage (IPS) and 
International Spent Fuel Management (3SFM). 
58. The recommendations formulated in relation to civil applications concerned 
bilateral relations, multilateral relations and the Agency's activities. As a 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 15 

whole, they provided for the development of the non-proliferation regime on a 

constructive basis and promoted what could be termed a building block approach. 
In short, the civil nuclear energy domain called for continued progress on the 
basis of MPT and along paths opened up by INFCE in the search for, and pursuit 

of, a nuclear policy more and more geared to universal application. 

59« In conclusion, he wished to recall some of the salient points of the Swiss 

non-proliferation policy as applied to the civil uses of nuclear energy: first, 
Switzerland considered MPT a basis for international efforts to prevent the 

proliferation of nuclear weapons, universal acceptance of it being a priority 

concern. Second, Switzerland would continue to support additional non


proliferation measures that seemed prudent and timely, provided they applied on 

a multilateral basis and were, as far as possible, supported by all countries 
concerned. A non-proliferation policy based solely on greater pressure or 
more severe limitations would ultimately have the opposite effect. Third, 
Switzerland was in favour of MPT being applied as judiciously as possible, 
mainly by facilitating international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy under Agency control. A non-proliferation system could not be 
effective or lasting unless States were convinced that their interests were 
best served by their being part of it rather than outside it. It was in that 
spirit that the Swiss authorities were strictly fulfilling all the international 
commitments into which they had entered, including those which derived from HPT, 
and were even going beyond the fulfilment of their NPB-related commitments. 
They would continue along those lines and would not be distracted by press 
campaigns. 

60. Mr. KQRHONEM (Finland) said that, apart from coal, nuclear energy was 
the only significant long-term alternative source of energy which could reduce 
dependence on oil. According to INFCE projections, the nuclear power generating 
capacity in the world would have to increase some seven- to tenfold over the next 
20 years if a global energy balance and modest economic growth were to be maintained. 
However, prospects for the development of nuclear energy continued 
to be undermined by a number of uncertainties including safety, non-proliferation 
and public acceptance. The Agency must tackle those problems effectively and 
assist Member States to secure stable and adequate production of energy. It 
was evident, therefore, that the activities of the Agency would expand more 
rapidly than those of any other organization within the United Nations family. 
61. There had been significant developments since the previous session of the 
General Conference, in Hew Delhi. In February, the International Nuclear Fuel 

GC(XXHT)/OR.221 
page 16 

Cycle Evaluation had been concluded, and its results provided an ample basis 
for future energy planning. For Governments, INFCE laid down in a systematic 

and logical manner the material and economic framework for future decisions and 
would probably lead to a reconsideration of nuclear policies in a number of 
countries. His delegation had often stressed the importance for small countries 
like Finland, largely dependent on foreign supplies, of having very clear 
principles and conditions on which to base decisions on highly investmentintensive 
nuclear energy programmes. The IHFCE results would facilitate the 

calculations involved. 

62. The results of the recently concluded Second HPT Review Conference were far 
from satisfactory. nonetheless, although the parties had been unable to reach 
a consensus, the basic validity of HPT had remained unquestioned. Indeed, 
views expressed on the peaceful use of nuclear energy were very similar. The 
nuclear-weapon States had special responsibility under HPT and should give 
proper weight to the arguments presented at the Conference by non-nuclear-weapon 
States. The responsibility of the nuclear-weapon States for the whole nonproliferation 
regime, and especially for the implementation of Articles IV and 
VI of HPT, had not diminished. 
63. The Convention on the Physical Protection of Huclear Material had been 
opened for signature the previous March. In spite of elaborate technicalities, 
the Convention was proof of a strong political awareness regarding the responsibilities 
resulting from the possession and handling of nuclear materials. 
Finland would sign the Convention as soon as possible and hoped it would have 
universal adherence. 
64. Safeguards activities, including the implementation of safeguards agreements, 
were one of the most vital tasks of the .Agency. They could only expand with the 
increasing use of nuclear power, and the Agency should therefore be granted the 
necessary manpower and other resources to meet its responsibilities. 
65. Within the limits of its resources the Agency had discharged its safeguards 
tasks in an excellent manner. Technical and manpower problems, however, should 
be the subject of continuous review. His delegation supported the Director 
General's appeal for less restrictive conditions to be applied to the acceptance 
of proposed safeguards inspectors. The more efficient use of existing safeguards 
resources should also be encouraged. It was Finland's experience that 
efficient Agency safeguards control enhanced national control. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 17 

66. He noted with satisfaction that no anomalies had been detected during the 
past year. It should not be forgotten even in that context that the principal 
problem in non-proliferation efforts was not technical but political. The 
annual report again indicated that the amount of nuclear material not covered by 
safeguards agreements with the Agency was increasing. That development was all 
the more deplorable as it would undoubtedly continue to hamper the transfer of 
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes and would justify various restraints 
and controls in bilateral arrangements which might otherwise have been 
unnecessary. 
67. He welcomed the increased emphasis on nuclear safety, the inclusion of the 
supplementary nuclear power safety programme in the Regular Budget, and the 
creation of a specific Division of Huclear Safety. It had become evident that 
the acceptability of nuclear energy in a number of Member States would depend 
largely on the credibility of safety systems and their implementation. The 
safety of all large industrial endeavours was a most complex question. Although 
statistics showed that nuclear power risks were low on an absolute scale and in 
comparison with other means of energy production, some important topics required 
further development if public confidence in the safety of nuclear energy was to 
be won. The improved utilization of operating experience, the increased 
importance of operational safety, the need for more comprehensive emergency 
plans and ways in which international co-operation could improve safety were 
subjects to which his delegation attached great importance. International cooperation 
to produce international safety recommendations was vital to countries 
which had to rely on services from abroad. 
68. His delegation had often stressed the importance of giving high priority 
to technical assistance activities and had also expressed its Government's 
willingness to accept a substantial increase in the target for voluntary contributions. 
The Agency should be capable of rendering assistance in planning and 
implementing nuclear power programmes in a safe and adequate manner to those 
countries which had chosen the nuclear option but had not yet been able to 
create the technological infrastructure it required. The nuclear option should 
be kept open for those countries. Significant emphasis should be put on the 
vital areas of manpower training, infrastructure organization and safety 
questions. 
69. He welcomed the agreement on the substantial increase in longer-term 
targets for financing technical assistance. His Government was preparing to 

GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 18 

provide supplementary funds to finance certain technical assistance projects, 
particularly those relating to manpower training and safety. Those funds would 
considerably exceed the amount corresponding to Finland's assessed contribution. 
He hoped that in future the Agency would he able to provide funds for technical 
assistance which were even more generous than the agreed figures. 

70. The Agency faced a number of old and new challenges in the 1980s. The 
major projects relating to International Spent Fuel Management and International 
Plutonium Storage (IPS) had been under way for some time. It was especially 
gratifying that the IPS project was making good progress; the Member States 
already had the opportunity to consider and comment on the first Draft Statute 
for IPS. The Committee on Assurances of Supply was a new and important 
responsibility for the Agency. The Committee provided a proper forum where, 
for the first time, supplier and consumer countries could discuss ways of 
improving the assurance of nuclear supplies in accordance with non-proliferation 
considerations. The Committee would also tackle the fuel cycle problem of 
countries which were dependent on services from other States. 
71. In that connection, he wished to draw attention to the problems of the 
ever increasing complexity of the multilabelling and multitracking systems 
resulting from the numerous bilateral agreements between supplier and recipient 
countries. That kind of complexity might in the long run jeopardize the 
original objectives of control systems and hamper the necessary transfer of 
nuclear material. The Agency must be prepared to study and seek solutions to 
that problem. 
72. Non-nuclear—weapon States accepted - were indeed demanding - that fullscope 
safeguards should be applied to the whole fuel cycle. They were thus 
entitled to request in return that the nuclear-weapon States accept full-scope 
responsibility for all those phases of the fuel cycle where their advanced status 
in nuclear technology made it appropriate or in which restrictions on use or 
transfer accepted by the recipient State necessitated it. That responsibility 
should extend from raw uranium supplies to reprocessing and other uses of spent 
fuel and to the final disposal of waste. Those problems, although enormous, 
should be constantly reviewed by the Agency in the 1980s. 
73. Mr. KUAN (Pakistan) said that nuclear energy was passing through its 
most crucial phase. The great debate initiated in the 1970s about the ethical 
and environmental aspects of nuclear energy was still continuing. With no 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 19 

alternative technologies in sight or on the horizon, the doubts raised about 

nuclear power were depriving the world of the benefits of a real and economic 

option already available. 

74. The economies of the industrialized and developing countries had been 
badly shaken by unresolved energy problems and, while the advanced countries 
were better prepared to absorb and manage unforeseen price increases, the 
Third World was facing a grim future. 
75» Solemn warnings had been given by responsible world leaders that the pursuit 
of energy security might lead to military conflicts in the effort to gain control 
of diminishing energy supplies and other raw materials. Bbthing destabilized 
the world more than a feeling of insecurity resulting from a fear of likely 
shortages or interruptions of vital energy supplies. 

76. Pakistan had noted with deep regret that the North-South negotiations on a 
common strategy for development had almost broken down in the United Nations 
following the unenthusiastic response given to the Brandt Commission's programme 
of survival. It had also been disappointed by the serious divergence 
of views at the recently concluded HPT Review Conference in Geneva. In spite 
of those set-backs, however, it continued to believe that there was no other 
alternative but to continue serious negotiations between the rich and the poor 
and between nuclear and non-nuclear States. At the twentieth session of the 
General Conference, Pakistan had proposed that, instead of imposing unilateral 
guidelines and restrictions on the export of equipment, technology and materials, 
the supplier States should enter into a dialogue with the recipient States to 
develop mutually acceptable norms governing nuclear trade within the framework 
of appropriate safeguards. That plea had gone unheeded. The supplier States 
had refused the transfer of peaceful nuclear technology, equipment and materials. 
They ought to recognize that that policy had not worked. Proliferation was 
essentially a political problem which could not be solved by technical means. 
The unilateral renouncing of agreements and contracts had been self-defeating 
and was directly responsible for the spread of nuclear fuel technology in 
different parts of the world. After having lost several precious years, the 
Board had finally decided to set up a Committee on Assurances of Supply. 
Pakistan welcomed that move as a positive and constructive step and was willing 
to contribute to the long delayed dialogue. 
77 • The Pakistan Government had repeatedly and unambiguously declared that its 
nuclear programme was intended entirely for peaceful purposes. Pakistan was 


GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 20 

deeply committed to the cause of non-proliferation and did not believe that the 

security of developing countries was enhanced by the acquisition of nuclear 
weapons. It was, therefore, opposed to both horizontal and vertical proliferation. 
It reiterated its stand on the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in 
South Asia and the development of a treaty banning the manufacture and introduction 
of nuclear weapons in that region. It was also prepared to consider any 
other reciprocal measures and arrangements to achieve the same objectives. 

78. The Pakistan delegation had already expressed its views on the Agency's 
programme for 1981-1986 and the budget for 1981 in discussions in the Board. 
Much greater imagination might have been shown in planning the Agency's programme 
for the next five years. While Pakistan strongly supported the making 
of savings in low-priority areas, it did not believe that a zero-growth budget 
should be imposed at the expense of crucial promotional and technical activities. 
The Director General himself had stated that a forced retrenchment in certain 
programmes of special significance to the developing countries was undesirable. 
The increasing bias in the Agency's budget towards regulatory at the expense of 
promotional activities was to be regretted since it was found to adversely 
affect the Agency's effectiveness in influencing the nuclear energy development 
programmes in Third World countries. The Agency was not helping matters by 
revising the long-standing Guiding Principles for the Provision of Technical 
Assistance and by interpreting those guidelines in a very restrictive manner 
so that developing countries were being forced to opt out of the technical 
assistance programme. If that trend gained momentum, it would have serious 
repercussions on the acceptability of the Agency's safeguards functions. 

79. The problem of financing technical assistance from predictable and assured 
sources had not been resolved. The temporary solution adopted would give 
everyone more time, but the real issue had been avoided. Pakistan believed that 
the best way to finance technical assistance was through the Regular Budget. 
80. Pakistan noted with satisfaction the continuing development of the Agency's 
safeguard system, and believed the system was a sound, satisfactory and reliable 
means of ensuring that the nuclear energy projects and programmes remained peaceful. 
Also, it congratulated the Agency on the award of the Bobel Prize in 
Physics to the Director of the International Centre for Theoretical Physios. 
81. Pakistan had followed carefully the work of the Agency relating to international 
plutonium storage. It fully supported the safeguarding of plutonium 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 21 

in accordance with the Statute of the Agency but did not subscribe to the proposition 
that the fuel reprocessing and plutonium recycling plants and breeder 
reactors which would play a dominant role in the next decade should remain the 
monopoly of a few industrialized States. The information and material should be 
accessible without any discrimination or hindrance to the developing countries 
for the benefit of their peaceful programmes. 

82. Over the past four years, the General Conference and the Board had been 
dealing with the question of the amendment to Article VI.A.2. After considerable 
debate, the General Conference at its twenty-second session had 
unanimously supported a resolution noting that the majority of Member States 
endorsed the proposition that a modest increase of one seat for Africa and one 
for the Middle East and South Asia would be desirable. It was to be hoped 
that a consensus on that modest increase would be reached without undue delay. 
Hot only was the existing imbalance unjust; it adversely affected the representative 
character of the Board, its efficiency and its effectiveness. Any 
delay in the acceptance of the compromise formula would constitute a denial of 
the right of the two least represented regions, which supplied more than half 
of the world's energy and oil needs and a considerable amount of uranium. Delay 
on the issue would not only lead to difficulties in the Board but would also 
pave the way for demands for a much larger increase in representation. 
83. Pakistan fully supported the holding of a United Nations conference in 1983 
on the promotion of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. It had also been pleased to note that the Co-ordinating Committee on 
Atomic Energy of the non-aligned countries had had a very productive and useful 
meeting at Buenos Aires and endorsed its declaration that it was the sovereign 
right of all nations to acquire and apply peaceful nuclear technology for their 
development under appropriate safeguards. 
84. Pakistan was proceeding with its peaceful nuclear energy programme, with 
emphasis on nuclear power and technology and the application of nuclear techniques 
in agriculture and medicine. The search for nuclear raw materials had 
led to the discovery of additional deposits of uranium, zirconium and other 
substances. Nuclear fuel had been manufactured locally for the country's 
natural-uranium heavy-water power reactor. The recent increases in the price 
of oil had made nuclear power even more attractive for Pakistan and provided 
a strong incentive for planning new reactors. The Government had already 


GC(XX3V)/OR.221 
page 22 

approved the construction of a 600-MW plant to be located at Chashma. Work had 
commenced on the seventh nuclear medicine centre, at Islamabad, and the third 
agricultural centre, at the Peshawar Nuclear Institute, had started functioning. 

85. The fifth International Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Seeds, 
held in Hathiagali, Pakistan, from 14 June to 2 July 1980, had been attended 
by 150 participants from 22 countries. The College had established itself as 
an example of how a developing country could help itself by inviting 
distinguished scientists from other countries to discuss the latest advances 
in physics and their applications for development. 
86. In conclusion, he expressed his country's full support for the work and 
programmes of the Agency. 
87. Mr. SIAZQg (Philippines), recalling the Eisenhower "Atoms for Peace" 
declaration of 1953, which had resulted in the establishment of the Agency in 
1957 and in the widespread use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes under 
Agency safeguards, said that that era had been characterized by international 
co-operation and by high public expectations. To a large extent, those expectations 
had been fulfilled by the introduction of nuclear power in developing 
countries and by the increasing applications of nuclear energy for medical and 
agricultural purposes. 
88. Today, however, the prevailing attitude towards nuclear energy was far from 
favourable. Pear of nuclear proliferation and concern over problems of nuclear 
waste had combined to restrain the increasing use of nuclear energy not only in 
the developed countries but also in the developing countries. national 
policies relating to non-proliferation and environmental protection had had 
retroactive effects and in some cases had resulted in delays, additional costs 
and adverse economic consequences in the developing countries. Those policies 
had aggravated the already complex energy problems of some of the countries in 
question. 
89. Changes in public attitudes towards nuclear energy required changes in 
strategy, and the Agency must therefore adjust its approach and programmes to 
the present requirements. Such an adjustment, however, was possible only with 
the full co-operation of Member States. 
90. First of all, the Agency had to expand and accelerate its activities in 
connection with nuclear safety. More emphasis had to be placed on the safe 
GC(X5CIV)/OR.221 
page 23 

disposal of radioactive wastes and on international co-operation in spent fuel 
management. The Agency had to continue to update its various safety codes and 
to strengthen its capacity to provide advice to Member States on the licensing 
of nuclear power plants, on the safety aspects of site selection, on the safety 
assessment of plants and on safety aspects of the technical specifications set 
forth in bids. It must also be prepared to intensify its programmes for 
training personnel from developing countries in all phases of the safe operation 
of nuclear power plants. As a further measure, it should promote more strongly 
the establishment of multilateral agreements between neighbouring countries and 
the Agency itself for the provision of emergency assistance in the event of 
nuclear accidents. Such agreements should be formulated in such a way that 
developing countries with nuclear power plants were assured of emergency assistance 
from one or more developed oountries in the event of a nuclear accident. 

91. The Agency should refrain from portraying nuclear energy as an energy 
alternative without serious problems. Significant efforts had to be made to 
explain to the public that, while there were problems associated with the use of 
nuclear energy, those problems were not insurmountable and solutions were in 
fact being successfully developed by national Governments, by the international 
community and by the Agency itself. It also needed to be underlined that, in 
spite of the problems, nuclear power was a viable and necessary source of energy 
for the economic development of many countries. The Agency must transform its 
public image into that of an organization with the competence and authority to 
provide objective advice on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. An intensive 
public information programme would be required for the purpose. 
92. The Agency was much better known at present for its safeguards functions 
than for its competence in nuclear energy. Perhaps there was some basis for 
that misconception. Its more serious efforts in connection with nuclear safety 
started only after the Three Mile Island accident, and the resources earmarked 
for such activities in the 1981 Regular Budget were much less than 25$ of the 
real costs of safeguards. For example, Table I of document GC(XXIV)/630 
showed only US 112 000 of expected extra budgetary resources for activities 
related to health and safety, while three Member States were expected to 
provide US $1 385 000 voluntarily for safeguards. Clearly, the emphasis which 
Member States placed on nuclear safety must be reflected in their contributions 
to the Agency. In that connection, it might be worthwhile to consider 

0C(XXIVr)/OR.221 
page 24 

soliciting financial or technical support from non-military nuclear industries 
in Member States for programmes geared to improving public ideas about nuclear 
safety. 

93. The fear of nuclear proliferation that many developed nuclear supplier 
countries felt had led to unilateral and sometimes retroactive changes in their 
nuclear supply conditions. Those changes had eroded confidence in the security 
of supplies and caused delays in the nuclear power programmes of developing 
countries. 
94. The .Agency had a central role to play in the matter of non-proliferation as 
it provided the only mechanism for the application of international safeguards. 
Recently, however, non-proliferation conditions had been developed on the outside 
and introduced into the Agency only after agreements had been reached elsewhere. 
That practice must stop. Since the Agency had the main responsibility for 
international safeguards, it was essential that non-proliferation questions 
should be considered and resolved within the framework of the Agency, Moreover, 
non-proliferation conditions and safeguards could be acceptable only if they went 
hand in hand with assurances of supply that were considered to be equitable. 
The price of "irrevocable safeguards*' was "irrevocable supply". 

95. In order for supplier countries to accept the Agency as the main forum for 
the consideration of non-proliferation issues, it might be necessary to assure 
them that the Agency's safeguards system would continue to be adequate in deterring 
nuclear proliferation and that the developing countries would continue to 
support the safeguards activities of the Agency. Confidence in the Agency's 
safeguards system could be maintained only as long as the Agency was provided 
with sufficient resources to carry out its safeguards functions effectively. 
Those resources would have to be provided by the developed countries because of 
their greater capacity to pay. 
96. The present level of resources for safeguards could not be considered high 
when viewed in the context of expenditures for national security systems. The 
present safeguards allocation, however, represented a very large part of the 
Agency's Regular Budget. As long as safeguards were not viewed as having the 
effect-of crowding out the Agency's promotional activities, the developing 
countries would continue to support them. However, they might become less 
enthusiastic if they were given the impression that promotional activities of 
interest to them would have to be reduced in order to accommodate expansion of 
the Agency's safeguards activities. 
GC(XKDr)/OR.221 
page 25 

97. The Philippines believed in the importance of the Agency's safeguards 
activities and was ready to ensure their continuing effectiveness. At the same 
time, it strongly believed that the Agency must also continue to improve its 
promotional activities and to ooncentrate primarily on the nuclear fuel cycle. 
The Agency's activities in regard to food and agriculture, the life sciences and 
the physical sciences had been very successful and had encouraged 13 countries 
in Asia and the Pacific to collaborate closely on at least seven projects in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Regional Co-operative Agreement for 
Research, Development and Training Related to Suclear Science and Technology 
(RCA) had not only provided an impetus to increased activity in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy but also enabled nuclear scientists in the region to 
transcend the socio-economic and political differences which occasionally arose 
between their respective countries. 
98. The Agency should continue to involve itself in activities of interest to 
Member States that were not yet in a position to avail themselves of nuclear 
power. It should also improve its training programmes to enable those countries 
to benefit from nuclear power in the future if and when they decided to do so. 
99. His delegation had in the past expressed dissatisfaction with the increasing 
trend towards reducing the promotional activities of the Agency in order to 
accommodate large expansion of safeguards activities within the overall budget. 
It believed that, in the preparation of the programme and budget, the primary 
concern should be the attainment of the Agency's objectives, namely, the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy under appropriate international 
safeguards. The necessary resources should be made available to implement a 
programme that would attain those objectives. The approach to the 1981 budget 
had been somewhat unorthodox because first the expenditure ceiling (corresponding 
to zero real growth) had been established and then the programme 
tailored to fit the predetermined expenditure ceiling. If continued in the 
future, that procedure would undoubtedly lead to increases in safeguards 
activities at the expense of promotional activities. Such a development could 
certainly lead to the unhappy situation of transforming the Agency's safeguards 
activities into another North-South issue. 
100. The establishment of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) by the 
Board of Governors would undoubtedly contribute to ensuring the central role 
of the Agency in the twin issues of non-proliferation and assurances of supply. 
With the failure of the Second Review Conference of Parties to the Treaty on 

Gc(mv)/oR.a2i 

page 26 

the libn-Proliferation of Kuclear Weapons (HPT) to agree on a final document, 
CAS had become doubly important. His delegation would endeavour to have the 
tentative agreements reached during the Second KPT Review Conference confirmed 
within the framework of CAS. It hoped that the other countries which had 
participated in the formulation of those agreements would be willing to confirm 
them. 

101. The Philippines believed that CAS should help establish stability in the 
conduct of international nuclear co-operation and trade by reconfirming the 
sanctity of contracts and agreements. CAS should deal with future arrangements 
between suppliers and consumers, and in that connection it would have to 
consider and formulate guidelines on: (a) conditions for access to supply; 
(b) procedures for introducing agreed conditions; (c) procedures for modifying 
conditions; (d) back-up measures in the event of market failure or supply 
interruptions; and (e) possible measures to improve the commercial aspects of 
the fuel market. CAS would also have to deal with non-commercial conditions 
for access to fuel and services, such ass (a) safeguards required; (b) duration 
of supply commitments and safeguards; (c) conditions for reprocessing, 
enrichment or other alterations of physical or chemical form of supplied 
material; (d) the role of the Agency in all those matters. That list of subjects 
was by no means exhaustive but, if CAS was able to deal with them successfully, 
nuclear power might be assured of more stable conditions in the future, 
at least with respect to assurances of supply and non-proliferation. It was 
extremely important for the medium term for the nuclear power industry to be 
able to make the necessary commercial arrangements within agreed political 
conditions. 
102. The Philippine delegation hoped that all Member States would exert maximum 
efforts to bring about the early attainment of the objectives of CAS. In its 
view the prospects for the success of CAS would be significantly improved if, 
at the outset, participating countries could affirm that, when one party or 
the other to a bilateral agreement wished to seek the renegotiation of nonproliferation 
conditions, means should be devised to achieve such renegotiation 
eopiitably, without resort to the unilateral interruption of supply or 
import, or to the threat of such interruption, and with each party avoiding 
to the extent possible the unilateral imposition of additional costs on the 
other or of new conditions retroactively applied. It would be useful if the 
supplier countries could demonstrate the importance they attached to assurances 
GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 27 

of supply by agreeing, pending the conclusion of arrangements for an international 
nuclear fuel bank, to make available, on a commercial basis, an 
interim uranium stockpile sufficient for one annual light-water reactor (Uffi) 
reload of enriched uranium and one annual heavy-water reactor (HWR) reload of 
natural uranium (with specific arrangements and conditions according to which 
that uranium would be made available to States which were unable to secure fuel 
supplied under existing contracts for reasons of contract default that were 
not the result of a breach of the non-proliferation undertakings stipulated 
in the relevant agreement). 

103. Since there was a direct correlation between safeguards and assurances of 
supply, a mechanism must be provided for reviewing the problems involved. That 
mechanism would complement the annual Safeguards Implementation Report. Using 
information from Member States, non-governmental organizations and commercial 
institutions, the Director General should prepare for submission to the Board 
and the General Conference an annual report covering the market in the nuclear 
fuel cycle and dealing, among other things, with (a) the general market framework 
and resources situation for the short, medium and long term; (b) nonproliferation 
and related conditions; (c) factors influencing the market and 
important events, difficulties and problems; and (d) the operation of formal 
and informal back-up arrangements. Such a report would strengthen the Agency's 
role in providing assurances of supply and re-establish the balance between 
safeguards and assurances of supply. 
104. A concomitant of the Agency's expanding role in determining policies 
related to international nuclear co-operation and trade and of the growing 
number of countries using nuclear energy for economic development was the 
increasing desire of Member States, both developed and developing, to have 
better representation on the Board of Governors. For the last few years, the 
General Conference and the Board had been considering, without much success, a 
proposed amendment to Article VI of the Statute. The continuing stalemate on 
that issue could seriously hamper the effectiveness of the Agency, and it was 
to be hoped that it would be possible to resolve the issue at an early date. 
105. The Philippine delegation welcomed the agreement reached in the Board 
concerning the establishment of multi-year indicative planning figures for the 
Agency's technical assistance programme. The new procedure would enable the 
Agency and recipient countries to plan their programmes more effectively. His 

GC(XXIV)/OR.221 
page 28 

delegation was concerned, however, that the figures agreed on for 1981, 1982 and 
1983 might not enable the Agency's technical assistance programme to attain real 
growth, especially in view of the present worldwide rate of inflation and the 
fluctuations of currencies. In that connection, he wished to draw the 
Conference's attention to the fact that, despite the recommendation of the First 
HFT Review Conference, in 1975t that all "technically sound" requests for technical 
assistance should be funded, only 23$ and 34$ of such requests had been 
funded in 1978 and 1979, respectively. That should serve as a further reminder 
of the need for predictable and assured financing for the Agency's technical 
assistance programme. 

The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
January 1981*

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION; 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna on 
Tuesday, 23 September 1980, at 3.20 p.m. 


President; Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 

Election of officers and appointment of 

the General Committee 

General debate and annual report for 1979 
(resumed) 7-7 8 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Indonesia 7-1 3 
Venezuela 14 - 25 
Yugoslavia 26 - 39 
Morocco 40 - 52 
Czechoslovakia 53 - 58 
Brazil 59 -69 
Italy 70 - 78 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 2 October 1980. 

**/ GC(XXIV)/626. 

The composition of delegations attending the sessions is given in documents 
GC(XXIV)/INF/l93/Rev.3, INF/l93/Rev.3/Mod.1 and INF/l93/Rev.3/Mod.2. 

80-6283 


GC(XXIV)/OR.222 

page 2 

ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

1. The PRESIDENT recalled that, pursuant "to Rules 34 and 40 of the Rules of 
Procedure, the General Conference had to elect eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman 
of the Committee of the Whole and five additional members of the General Committee 
on the proposal of the President. 
2. As a result of consultations the day before and that morning, there appeared 
to be a consensus that the General Conference should by way of an exception suspend 
the relevant provision of Rule 40 and elect six (instead of five) additional members 
to form the General Committee together with the President of the Conference, the 
eight Vice-Presidents and the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, it being understood 
that that would not constitute a precedent. 
3. He therefore proposed that the delegates of the following Member States should 
be elected as Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: Japan, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Thailand, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America and Venezuela. 
4. He proposed Mr. Siazon, the delegate of the Philippines, as Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole and the delegates of the following States as additional 
members of the General Committee: Costa Rica, Prance, German Democratic Republic, 
Hungary, India and Sudan. 
5. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
6. The General Committee was thus duly appointed. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1979 (resumed) 

7. Mr. NIMPUNO (Indonesia) said the main task facing the General Conference 
was to evaluate developments relating to nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, the 
transfer of technology and assurances of supply. Unfortunately, most developing 
countries were not yet fully enjoying the benefits of nuclear energy. Effective 
and serious co-operation between them and the technologically advanced countries 
was essential and should therefore be the object of further efforts. 
8. There was no doubt as to the potential advantages of nuclear energy in a 
number of fields, and Indonesia was applying nuclear techniques in various sectors 
of agriculture under Regional Co-operation Agreement (RCA) programmes. In that 
way it had been able to achieve improvements in the cultivation of food products 
(e.g. rice) and in the processing of latex. However, most benefits of using 
nuclear techniques were not yet fully shared by all members of the world community. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 3 

9. It was an unfortunate fact that nuclear energy was still very often 
associated with the idea of the destructive power of the atom. It was truly 
regrettable in that connection that the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) had 
not accomplished very much and that the Second NPT Review Conference had 
been unable to arrive at a concerted final statement. That situation would 
undoubtedly be an obstacle to the action to be taken during the next five 
years, but it was to be hoped that it would have no adverse effect on the 
Agency's activities. More unfortunate still was the fact that, under the pretext 
of preventing proliferation and contrary to its Article IV, NPT was standing 
in the way of the implementation of nuclear programmes of developing countries 
by blocking the transfer of technology and materials to them. 
10. In the matter of implementation of the safeguards system, the reports to 
the Second NPT Review Conference by the Agency showed that the system had not 
yet been extended to new facilities which were significant from the point of 
view of their potential for producing materials which could be used for 
nuclear weapons. Indonesia, which possessed only a few small research reactors, 
had placed its modest nuclear programme under safeguards. It believed that 
good intentions should be expressed not only in words but also in deeds so as 
to inspire confidence and good faith and thus contribute to the cessation of 
nuclear arms proliferation. 
11. As for the Agency's promotional activities, everyone recognized the 
importance and usefulness of the technical assistance programme. Nevertheless, 
there was still room for many improvements in that area. It was a regrettable 
fact that Agency staff members sometimes acted as if they wanted to retard the 
implementation of the national programmes of developing countries. Requests 
for assistance from those countries should be viewed in a broader context and 
it should be understood that those countries were emphasizing the transfer of 
technology in general in order to achieve the level of competence needed for 
realizing their national development programmes. Technology required the 
support of fundamental science, and that was why the Indonesian delegation 
had on many occasions stated its support for the activities of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. 
12. With regard to the annual report for 1979t n e wished to emphasize the 
importance of a systematic evaluation of all the activities of the Agenoy, 
and especially of the technical assistance programme, as that was the only 

GC(XXIV)/OR.222 

page 4 

way to correct shortcomings, and it was necessary for the Agency to assign a 
sufficient number of staff to that task. 

13. The Indonesian delegation was grateful that the Board had arrived at a 
consensus regarding the target for voluntary contributions in 1981. It was 
well known that there was a draft resolution proposing that technical assistance 
should be financed under the Regular Budget. Although the many discussions that 
had been devoted to that question had not produced significant results, Indonesia 
still supported the resolution. In any event, it had been agreed that a means 
should be found for achieving assured funding. Indonesia, which approved the 
figures adopted for 1981, 1902 and 1983, wished to announce a pledge of 
US $20 800 as its voluntary contribution for 1981. 

14. Mr. ROSSI GUERRERO (Venezuela) said that the twenty-fourth session 
of the General Conference was taking place at a moment when the international 
situation was particularly critical. The arms race, and especially the nuclear 
weapons race, had become the principal cause for concern. On the occasion of 
the present General Conference of the Agency, a body which had been set up 
mainly to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, it was appropriate to 
present some thoughts on the subject of facts and attitudes which represented 
a growing danger for the international community. 
15. The results of the Second NPT Review Conference, held recently at Geneva, 
had been discouraging. Once again, the nuclear-weapon States had sought to 
preserve a kind of nuclear oligopoly. Evidence thereof was the acceleration 
of the arms race. That behaviour was contrary to the principles and 
objectives of the Agency. As long as there was no change in the attitude of 
the nuclear-weapon States, no real progress could be made towards regulating 
the different aspects of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
16. Venezuela resolutely supported the efforts in favour of non-proliferation, 
but it asserted just as resolutely that non-proliferation could not and should 
not consist in the unilateral imposition of obligations on a large number of 
States while a privileged minority was seeking to avoid them. Non-proliferation 
must be a joint and equitable enterprise. 
17. The use of nuclear energy for the economic and social progress of peoples 
should be recognized as an inalienable right of all countries, a right which 
had been confirmed in the final report of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle 
Evaluation (INFCE). 
GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 5 

18. For Venezuela, as a country which produced and exported energy, the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy was of particular importance. The energy shortage had 
demonstrated that it was urgently necessary to exploit new sources as rapidly 
as possible. That was true also for Venezuela, and that was why it had set 
up the National Council for the Development of the Nuclear Industry, which 
was responsible for promoting the use of nuclear energy for the economic and 
social progress of the country. Given the complexity, technological difficulties 
and cost of a nuclear programme, the Venezuela Government considered that international 
cc—operation was indispensable, and in that context it needed the 
assistance and co-operation of the Agency. Venezuela strongly supported the 
work of the Agency, especially its efforts at promoting international cooperation 
in nuclear matters. 
19. In that connection, the Venezuela delegation wished to mention the technical 
assistance programming mission sent by the Agency to Venezuela in May; the 
results of that mission were of great importance for the country's nuclear 
activities. It also wished to point out that Venezuela would be acting as 
host to a regional course on the use of radiation-induced mutations in plant 
genetics which was to take place at the Faculty of Agronomy of Zulia University 
in Maracalbo from 3 November to 5 December 1981 under the auspices of the Agency 
and FAO and with the co-operation of the National Council for the Development 
of the Nuclear Industry. 
20. It was obvious that the Agency was playing and would continue to play an 
important part in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. It should carry 
out its mission with equal vigour in two directions: technical assistance and 
control of nuclear weapons proliferation. 
21. Technical assistance should be the subject of increasingly intensive efforts. 
It should enable the developing countries to create the scientific and technological 
infrastructure necessary for eliminating their technological lag and 
to achieve a balanced interdependence. It was therefore necessary to establish 
an assured source of funding for technical assistance, to increase the resources 
allocated to it and to assist the developing countries in obtaining the necessary 
technical assistance for their projects. 
22. Aware of the danger that a nuclear war represented for the survival of 
mankind, Venezuela firmly believed in the need for total non-proliferation 
based on the most absolute ethical principles and on international justice. 

GC(XXJV)/OR.222 
page 6 

To achieve tha-t goal, it was necessary, with the same vigour that was applied in the 
restrictive measures taken in connection with safeguards, to provide developing 
countries which undertook not to possess nuclear weapons with the indispensable 
assurances as to materials and equipment, the training of staff, the participation of 
national industry and co-operation in research and in the financing of projects. 

23. However, that was not sufficient; the nuclear-weapon States really had to put 
a stop to the arms race» A large part of the resources thus freed could be devoted 
to promoting economic and social welfare, especially in the developing countries. 
It was appropriate to mention in that connection that Latin America had taken concrete 
steps through the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which represented an unprecedented joint 
effort to free the countries of Latin America from the threat of nuclear destruction. 
Venezuela would continue to support the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America. 
24. Venezuela also supported without reservation the Inter-American Nuclear Energy 
Commission (IANEC) in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the region. 
In that context, Venezuela would be host to a regional co-ordination meeting of the 
national officials responsible for training programmes in the field of nuclear power, 
which would be held under the auspices of IANEC in co-operation with the National 
Council for the Development of the Nuclear Industry at Caracas from 8 to 10 October 19&0. 
Venezuela would also take part in the legal workshop on comparative legislation 
relating to exploration for and exploitation of radioactive ores, to be held at 
Quito from 7 to 10 October under the auspices of IANEC. 
25. Lastly, he wished to reiterate his hope that the Agency's activities would 
respond to the legitimate aspirations of the developing countries, in conformity 
with the objectives which had inspired and justified its creation. 
26. Mr. PRIBICEVIC (Yugoslavia) noted that the General Conference was 
being held in international conditions that were difficult and complex from 
both the political and economic standpoint. The present energy crisis continued 
to affect adversely the economic and social development of all countries, 
especially the developing ones. The gap between the developed and developing 
countries was widening and the overall situation could easily lead to a major 
world economic crisis, with serious consequences for international relations 
as a whole. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.222 

page 7 

27. His delegation had stressed on a number of occasions the importance of 
nuclear energy as a safe and clean energy source that could contribute to 
the solution of energy problems. Although it was true that the introduction 
of nuclear energy had come up against a number of difficulties that should 
not be underestimated, it was not to be forgotten that many countries, first 
and foremost the developing countries, lacked the conventional energy sources 
and could not therefore indefinitely postpone their decision to go nuclear. 
To wait for new energy sources that were not yet commercially available would 
seriously delay their economic development. 
28. At the present time, however, there was no reliable system for assuring 
on a long-term basis, the supply of nuclear materials, equipment and technology. 
The exchange of information on scientific developments and the transfer of nuclear 
technology and materials continued to be hampered by a group of nuclear suppliers 
through unilaterally imposed limitations. Under the pretext of preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons they were imposing additional restrictive 
requirements, as a result of which the development, research, production and 
use of nuclear energy in a number of countries had been considerably curtailed. 
All those measures had held up international co-operation in the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes and the transfer of nuclear technology, and in 
certain cases they had even adversely affected the economic planning of importing 
countries. 
29. Under those circumstances Yugoslavia believed that there was need to adopt 
measures ensuring maximum security for importing countries when their 
respective nuclear programmes were put into effect. The problems concerned 
were essentially of a political nature. The first International Conference 
on Nuclear Energy and its Fuel Cycle, held by the Agency in Salzburg, had been 
able to produce very important scientific and technical data. Similarly, 
the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) had provided highly 
useful technical data, accompanied by certain recommendations. In neither 
case, however, had there been concrete proposals for effectively 
solving the existing problems relating to international co-operation in the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy. 

30. The Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons had not yielded any tangible results. It 
was hoped, however, that its failure would not adversely affect the processes 
wider way at the Agency or elsewhere to arrive at a solution to the problems. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 8 

31. It was encouraging to note the Agency's decision to set up a Committee 
on Assurances of Supply (CAS) to consider ways in which the supply of 
nuclear materials, equipment and technology, together with fuel cycle services, 
could be assured on a long-term basis, thereby guaranteeing free access to 
nuclear materials and technologies. 
32. With a similar aim in mind Yugoslavia had participated in the work of 
expert groups on International Plutonium Storage (IPS) and International 
Spent Fuel Management (ISEM). It would be guided, in future deliberations, 
by the conclusions of the First Regular Meeting of the Non-Aligned Co-ordinating 
Countries on the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, held recently at Buenos Aires. 
The representatives of the non-aligned countries had stressed that the results 
of those activities should not limit or affect in any way the free technological 
development of countries concerned or the availability of nuclear 
materials, including their own excess plutonium, nor impose requirements 
beyond those of the Agency's present safeguards. 
33. Like many other countries, Yugoslavia felt that all the Agency activities 
referred to could also serve as a basis for the international conference on 
the promotion of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The non-aligned countries felt that the said conference would afford 
an opportunity to discuss all the political and economic aspects of the world 
development of nuclear energy: the promotion of international co-operation; 
transfer of materials, equipment, technology and know-*ow; long-term 
assurances of nuclear fuel cycle services; safety, regulatory and legal 
aspects; and the role of international organizations. There seemed to be a consensus 
in favour of the conference being held during the first half of 1983. 
34. It was clear that the Agency would be expected to play a key role in all 
such activities, and its contribution would certainly be substantial. At the 
same time, it would have to continue efforts to adjust to the present state 
of affairs where international co-operation on nuclear energy was concerned. 
The present energy crisis made it essential for the Agency to take new action 
to meet the requirements of a number of countries, especially the developing 
ones, in introducing nuclear energy into their national programmes. To achieve 
that aim the Agency would have to be more democratized and manifest a higher 
degree of efficiency. All Member States, for example, should be able to take a 
full part in its activities and there would have to be equitable regional 
GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 9 

distribution of seats on the Board of Governors and of staff posts in the 
Secretariat, including the safeguards inspectorate. That could not 
be attained without a balance between technical assistance and other promotional 
activities, on the one hand, and the safeguards inspection activities, 
on the other. It was encouraging to see that the Board had decided, in 
June 1980, to establish indicative figures for technical assistance contributions 
in the coming years, thereby introducing an element of predictability 
into a vital area. 

35. The Yugoslav long-term development plan up to the year 2000 paid due 
regard to nuclear energy, more especially the construction of nuclear power 
plants. Analyses of energy generation requirements showed that despite the 
still dominant part played by coal and hydropower, the introduction of nuclear 
energy would be indispensable. Several nuclear power plants were to be 
constructed in the course of the next 20 years, and the country's first 
nuclear power plant would in fact undergo trial operation in mid-1981. 
36. At the present time, Yugoslavia was preparing a programme based on a 
single type of nuclear fuel cycle. Since the participation of foreign 
technology suppliers would be indispensable for the implementation of the 
programme - which would probably be worked out in the course of 1981 - intensive 
negotiations on terms for participation by the partners in the construction 
of Yugoslav nuclear power plants were now under way. Preliminary site studies 
had already been carried out, and in all industrial sectors efforts were 
now geared to improving technologies already acquired and strengthening 
production capacity so as to achieve the greatest possible degree of selfsufficiency. 
37. The imminent completion of the first nuclear power plant and preparation 
of the nuclear development programme up to the year 2000 made it imperative 
for Yugoslavia to speed up the drafting of the different regulatory documents 
that would be required. 
38. He expressed his country's appreciation to the Agency for the expert 
services and valuable technical assistance provided during the final stage 
of the construction of the first nuclear power plant. It was hoped that 
the assistance would be continued in 1981. 
39» In conclusion, he stressed his country's desire to increase co-operation 
with the Agency; as both a non-aligned country and a Member State, Yugoslavia 


GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 10 


would take part in all Agency activities promoting the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. There was clearly a need to find a new consensus among exporters and 
importers of nuclear materials and technology, in a spirit of understanding, 
equality and non-discrimination. 

40. Mr. SKALLI (Morocco) pointed out that the General Conference was being 
held within a rather special context - only a short while after the Second 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, the deliberations of which had been characterized by failure 
entailing unforeseeable consequences. 
41. The international climate was seriously deteriorating and it was to be 
noted that the race to acquire ever more sophisticated and ever more destructive 
weapons had in no way abated, while the gap between the affluent and developing 
countries was steadily widening. To that had to be added the waning reserves 
of natural energy sources, which could easily create a serious threat to a 
number of vital balances and add further tension to that already existing. 
42. It was on those grounds that nuclear energy was bound to acquire an 
ever more important role and to arouse interest on an ever increasing scale 
in the international community, provided that the doubts and distrust regarding 
the safety of nuclear power plants and the risk of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons were dispelled. His delegation had had frequent occasion 
to stress the importance of the Agency's mission and responsibilities both 
in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy and in strengthening the nonproliferation 
regime. 
43. It should be recalled that the Second NPT Review Conference had ended 
a short while before without any consensus being reached on a final document. 
If the credibility of NPT was not to be further damaged, it was imperative 
for vertical and horizontal non-proliferation to be achieved. The nuclear 
powers would therefore have to respect the provisions of NPT and apply in 
full the commitments contained in it, especially in Article VI. Everyone 
was aware of the importance of banning nuclear tests and the urgency of 
concluding a treaty along those lines. 
44. The problem of the security of non-nuclear-weapon States was an extremely 
important one for Morocco. It was essential that the nuclear Powers 
provide guarantees of safety for those States and it was encouraging to see 
GC(XXrv)/OR,222 
page 11 

the establishment of a special working group by the Conference of the Committee 
on Disarmament to study effective international arrangements to safeguard nonnuclear-
weapon States against the use, or threatened use, of nuclear weapons. 

45. His delegation also believed that the creation of denuclearized zones was an 
important step towards disarmament and reiterated its support for the position 
adopted by the Group of 77 at the Second NPT Review Conference. 
46. Furthermore, it was vital that non-nuclear-weapon States should benefit from 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy. International co-operation in that field 
would make it possible, especially for developing countries, to meet the many 
challenges facing them in promoting their economic and social development. 
47. With regard to safeguards, the system should be rigorously applied so as to 
prevent the diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful applications. Non-nuclearweapon 
States were committed to respecting the system by signing safeguards 
agreements with the Agency, and it was heartening to see that a large number of 
countries had already done so. 
48. Morocco possessed an important energy potential and was at present deploying 
considerable efforts to develop its resources. To meet its needs the primary 
energy sources used were hydropower, coal and hydrocarbons. In 1979» 82.1% of 
the primary energy consumption had been met by hydrocarbons, 8.8$ by hydropower, 
7.8$ by coal and 1.3$ by local natural gas. 
49. Morocco therefore regarded oil prospecting as a matter of high priority and 
a number of sedimentary basins were at present being thoroughly explored from 
both land and sea. It was also planned to develop its bituminous schists, of 
which there were abundant reserves in the country. Two major deposits had 
already been the subject of intensive geological studies. Hydroelectric power 
currently accounted for about 9$ of national energy consumption and could be 
further developed. Coal accounted for 7.4$ in *he country's energy balance and 
was being mined at Jerada at the rate of 75 000 tonnes per year. 
50. As far as uranium was concerned, geological and radiometric surveys had continued 
in the Upper Moulouya River region and in the Western High Atlas mountains, 
where the drilling carried out had shown high uranium concentrations. With regard 
to the uranium contained in phosphates, Morocco was closely following the development 
of the extraction technology based on phosphoric acid, in particular the 
results obtained by some of the industrial units already in operation. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.222 

page 12 

51. In view of the national grid situation, the commissioning of a nuclear 
power unit would not tie possible before 1993 or 1994. However, siting studies 
and the training of staff had already been started in co-operation with Agencyexperts 
and would be intensified in the years ahead. A Trigs research reactor 
had been purchased, but the scientific and technical research programme to be 
drawn up could not be implemented without the constant aid of Agency 
experts. 
52. In conclusion, he wished to draw attention to the under-representation 
of the African continent in the Agency. By virtue of its human and energy 
potential, by virtue of the varied and immense riches in its possession, and 
by virtue of the number of States that it incorporated, Africa could rightly 
claim better representation at all levels. 
53. Mr. BARABAS (Czechoslovakia) said that the Agency's activities were 
especially important in matters connected with peace, the relaxation of internatioiial 
tension and disarmament. Among other things, it bore full responsibility 
for implementing the safeguards agreements concluded in connection with 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The Second NPT 
Review Conference had shown that it was essential first of all to strengthen 
the NFT regime. That objective was not unrelated to the implementation of the 
decisions contained in the Sinai Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security and 
Co-operation in Europe and hence was of importance also for the conference shortly 
to be held in Madrid. 
54. His delegation firmly advocated the strengthening of the non-proliferation 
regime and of the Agency's safeguards function. It appreciated the Agency's 
activities and achievements in the area of safeguards and called upon States 
party to NPT which had not yet signed an agreement with the Agency to do so 
as soon as possible. It welcomed the conclusion of the Convention on 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and also the Agency's activities 
in continuation of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation. It 
considered that the supply procedures in use among the socialist countries 
demonstrated that it was possible, within the framework of NPT, to establish 
an export system without discrimination. 
55. Since the preceding session of the General Conference, Czechoslovakia had 
commissioned a second WWER-440 reactor at the Wl power station. The construction 
of a second power station comprising two WWER-440 reactors had 
GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 13 

made appreciable progress. Two other stations, each with four 440-MW 
reactors, were being built and preparatory work had begun at the site 

of a future station with WWER-1000 reactors. 

56. Czechoslovakia had exported the first pressure vessel of a WWER-440 
reactor to Hungary. It planned to build a total of 17 reactors of that type, 
including seven for export. For the purpose of city heating, it was also 
considering the use of nuclear power plants, to which very stringent safety 
criteria would be applied so that they oould be installed in the vicinity of 
large cities. 
57. Such an extensive nuclear power programme would not have been possible 
without close co-operation with the Soviet Union and other countries members 
of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). While every effort 
was being made to use all available sources of energy, the Czechoslovak 
planners considered that in the decades ahead nuclear power plants would 
supply the largest part of the country's energy requirements. 
58. The Czechoslovak delegation fully endorsed the Agency's programme for 
198I-I986 and the draft budget for 1981. It set a high value on the Agency's 
activities and would continue to support thera in the future. 
59« Mr. de CARYALHO (Brazil) said his Government considered that every 
country had the inalienable right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
on the basis of non-discriminatory international co-operation. It firmly 
believed that any effective non-proliferation policy must involve universally 
applied measures. The existing safeguards system had produced excellent 
results insofar as the non-nuclear-weapon States were concerned. However, 
since the establishment of the Agency in 1957 there had been at the same time 
uncontrolled vertical proliferation of both nuclear weapons and international 
safeguards, the former in nuclear-weapon States and the latter in the rest 
of the world. It was time to consider the establishment of a more effective 
safeguards system which would be universally applicable and non-discriminatory. 

60. Public acceptance of nuclear energy was stil l a major problem which was 
not likely to be resolved for a long time and might seriously affect the 
development of national nuclear programmes. It was therefore necessary to 
promote public education and to present the undistorted facta about 
nuclear energy. The Agency could play a highly important part in that connection 
by fostering co-operation and through dissemination of information to its 

GC(XXIV)/OR.222 

page 14 

"Member States. That function of the Agency called for an effort comparable to 
its non-proliferation role. 

61. As a developing country, Brazil considered that the increasing use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes was essential for accelerated and selfsustained 
economic development. In Brazil, 90fo of the electric power used 
was hydroelectric; on the other hand, only 20$ of the oil it consumed was 
produced in the country. The anticipated increase in the demand for electric 
power indicated that Brazil's hydroelectric potential, which was over 200 000 MH, 
would be fully utilized in less than 30 years. In order to ensure economic 
development, it was making tremendous efforts to tap new sources of energy. 
An example of those efforts was the programme for production of ethanol from 
sugar-cane and other biomasses, which was perhaps the most significant project 
of its kind in the world. By the end of 1981, more than half a million 
vehicles would he using ethanol as fuel. 
62. As for electricity generation, given the limits of its hydroelectric 
potential and the relative shortage of fossils fuels, his country had no 
alternative hut to use nuclear energy. It was generally recognized that 
scientific and technological development was a sine aua non for economic 
development, and could only take place from a certain level of economic 
development. Developing countries should therefore concentrate their meagre 
resources in a few chosen fields considered to he strategic sectors. Such 
sectors were those which, once developed, would have a series of positive 
impacts on other sectors, thus triggering socio-economic development. The 
nuclear sector was perhaps one where scientific and technological progress 
could have the greatest effect. For that reason, apart from playing a role 
in the generation of energy and in supplying electricity grids, nuclear 
programmes had a very positive effect on a country's educational system, on 
basic and applied research in several sectors, and on standardization and 
quality control in industry. 
63. Besides its direct impact in increasing the scientific knowledge 
in a country, a nuclear programme had considerable positive effects in all 
areas of knowledge and industry. As regards agriculture, it was widely 
recognized that food production was one of the crucial problems of the present 
time. The world's population was growing, while the availability of arable 
GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 15 

land was tending to decrease. It had therefore become imperative to make 
better use of available land and to improve productivity in agriculture. 
Nuclear techniques offered considerable advantages in that regard. 

64. Those facts demonstrated the importance of the utilization of nuclear energy 
in developing countries, especially when it was realized that the rate of development 
must be such as to enable them to reduce and eventually eliminate the gap 
separating them from the developed countries. A nuclear programme in a developing 
country could serve as a catalyst of general economic development. 
65. It was in that context that the Brazilian nuclear programme was being 
carried out. In a few months the first Brazilian power reactor, Angra-I, 
would reach criticality; it would generate up to 626 MW(e). Two additional 
power plants, of 1300 MW(e) each, were already under construction at 
the same site, and siting studies for subsequent nuclear power stations 
were under way. Determined to achieve self-sufficiency in the nuclear field, 
his country had undertaken to master all aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle, 
from ore prospecting to waste disposal. Its proven reserves of uranium were 
well over 200 000 tonnes equivalent of U^OQ concentrate. The techniques of 
ore dressing and yellow cake production had been mastered and the first yellow 
cake plant, with a capacity of 500 tonnes per annum, would soon start production. 
In 1979 Brazil had started the conversion of uranium hexafluoride in a pilot 
plant, using techniques developed domestically. A plant was under construction 
at the same site,near SSo Paulo, and during the present decade the country's 
demand for uranium hexafluoride would be met fully from national production. 
66. Within the framework of its co-operation with the Federal Republic of 
Germany, Brazil1 was developing the jet nozzle enrichment process. A fuel 
fabrication plant was already under construction near Rio de Janeiro. 
Moreover, a plant to produce heavy components for the nuclear industry had 
gone into operation in early 1980. 
67. The importance of the Agency's technical assistance programme should be 
emphasized, since nuclear safety depended on qualified manpower, whose training 
was a basic need in developing countries. Nuclear safety should be considered 
a factor which would facilitate the maximum use of nuclear technology rather 
than one which would limit its future development. The Brazilian National 
Nuclear Energy Commission was acquiring the necessary technical competence 
to carry out the safety evaluation of the nuclear facilities under construction. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 16 

Under the Agency»s technical assistance programme, a large number of experts 
had gone to Brazil to assist the Commission in the various aspects of safety


assessment, inspection and operator licensing. In addition, Brazilian experts 
had participated in many Agency-sponsored courses, conferences, working group 
meetings and training programmes. 

68. The Agency's activities in the area of safety research were very important, 
Research programmes in co-operation with the Agency would enable developing 
countries to be involved in analytical and experimental work which they could 
not have undertaken for budgetary reasons or for lack of qualified personnel. 
Proper management of radioactive waste was a necessary condition for the public 
acceptance of nuclear power. The Agency should promote international cooperation 
with a view to finding a rational and feasible solution to that 
controversial problem. 
69. Brazil attached great importance to co-operation among developing countries 
as a means of increasing their self-reliance. That concept also applied to 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that respect, it was 
worth mentioning the recent agreement concluded between Brazil and Argentina 
on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It covered a wide range of activities 
and the co-operation between the two countries in both scientific and industrial 
areas was developing rapidly; it could be said that the agreement had already 
increased the self—reliance of both countries in the nuclear field. 
70. Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) said that the twenty-fourth regular session of the 
General Conference of the Agency was being held at a time when the world 
community was facing an especially critical situation. It was necessary more 
than ever for the members of the international community to co-operate in 
reducing tensions and strengthening security and mutual trust. Co-operation 
was also needed in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which was becoming 
increasingly essential for economic growth in the years to come. Without 
underestimating the role which other sources of energy and, in particular, 
the more rational use of oil might play, it could be stated that the main socioeconomic 
problems facing the world could be resolved satisfactorily in the 
next few decades only by the increasing use of nuclear energy. In that 
connection mention should be made of two developments since the twenty-third 
session of the General Conference: the conclusion of the International 
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) and the Second Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the iron-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (HPT). 

GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 17 

71. INFCE had rendered a great service by removing certain misunderstandings 
and by shedding light on certain realities. It had been pointed out, for 
example, that nuclear energy could and should be used increasingly in order 
to meet the energy requirements of mankind and that effective measures could 
and should be taken to respond to the specific needs of developing countries 
in the matter of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. INFCE had shown that 
it would not be realistic to expect to develop new fuel cycles which could 
eliminate any risk of military uses of nuclear energy and it had confirmed 
the validity of the existing cycles. Effective measures capable of reducing 
the risk of horizontal nuclear proliferation could and should be taken but 
not in such a way as to reduce the supply of nuclear material. Lastly, the 
desired objectives could only be achieved through continuing international 
co-operation in a climate of mutual understanding. 
72. It was disappointing to note that at the Second NPT Review Conference, 
which had been held ten years after the entry into force of the Treaty, the 
parties had not been able to arrive at a consensus on a final document. 
Nevertheless, it had been possible at the Conference to carry out an extensive 
and highly useful review of the application of the Treaty. The Italian 
Government wished to stress the importance of NPT, which was an essential 
and irreplaceable factor in strengthening peace and security in the world 
and in promoting co-operation and socio-economic development. The Treaty 
should be applied effectively in the various sectors of international activity 
with which it was supposed to deal, for that would lead to a reduction of the 
risks of nuclear proliferation and to ensuring universal accession to the 
Treaty. It was essential, among other things, to apply the provisions of 
Article IV relating to the peaceful applications of atomic energy and those 
of Article VI dealing with measures for limiting and controlling nuclear 
weapons. 
73. The discussions which had recently been held at Geneva showed that there 
was considerable convergence of views concerning a number of evident disparities 
observed in connection with the application of Articles III and IV 
of the Treaty. While safeguards against risks of diversion of nuclear energy had 
proved to be effective and adequate, the application of the provisions designed 
to facilitate exchanges in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
seemed to be only partial and unsatisfactory. For that reason, the Italian 
Government, too, was of the opinion that the application of Article TV should 

GC (XXIV)/OR.222 
page 18 

be watched more closely. In that connection, it agreed with the Director 
General's view that ideas such as that of "prior consent" were inappropriate, 
since they could give rise to effects which were the opposite of what was 
intended. In its 'bilateral relations in the field of nuclear energy, his 
Government complied strictly with the international agreements in force and 
had agreed in principle on the need to specify full-scope safeguards as 
the final and universal goal in that area. 

74. As regards safeguards against the risks of military uses of nuclear energy, 
the Italian Government was highly satisfied with the assurance contained in the 
annual report for 1979 "that verifications had shown that there had been 
no diversion. That assurance strengthened the firm belief of the Italian 
Government that the concern felt by the world community over the risks of 
diversion should not result in the imposition of new forms of unilateral 
control which might impede the peaceful uses of nuclear energy essential for 
the survival and the social and economic progress of mankind. His Government 
considered it sufficient to apply the Agency's safeguards system correctly. 
Recalling in that connection the decision taken by nuclear-weapon States such 
as the United Kingdom, the United States and Prance to accept Agency safeguards 
on a voluntary basis for some of their nuclear facilities, it hoped 
that other nuclear—weapon States would follow that example. 

75. Since the situations in different countries required different strategies 
of exploitation of nuclear energy, the Italian Government would continue, within 
the framework of the Agency and consequently with the indispensable contribution 
of all countries concerned, to support the preparation of international 
standards which could specifically and adequately meet the parallel requirements 
of non-proliferation and the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energ/. 
For that reason it was pleased to note that the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material had been submitted for ratification and confirmed 
that it would contribute to the preparation of appropriate international 
standards for international management of spent fuel and international plutonium 
storage. On the subject of the supply of nuclear material, his Government was 
confident that the Committee on Assurances of Supply would carry out its 
vitally important task. 

76. Realizing the need to reduce its dependence on oil, Italy had undertaken 
a national energy programme extending over ten years and calling for balanced 
use of other sources and for conservation of energy. As for nuclear energy, 
GC(XXIV)/OR.222 
page 19 

Italy was planning to construct nuclear power stations, each comprising two 1000-4JW 
units, at the rate of one a year. That would enable it to increase its total installed 
capacity from 1350 MW at present to about 7400 HW in 1990 and to more than 
25 000 MW by the end of the century. In spite of the difficulties still being 
encountered by the Italian nuclear power programme, especially in the matter 
of final site licensing procedures, there were conditions favourable for the 
development of that programme. For example, a national conference on nuclear 
safety, which had been held in Venice in January 1980, after the Three Mile Island 
accident, had discussed the problem of safety of nuclear power plants in Italy, 
The discussions confirmed in particular the validity of the safety standards 
and procedures in force in Italy. In April 1980 the Italian Government had 
approved the five-year plan of the National Nuclear Energy Committee for 
1980-84, which provided for the establishment of an autonomous body to oversee 
all activities, and not only nuclear activities, involving hazards for the 
population and for the environment. Furthermore, under the plan the Committee 
would intensify its industrial promotion activities both in the nuclear sector 
and in the sector of new and renewable energy sources. 

77. The effort being made by Italy at the national level in the area of nuclear 
energy had necessarily to be placed in an international context, and Italy 
would continue, and seek to extend further, the co-operation activities which 
it had already undertaken. 
78, In the fifties efforts had been made to efface the memory of how the era 
of nuclear energy had started by launching the "Atoms for Peace" slogan. 
Since then a number of developments had taken place and the world was 
facing an energy crisis. It might therefore be appropriate for the years ahead 
to adopt a new slogan: "Atoms for Survival". 

The meeting rose at 5»15 P«m. 


GC(XXIV)/0R.223 
March 1981* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSIONS 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUMORED AND TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburgj Vienna 
on Wednesday, 24 September 1980, at 10.30 a.m. 

President? Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 
later: Mr. ROSSI GUERRERO (Venezuela) 
agains Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
agenda** Paragraphs 

4 Arrangements for the Conference 
1 -4 


(a) 
Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
of items for initial discussion 1 — 2 
(b) 
Closing date of the session and opening 
date of the next session 3— 4 
6 General debate and annual report for 1979 
(resumed) 5—94 


Statements by the delegates ofs 

Bangladesh 5-1 2 
Mexico 13 - 32 
Poland 33 - 43 
Holy See 44-54 
Hungary 55 - 65 
Canada 66 - 72 
Bulgaria 73 - 80 
Romania 81 - 87 
Iran 88 - 94 

*/ 
A provisional version of this document was issued on 1 October 198O. 
**/ 
GC(XX3V)/637. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in documents 
GC(XXIV)/INF/l93/Rev.3, 193/Rev.3/Mod.1 and 193/Rev.3/Mod.2. 

80-6287 


GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS POR THE CONFERENCE 

(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS POR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
1. The PRESIDENT informed "the Conference that the General Committee, 
at its meeting the previous day, had authorized him to report on the results 
of its consideration of the agenda and the allocation of items for initial 
discussion. The General Committee recommended that the agenda should consist 
of all the items contained in the provisional agenda, as set out in 
dooument GC(xXIV)/626, and that the items should he allocated for initial 
discussion as indicated in that document. 
2. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
3. The PRESIDENT further informed the Conference that the General 
Committee had authorized him to report that it recommended fixing Friday, 
26 September 1980, as the closing date of the twenty-fourth regular 
session and Monday, 21 September 1981, as the opening date of the twentyfifth 
regular session of the General Conference. 
4. 
The recommendations of the General Committee were accepted. 
Mr. Rossi Guerrero (Venezuela) took the Chair. 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT POR 1979 (resumed) 

5. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh) said that Bangladesh believed in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind and had signed the 
Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in 1979. It had 
thereby fulfilled its obligations to the international community to ensure 
peace and friendship by limiting all sources of destruction and using nuclear 
energy exclusively for the prosperity of mankind. A positive step towards 
limiting nuclear armaments and other weapons of mass annihilation was the 
paramount need of the present day if an atmosphere of trust and amity was 
to be created, particularly among the less developed nations. Although, 
together with many other countries, Bangladesh had demonstrated its firm 
belie•f in disarmament by signing NPT, if the major Powers did not sincerely 
intend to apply the Treaty it would be totally ineffective. The major 
Powers would have to take positive steps to gradually reduce their production 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 3 

of nuclear weapons until it stopped altogether; then the aim must be to 

destroy the existing nuclear arsenals. He also firmly believed that, to 

ensure 
peace, conventional arms should also be substantially reduced in 

a gradual, systematic way. He was disappointed at the unsuccessful ending 

of the 
Second NPT Review Conference and agreed with Dr. Eklund's suggestion 

that 
a comprehensive test ban treaty would help create confidence among 

non-nuclear countries by eliminating discriminatory elements in NPT. 

6. While appreciating the efforts of the Secretariat in preparing the 
Agency's programme for 198I-86 and the budget for 1981, he was concerned 
about the shortfall in the Technical Assistance Fund, despite the Board's 
target of $13 million for 1981. He therefore repeated Bangladesh's request 
to the Agency to take every measure to increase the amount of technical 
assistance for developing countries, so as not only to balance the increasing 
cost of safeguards but also to meet the real needs of those countries. The 
following points deserved emphasis: 
(i) 
The IAEA should approach UNDP, the UNCSTD Interim Fund, CIDA 
and other funding bodies for research and development in order 
to increase the sums available for technical assistance; 
(ii) 
A revolving fund might be provided by the Agency for developing 
countries to use for emergency purposes; 
(iii) 
Seminars and symposia should be organized in developing countries 
to ensure a greater number of local participants; and 
(iv) 
Technical manpower and funds within the developing countries 
should be better utilized, in accordance with the TCDC concept, 
by establishing appropriate relationships between them. 
7. According to expert opinion, the cost of nuclear power was becoming 
increasingly competitive with conventional energy sources, as oil and other 
fossil fuels had gradually risen in price while the price of uranium and enrichment 
services had remained fairly stable. His country was accordingly interested 
in having a nuclear power programme which might eliminate the shortage of electricity 
in Bangladesh, and thus protect its industrialization plans. It was also 
mindful of the benefits that would yield in science and technology. The main 
problems facing Bangladesh and other developing countries were that (i) they 
needed small and medium-sized reactors, the manufacture of which was gradually 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 4 

decreasing, and (ii) the initial investment cost of nuclear power plants 

was very high and increasing annually. His delegation appreciated the Agency's 

concern about those problems and urged it to seek a solution, possibly by 
encouraging manufacturers to supply small and medium-size reactors to the 
developing countries and convincing OPEC countries and the World Bank and other 
financing agencies, such as the Asian Development Bank, to provide special 
credits for the developing countries, thus enabling them to procure such 
reactors. 

8. Bangladesh was negotiating the purchase of a small but commercial power 
reactor and was grateful to the Agency for helping it to evaluate the technical 
bids. It hoped that the Agency would continue to support it and to help in 
many ways, such as by training staff for the power reactor. 
9. In order to embark upon nuclear power programmes, the developing countries 
would require help with respect to the entire nuclear fuel cycle. While congratulating 
the Agency on the successful conclusion of the International Nuclear 
Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), he urged that the various reports should 
be made available as early as possibles they would reflect the developing 
countries* needs and show them how to obtain the requisite nuclear fuel cycle 
services. He expressed strong support for the establishment of regional fuel 
cycle centres under international control and management. Bangladesh would 
support the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), which was perhaps one 
of the first practical results of INFCE. 
10. It was gratifying to note the Agency's work to strengthen its regional 
research activities under the RCA. Bangladesh had been actively participating 
in all RCA projects since its inception in 1972. It had also agreed to take 
part in the RCA programme on applications of isotope and radiation technology 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 5 

under the UNDP five-year industrial project. It strongly supported 
the continuation of such projects with enhanced financial contributions by the 
IAEA and developed countries. He welcomed the recent accession of Japan and 
Australia to the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA). It was to be hoped 
that through greater co-operation within the framework of the RCA it would soon 
be possible to open an IAEA Asian Regional Centre. 

11. Bangladesh was committed to the peaceful utilization of atomic energy 
in the economic development of the country. In addition to research and 
development activities in different branches of atomic energy, important 
developments had taken place during the past year. The Atomic Energy 
Research Establishment at Savar was to be Bangladesh's main nuclear 
research establishment. The work at different institutes had 
been progressing according to schedule. The building for the Irradiation 
and Pest Control Research Institute (IPCORI) had been completed and a 
Co radiation source installed for pilot studies. The laboratory was 
now fully operational in the new campus. An IBM fast computer (4OOO series) 
was scheduled to be installed at Savar by the end of 1980. Building work 
for the installation of a 3-MW Triga Mark-II research reactor at the Institute 
of Nuclear Technology was to start in two or three months' time. Two new 
nuclear medicine centres, one at Sylhet and one at Dinajpur, were under construction 
and would be operational by the end of 1980. Finally, exploration 
for uranium and other heavy minerals along the country's shoreline was in 
progress; the necessary test drilling and pilot plant work had started. He 
was grateful to the IAEA and UNDP for their help in that respect. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 6 


12. His delegation hoped that the Agency would be willing to increase its 
technical assistance to Bangladesh, in keeping with the country's needs. 
Bangladesh, for its part, was prepared to renew its pledge to co-operate in all 
aspects of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He felt confident that, under 
the able guidance of the Director General, the Agency would continue successfully 
to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy in the interests of peace and 
prosperity throughout the world. 
13. Mr. COSTA-ALONSO (Mexico) said that his country, which throughout its 
contemporary history had adopted a humanistic and anti-war approach, desired to 
co-operate in all activities promoting healthy international co-existence and 
eagerly participated in all international forums which pursued that noble aim. 
It had therefore firmly supported the principles of non-intervention in the 
affairs of other nations, of free self-determination of peoples, of peaceful 
solution of conflicts and of observance of international treaties. 
14. The present time was characterized by insecurity and distrust. It was 
no wonder that much of the effort to dispel them ran up against despair and 
cynicism, for war had hitherto been an incurable disease and the prevailing 
peace was nothing but an armed truce during which raged numerous civil wars and 
local conflicts. 
15. Mexico was fighting for the freedom and dignity of man and for social 
justice, because war was not caused exclusively by political differences or 
confrontation of economic interests but was also due to poverty, misery, fear 
and social injustice. 
16. In spite of the considerable efforts made by many nations to remove suspicion, 
fear and mutual distrust as factors contributing to war, comprehensive development 
must be promoted so as to eliminate the climate which engendered violence - only 
such development would remove the sharp contrasts between wealth and misery 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 7 

existing among nations and social classes. The pursuit of universal peace should 
go hand in hand with comprehensive development, making a reality of the principles 
embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Since peace meant 
comprehensive development and development meant peace, such development had to 
be the goal of human society and should take the form of achieving full freedom 
and dignity of man where social justice was concerned. In the context of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, development referred specifically to the 
capacity to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in economic 
development which would promote comprehensive development. 

17. President Lopez Portillo of Mexico had pointed out that, if more rational and 
fairer international economic relations could not be established, the present 
peace was bound to end in war, which would probably be the last for mankind; 
addressing the United Nations General Assembly, he had called for a world energy 
plan to achieve more rational energy consumption and to ensure transition and 
access to new non-hydrocarbon sources. That implied creating an environment in 
which interested nations could without delay embark on developing nuclear power 
so as to reap its benefits in the post-oil era. His country would be striving • 
for such a plan involving the development and use of alternative sources of 
energy. 
18. It was worth mentioning that Mexico and Venezuela had prepared a regional 
co-operation project on energy in Central America, under which countries with 
abundant energy resources would share them under certain conditions with those 
lacking such resources. 
19. Comprehensive development must be based on universal, rational and 
equitable use of the basic energy resources. Without the distribution of 
technology, material and equipment essential for such development, war in some 
form would be inevitable. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 8 


20. Mexico viewed with deep concern the growing deterioration in international 
co-operation, as evidenced by the failure of the Second Conference to Review 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NFT), held at Geneva. 
It was indeed to be regretted that, during review of the operation of the only 
international instrument designed to prevent the military uses and to guarantee 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, the participating countries had been 
unable to agree on a solution reconciling the application of safeguards with 
assurances of nuclear supply for developing countries. 
21. Developing countries had not been compensated for their unilateral and 
free renunciation of nuclear weapons, and wondered whether HPT had not become 
an obstacle to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, especially as countries 
not party to the Treaty had ample access to nuclear technology. It was indeed 
an irritating paradox that after being in existence for a decade the Treaty was 
unable to halt the nuclear arms race and to result in the destruction of the 
existing nuclear arsenal but had proved effective in hindering the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. He emphatically pointed to the failure to fulfil the 
two main obligations under the Treaty, namely the obligation to initiate 
disarmament and the obligation to supply peaceful nuclear technology to 
non-nuclear-weapon States, 
22. As had been recognized at the Second HPT Review Conference, progress had 
been achieved in several areas; for example the Agency's safeguards activities 
under Article III of HPT had developed satisfactorily, the number of safeguards 
agreements concluded with the Agency had increased and no diversions or 
anomalies had been discovered through the application of safeguards in the 
preceding five years. The progress in national systems of accounting and 
control, in safeguards techniques, instrumentation and data processing, and 
in the rationalization of Agency inspections was commendable. 
23. However, the developing countries had expressed their unanimous opposition 
to the unilateral imposition of additional conditions of supervision and 
control, which were beyond the safeguards requirements under Article III of MPT 
and lay outside the scope of the Agency's safeguards system. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 9 

24. Mexico considered such measures to be unacceptable because, first, they 
were contrary to the principle of self-determination in the matter of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy under Article IV of NPT; second, they cast 
doubts on the efficacy and sufficiency of the Agency's safeguards system and 
undermined its application; third, they had been introduced without consulting 
or informing the other States party to HPT; and lastly, they assumed that addi^tional 
restrictions were needed to ensure that importing States complied with 
their undertakings, in spite of the hitherto scrupulous observance of those 
undertakings by the States concerned; besides, those restrictions were 
incompatible with the sovereign rights of States and their independence. 
25. His country wished to reiterate its full adherence to the Agency's 
safeguards system, which was multilateral and non-discriminatory, and regarded 
as inconsistent with NFT any measure which,under the pretext of preventing 
horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons,placed restrictions in addition to 
those accepted by States under HPT. 
26. The lack of a consensus concerning the operation of MPT was not something 
unique, and it was closely related to the difficult negotiations and slow progress 
observed at the Agency in connection with the expansion and financing of technical 
assistance. The debate on the latter subject indicated the obstacles in the way 
of fulfilment of the obligations under Article IV of HPT. 
27. It must be pointed out that the "inalienable right of all the Parties to the 
Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes", under Article IV.l of NPT, could not be respected if the responsibility 
for the exchange of material, equipment and information with the less advanced 
countries was evaded. 
28. His delegation hoped that the international mechanisms created by the world 
community to promote collaboration in development would not fail and that the 
Agency would play its part in reversing the trend, noticeable in certain events, 
which was discouraging developing countries. 
29. The Agency should not be reduced to a status where it sent experts to inspect 
rudimentary facilities, granted fellowships to train scientists from countries 
lacking nuclear facilities and got involved in triangular assistance in the use 
of radioisotopes. If the aforementioned adverse conditions were not remedied, 
the Agency would lose its credibility,so that its viability as the supreme body 
for multilateral co-operation in the nuclear field would be called into question. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 10 

30. Although his country continued to hope that historical vision and political 
will would be shown in strengthening those areas of activity where the developing 
countries needed substantial impetus for their nuclear programmes, it feared that 
action could not tie expected in the near future and regretted that the rare 
opportunities for the Agency's fully carrying out its functions were being lost. 
31• Recalling, in particular, the terms of reference of the committee established 
by the Board in June 1980 to consider and advise on assurances of nuclear supply, 
he wondered why such a body was required if what the developing countries needed 
was a true forum to negotiate agreements involving the parties and not learned 
analyses of the state of the nuclear fuel cycle in the world. Adoption of joint 
declarations and codes of conduct were not likely to lead to more effective and 
less discriminatory co-operation, for the impediments to the transfer of nuclear 
technology and the proliferation of nuclear weapons were political matters. 

32. The establishment of that committee ought to lead to a new stage in the 
Agency's life,where countries could obtain pledges of supplies on a reliable 
and long-term basis, and thus to pave the way for negotiations. Otherwise, he 
feared that it would only help in maintaining the status quo and not be a 
challenge to the political will of the parties in the prevailing atmosphere of 
distrust and tension. 
33. Mr. WYRZYKOWSKI (Poland) recalled that at the twenty-third session of 
the General Conference, in New Delhi, the Polish delegation had emphasized the 
importance of the urgent entry into force of SALT II. It was to be regretted that 
no progress had been made since that time towards ratification of the Treaty, 
though Poland still hoped it would come into force in the near future. 
34. Another event which had caused deep concern to the Polish nation was the 
HATO decision in December 1979 to deploy new types of nuclear missiles in 
western Europe. Such acts did not serve to strengthen the policy of detente and 
disarmament. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 11 

35« One of the main tasks currently facing mankind was to protect the world 

from the dangers of the arms race. In that connection, NPT played an important 

role by helping to limit the territorial extent of the problem. Such a stabi


lizing effect was particularly important at a time when numerous destructive 

factors were tending to increase international tensions. Poland appealed to 

the Governments of other countries to join in the efforts to stop the arms race 


a race which was encouraging various Powers to acquire nuclear weapons. 

36. The recent Review Conference in Geneva had reconfirmed the importance of 
the KPT and had stressed the necessity of achieving real progress in the fields 
of arms limitation and disarmament, of developing international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and of strengthening the Agency's safeguards 
activities. 
37« After long scientific and technical studies, Poland had started construction 

work on its first nuclear power plant, of 880 MH capacity (later to be increased 

to 1000 MW)» The country was relatively rich in coal, producing more than 

200 million tons of hard coal and 50 million tons of lignite a year. However, 

the Polish Government believed that coal was a valuable resource and should not 

simply be burnt for power and heat generation purposes. It therefore planned 

further rapid development of nuclear power stations and also the construction 

of nuclear generating plants for district heating purposes. It was important 
to emphasize the fact that the rapidly growing demand for energy could not be 
met with coal only: a balanced development of different energy sources, and 
particularly nuclear energy, had become economically and technically essential. 

38o Poland was in favour of international scientific and technical co-operation 
between countries interested in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Hon-nuclearweapon 
States should have guaranteed access to scientific and technical achievements 
and the practical applications of nuclear materials for peaceful purposes. 
The Polish delegation wished to emphasize the direct connection that existed 
between the creation of possibilities for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and 
the strict observation of obligations concerning non-proliferation. The Agency 
had an important role to play in that connection. 

39. The Polish delegation supported the idea of elaborating, under the aegis of 
the IAEA, principles for international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy and it welcomed the setting up by the Board of Governors of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 12 

40. The further development of -the Agency's safeguards system was a veiy important 
task. The work already started on improving the effectiveness of safeguards 
data verification should be continued. As a token of its high regard for the 
Agency's safeguards activities, Poland was supplying highly qualified specialists 
to work as inspectors. 
41. As a country with a rich tradition and widely recognized scientific achievements 
in fundamental and applied atomic research, and a country which was just 
starting to implement its own nuclear power programme, Poland appreciated the 
importance of technical assistance. It had sought and would continue to seek 
Agency help in training its scientific personnel. It intended to share, to an 
increasing degree, its own experience with interested countries within the framework 
of the technical assistance programme. 
42. Poland approved the figure of 413 million agreed for technical assistance and 
was ready to contribute its assessed amount. It believed that contributions to 
the Fund should continue to be voluntary and to be paid in local currencies. 
43. The Agency could not avoid the economic problems affecting the rest of the 
world. For the first time in the Agency's history, the budget showed zero growth 
in real terms. The Director General was to be congratulated for tailoring the 
budget to the economic situation of the Member States. It was unlikely that the 
difficult situation would improve in the near future, so the present financial 
policy should be continued. That would require from the Director General and the 
Secretariat a more rigorous selection of those programmes which would enable the 
Agency to carry on its statutory tasks, especially the development of the safeguards 
system, and nuclear safety and technical assistance activities, without a 
significant increase in the budget. The phasing out of certain programmes would 
enable staff to be redirected to new tasks. A critical analysis should be made 
in order to eliminate programmes which, as a result of developments in atomic 
science, had become of secondary importance. The Scientific Advisory Committee 
should extend its activity in that direction. However, the Polish delegation 
wished to state that it considered the proposed programme of Agency activities to 
be constructive and justified and the draft budget to be acceptable. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 13 

44. Mr. PERBSSIN (Holy See), after congratulating the President on his 
election, said that the statement he wished to make related to the work of the 
Agency but was based on the anthropological and social principles which were 
inspired by faith and which had been stressed by His Holiness Pope John Paul II 
in his addresses to the United Nations on 2 October 1979 and to UNESCO on 
2 June 1980. 
45. In an increasingly complex world that demanded scientific and technical 
expertise which staggered the minds and imaginations of most persons, men and 
women of science and those who held political positions of responsibility must 
be ever more sensitive to the impact which scientific advance and political 
decisions had on the lives of citizens. There were many forces that could be 
used, and at times had been used, to reduce the human personality, to control 
whole peoples and to bring about in man a sense of alienation from his true 
destiny. That possibility should not be forgotten at the Agency's General 
Conference. It was, therefore, incumbent upon all who shared such responsibility 
or who had such expertise to be conscious of the roles they played and 
of the goals to be set for that important aspect of human life. Pope John Paul 
had made that very point in his address to UNESCO. 
46. The spectre of past abuses of science still haunted people today, and 
the potential for misuse of scientific advances for the production of nuclear 
weapons or to render them more sophisticated added to the apprehension of 
many people. Conscious of that, all Member States had the task of guaranteeing, 
first of all, that the nuclear material under their jurisdiction was employed 
exclusively for the benefit of mankind. Member States also needed to inform 
people truthfully and honestly of the meaning, purpose and implications of 
the options which stemmed from an assembly such as the Agency's General 
Conference. 
47. The threat of destruction through the use of nuclear warheads had brought 
about a grave situation that was contrary to the Well-being of humanity. It 
was necessary to ask whether it was certain that the upsetting of the delicate 
balance upon which international relationships rested would not lead to a war 
in which recourse would be had to nuclear arms without hesitation. Nuclear 
arms, of whatever power or type, were becoming more and more effective every 
year, and they were becoming a part of the arsenals of a growing number of 

GC(XHV)/OR.223 
page 14 

countries. It was necessary to consider whether the use of nuclear arms, even for 
purposes of national defence or in limited conflicts, might not inevitably lead to 
escalation, resulting in a destruction that mankind could never envisage or accept. 

48. Unfortunately, the current political situation did not give reassurance where 
progress towards nuclear disarmament was concerned, and the plea made by the Pope 
for a systematic and mutual reduction in armaments had not alerted those responsible 
to a degree sufficient to reassure a world that had justified reservations about the 
situation. 
49. The responsibility of the General Conference was thus a grave one. The peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy must clearly be separate from the use of nuclear materials for 
destruction. The attitude of everyone involved must be that of scientists or 
statesmen dedicated to a task in the service of man's life. To that end, a change in 
outlook and mentality was required in order to pursue united efforts to secure the 
common good through mutual co-operation. Peoples and nations must share a common 
outlook and attitude that looked to the defence of humanity, that sought to build 
the necessary structures, and that went hand in hand with a willingness to work 
together for the common good of all, while giving up the selfish short-term interest 
of a few. 
50. With that positive vision of hope for the common good must be linked a 
political will, which was the key to its achievement, and only those responsible in 
their respective nations could bring it about. 
51. His delegation considered that the initiatives of the Agency merited encouragement, 
and that the more the Agency added to knowledge of how nuclear materials could 
be applied for the good of humanity, the more it would make beneficial options 
available to those who needed and wanted them and the more it would contribute to 
the strengthening of the forces of life for the well-being of all. The world could 
not renounce the atom. But it must ensure that it be used for the good of all. 
His delegation wished to commend those programmes of the Agency that did that. The 
possibility of food conservation by irradiation, the various breakthroughs in 
medicine and genetic research, the programme on marine biology, those and many 
others should be the source of a sense of pride and accomplishment on the part of 
this Agency. 
52. All those programmes, however, must always be carried out in accordance with the 
needs of all Member States and not merely as a function of their power and influence. 
GC(XXEV)/OR.223 
page 15 

The Agency and its Member States were committed to the principle of equity by the 
Statute of the IAEA. The well-being of present and future generations in 
industrialized countries could not be achieved at the cost of the well-being of 
present and future generations in the developing countries. The Agency could do 
much in that respect by keeping those responsible informed of what was available and 
by assisting those with fewer resources to use such information for planning their 
own futures in an appropriate way. 

53. In 1980 the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (iNFCE) had completed 
its three years of work. The Agency had played an indispensable part in all the 
studies that had culminated in INFCE's reports. For experts and for political 
leaders those reports would, it was hoped, show means of improving the assurance of 
nuclear supply while minimizing the risk of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
It might, however, be possible for the Agency to simplify some of that and similar 
material and to begin a programme that would make essential information more readily 
available to the public, which needed it. The Agency had prepared a number of fine 
documents about safety and about preparedness in case of emergencies or accidents, 
which might be helpful as a means of deepening the understanding of the public. 
A well-informed public was a necessity and the Agency had an obligation to contribute 
to sound, well-presented and comprehensible information at the proper levels for 
people everywhere. 
54. Two years earlier, in a message to the United Nations Special Session on 
Disarmament, Pope Paul VI had said that disarmament, a new world order, and development 
were three obligations that were inseparably bound together and which, by their very 
nature, presupposed a renewal in public outlook. All three of those concerns 
demanded renewed effort on the part of the Agency, which must further 
disarmament and co-operate in every effort to end the threat of nuclear warfare. 
The Agency must collaborate with others towards a new world order by ensuring that 
advances in nuclear science and technology were made available in appropriate ways, 
on an equitable basis and without self-interest, to all peoples and nations 
according to their needs. In that way, the Agency would find itself committed to 
the development of all peoples, whereby it would be possible to build the common 
future of the human race and construct a great and lasting house of peace. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 16 

55. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary), after congratulating the President on his 
election, observed that the development of nuclear power was playing a major part in 
the economic life, and even in the everyday political life, of many countries. 
Unfortunately, mankind had first become aware of the tremendous energy available 
from the atomic nucleus through its destructive power. The examples of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki served to demonstrate that everything should be done to prevent 
nuclear power from being used for military purposes and to halt the nuclear and 
strategic arms race. At the same time, all steps should be taken to hasten the 
continuation of disarmament talks since a peaceful atmosphere was a precondition 
for the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. 
56. Hungary had concluded a safeguards agreement with the IAEA and was fully 
satisfying the conditions attached thereto. His country was deeply appreciative of 
the Agency's work in connection with SPT. Although the number of States party 
to KPT now exceeded 110, some 40 countries had yet to sign the Treaty, the importance 
of which had been endorsed by the Second Review Conference held recently in Geneva. 
57 • No satisfactory response had yet been made to the just demands of nonnuclear-
weapon States for firm and reliable international assurances that they 
would not be threatened with the use of nuclear weapons. Disarmament was such 
an important issue that every possible opportunity should be taken to advance 
talks on that subject. He hoped that the SAI/T-II Treaty would be ratified in 
the near future and that the third stage of the SAU negotiations could then 
commence. He also hoped that the Madrid conference on security and co-operation 
would give fresh impetus to European and international de'tente and that a decision 
would be taken to convene a conference on military de'tente and disarmament. His 
Government was firmly convinced that the most complex and delicate issues could 
be resolved in a peaceful and mutually acceptable manner by negotiation. 

58. The peaceful applications of nuclear power were playing a greater and greater 
part in the economic development of Hungary. According to the statistics for the 
previous year, approximately $00 laboratories and other facilities were using 
radioisotopes and nuclear techniques* of those users, about one third were in the 
health care sector, slightly more than one third in the industrial sector and the 
remainder in the agricultural sector. Energy supply was a major issue in Hungary. 
In the years to come, nuclear power stations would become an increasingly important 
source of energy alongside coal-fired power stations. The construction of the 
first nuclear power plant, near Paks, was proceeding apace with the assistance of 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 17 

Member States of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA), The pressure 
vessel of the first WWR 44O-MW reactor had been delivered to the site, and instal


lation work had begun. The fuel for that reactor was scheduled for delivery by 
the end of 1980 and would naturally be subject to Agency safeguards. The con


struction and operation of nuclear power plants in Hungary would reflect the 
Agency's safety standards and recommendations, to be translated into Hungarian 

for the benefit of the personnel concerned. 

59. Under a long-term programme of co-operation and specialization in nuclear 
engineering within CMEA, Hungary had undertaken to organize the manufacture and 
further development of equipment for the steam supply system of nuclear power plants, 
systems for handling fuel elements and reactor repair and maintenance equipment. 
60. In 1980 the Hungarian State Assembly had adopted a law governing the utilization 
of atomic energy and, in particular, banning its use for the purposes of producing 
nuclear weapons or other means of mass destruction. The law stipulated that 
nuclear power and related scientific research and development should be directed 
towards the benefit of society as a whole. Under the provisions of that law, 
materials, devices, equipment and systems relating to the application of nuclear 
power were classified as State property. The law also stated that nuclear power 
should not be used to the detriment of human life or health, nor should it affect 
the living conditions of present and future generations or harm the environment, 
61. Under the expert guidance of its Director General, the Agency was playing a 
leading role in the field of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. At its present stage of development, his country enjoyed a two-way 
link with the Agency and participated in the work of the Agency's governing bodies 
as well as in various technical committees and expert groups. 
62. His country was pleased to note that the voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance Fund in 1979 had been put to effective use and that the Agency 
was reporting still greater success in the utilization of non-convertible currencies. 
Effective use of the Technical Assistance Fund was of the greatest value in the 
case of large-scale projects covering the supply of equipment and the provision of 
fellowships and expert services. The Agency's experts should not only provide 
highly skilled services but should also be fully briefed on the special features of 
the recipient country and seek to develop its potential accordingly. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 18 

63. Cognizant of the great value of technical assistance, Hungary would continue to 
grant fellowships to candidates from developing countries and seek to place 
highly qualified experts at the Agency's disposal. In 1981 the Government would 
make a voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance Fund of one million 
forints, a sum exceeding Hungary's share of the target set by the Board. 
64. With regard to the Agency's system of safeguards, to which the Second HPT 
Review Conference had attached great importance, he was pleased to note that no 
safeguards violations had been detected during the past year. However, the scope 
and effectiveness of safeguards should be amplified by providing the inspectorate 
with the appropriate support and equipment and by ensuring that Member States 
nominated skilled experts for this work. 
65. The Hungarian delegation fully supported the decision by the Board'of Governors 
to set up a Committee on Assurances of Supply and was ready to play an active part 
in its work, 
Mr. Haunschild (Federal Republic of Germany) resumed the Chair. 

66. Mr. COPITHORHE (Canada) said that two events of importance to the work of 
the Agency had taken place since the previous session of the Conference: the INFCE 
Pinal Plenary and the Second HPT Review Conference. Both had stressed the importance 
of the Agency's contribution towards meeting the energy needs of the world. The 
Canadian Government was committed to expanding the use of nuclear power by 
facilitating the marketing efforts of its nuclear industry, and there were signs 
in Canada and elsewhere that the recent slow-down in the advance of nuclear power 
might be at an end,, Canada currently had more than 5000 MW(e) of installed nuclear 
generating capacity and another 9000 MH were committed or under construction. In 
addition to meeting its own requirements Canada had exported some 6000 tons of 
uranium in 1979. Canadian CAHDU reactors were being built in a number of countries, 
including Argentina, the Republic of Korea and Romania, and several others were 
seriously considering that proven technology. As a major exporter of nuclear 
material and technology, Canada wished to promote the further development of nuclear 
commerce on a predictable and secure basis. 
67. A vital element in the expansion of international nuclear commerce was an 
environment which minimized the risk of nuclear proliferation and, in particular, 
of any possibility that nuclear exports might be used for nuclear explosive 
purposes. Perhaps the most important single result of the work of HJPCE had been 
its assertion of the general principle that assurances of supply and assurances of 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 19 

non-proliferation were complementary. Moreover, both consumer and supplier countries 

recognized the important relationship between supply and demand, but that relationship 
could only function efficiently in the non-proliferation framework which 
governed nuclear commerce. That would be the subject of discussion in the newly 
established Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), which would continue the 
work of INFCE, Canada hoped that the spirit of co-operation and understanding 

achieved in IHPCE would prevail in the new committee; the valuable work done in 
Committee II at the recent HPT Review Conference had reinforced Canada's conviction 
that consumer and supplier countries could reach a consensus on the main aspects of 

CAS's work. 

68. The Agency's safeguards were a key element in the international non-proliferation 
regime. It was gratifying that the Agency had been able to conclude again in 1979 
that nuclear material under Agency safeguards had remained in peaceful nuclear 
activities or was otherwise adequately accounted for. For Canada, as for many other 
countries, the prevention of the further spread of nuclear explosive capability was 
fundamental to the future of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Agency safeguards 
played a key role in providing the assurances required for public support of 
nuclear energy. However, as new technologies emerged safeguards technologies would 
have to develop as well. The Canadian safeguards support programme, begun in 
co-operation with the Agency in 1977, had led to the development of special safeguards 
equipment which should enable the Agency to reach its conclusions concerning 
safeguards with a greater degree of confidence. The effectiveness of the Agency's 
safeguards activities was commendable, particularly in view of the budgetary and 
manpower constraints placed upon it. Canada strongly supported efforts by the 
Deputy Director General for Safeguards to increase the cost effectiveness of 
safeguards operations. The Agency had recently opened its first permanently staffed 
safeguards field office in Toronto; that was expected to contribute to the more 
efficient utilization of Agency resources. 
69. Canada also remained committed to the technical assistance activities of the 
Agency and had joined the consensus in the Board of Governors which, through the 
introduction of the concept of indicative planning figures, had projected a steady 
increase in the voluntary fund for technical assistance to the end of 1983. The 
target for voluntary contributions envisaged for 1983 - $19 million - compared 
strikingly with the 1980 figure of $10.5 million. 

GC(XXtV)/OR.223 
page 20 

70. Since the Three Mile Island accident, the international community had become 
more sensitive to the question of nuclear safety in spite of the extraordinarily 
good safety record of the nuclear industry. Although responsibility for safety was 
primarily a national problem, the international implications of an accident of any 
magnitude might be dramatic. Canada welcomed the expansion of the SUSS programme 
and the .Agency's improved ability to provide assistance in general questions of 
safety and of the environment and in emergencies to countries developing their own 
nuclear programmes. The Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues 
to be held in Stockholm was also a worthy initiative. Other multilateral and 
regional efforts on safety matters should be encouraged. In the Korth .American 
region, Canada and the United States were continuing discussions to develop a 
co-ordinated nuclear emergency information and response system. Within Canada, 
increased research and development efforts were being devoted to the disposal of 
high-level radioactive wastes and the long-term management of uranium mine tailings. 
As in many countries, that was an important element in establishing public confidence 
in nuclear power,, 
71. A further international measure of considerable value was the conclusion of the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Uuclear Material, which Canada had just 
signed. That Convention, which was intended to diminish the chance of theft or 
forcible seizure, would contribute to reducing the risk of horizontal proliferation. 
72. The zero real growth budget for 1981 placed before the Conference had Canada's 
full support. In providing for limited real growth in the high-priority programmes 
of safeguards, technical assistance and nuclear safety, while setting aside additional 
funds to meet the considerably increased operating costs at the Agency's Permanent 
Headquarters, the Director General had been obliged to make decisions involving 
reductions in some less important activities. Such decisions were never easy, and 
had proven especially difficult for international organizations. Unfortunately, the 
foreseeable future would bring continued severe restraint on the budgets of all 
international organizations. In the case of the Agency that would mean an even 
more thorough revision of priorities, with further reduction and possibly even 
elimination of some lower-priority activities. It would also mean that other 
expenses, especially those related to the occupancy of the Vienna International 
Centre, would have to be closely scrutinized by the Board of Governors. All those 
measures would be necessary if the Agency was to have the financial means to continue 
its vital programmes at a credible level. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 21 

73. Mr. PAKDEV (Bulgaria) said that the twenty-fourth session of the General 
Conference was taking place at a time of increased international tension. It was 
thus more imperative than ever that the international organizations concerned 
with peace, security and disarmament should be strengthened. The Agency, one of 
whose functions was to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, was one 
such organization. As had been confirmed by all the States participating in 
the Second KPT Review Conference, the Agency's role could only increase in the 
future. Although the Conference had not worked out a final document with 
specific recommendations for the Agency, all the participants had once again 
reiterated their adherence to the Treaty and its principles, considering it to be 
an important means of promoting co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy while providing comprehensive guarantees against the diversion of nuclear 
material for purposes forbidden by the Treaty. Agency safeguards had also 
received the support of all delegations. His country paid close attention to the 
implementation of safeguards and made every effort to help improve methods and 
techniques. Ensuring non-proliferation would not hamper the development of 
peaceful nuclear activities - on the contrary, safeguards alone could promote widescale 
international co-operation. That co-operation was of particular interest to 
his country as it had developed a successful peaceful nuclear programme. 
74. The Agency's promotional role continued to expand and its many activities were 
reflected in the annual report. Of special note were the Agency's activities in 
assisting Member States to utilize nuclear energy and its efforts to improve 
safeguards. The Agency's positive technical assistance programme was also to be 
commended, as was the creation of guidelines and rules on nuclear safety and 
protection of the environment, which were of considerable help to countries compiling 
their own national documents. 
75. His country valued highly the results of IKPCE, which it felt should be the 
subject of further study, and had thus decided to take part in the work of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply. The programme for 1981 to 1986 was well in 
keeping with the Agency's role in promoting nuclear power as a means of meeting energy 
needs. The programme reflected the problems involved in the development of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. More attention should be paid, however, to questions 
relating to nuclear heating-and-^>ower plants and heat supply plants. His delegation 
supported the programme for 1981-1986 and the budget for 1981. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 22 


76. Because of the great value of the Agency's technical assistance programme, his 
country had regularly and willingly made its contribution to the Technical Assistance 
Pond, and it would again contribute its share in 1981. His delegation 
supported the view that technical assistance should be voluntary and could not agree 
with those delegations who wished that it be financed from the Regular Budget. 
77. For reasons of economy and the conservation of natural resources, his country 
had adopted a comprehensive programme of nuclear power expansion. Two units with 
reactors of 440-MW(e) capacity each had been in operation in Bulgaria from 1974 
and 1975 respectively. In 1979 they had produced 20 000 million kilowatt hours 
of nuclear electrical power or 18$ of the courrtry^s total electricity. A third unit 
with a capacity of 44O MW(e) was to come into operation in 1980 and a fourth unit 
of the same capacity was to begin operating in 198l. That would complete the second 
stage of the construction of the Kozloduy nuclear power station, 
78. The third stage had begun in 1980 and provided for the construction of two units 
with water-cooled, water-moderated reactors of 1000 MW(e) capacity each. The first 
of those reactors was planned to begin operation m 1984 and the second after 1985. 
A further two units of similar capacity were planned to be completed by 1990. Thus, 
by 1990, the installed capacity of nuclear power plants would reach 4760 MW(e) and 
the electrical power produced by them would be about 45$ °f total electricity 
production. The experience gathered in recent years from operating the Kozloduy 
station and the high reliability of plant equipment were the basis of the stable 
overall operation of the units. The average utilization of capacity between two 
refuelling operations was about 93$ and had reached 97$ for one reactor m 1979. The 
expansion of nuclear power in his country was accompanied by the increasingly widespread 
use of nuclear methods and radiation technology. A whole range of short-lived 
radioactive isotopes had been produced for use in medicine, industry and agriculture. 
Various radioisotope instruments for controlling and automating technological 
processes had been developed in scientific institutes and laboratories. The irradiation 
of seed before sowing had been carried out on an industrial scale in the 
agricultural sphere, and a Centre for Isotope Utilization had been established in 
Sofia in accordance with UNDP guidelines and with the active support of the Agency. 
79. The expansion of nuclear power m Bulgaria depended also on finding solutions 
to problems of nuclear safety and environmental protection. For that reason, the 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 23 

regulatory functions of the Committee on the Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy had been 
widened by a State Act in 1980 with the aim of ensuring the safety of nuclear constructions. 
Agency recommendations had been widely used when drawing up the documents. 

80. The success achieved in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy in his 
country was the result of mobilizing internal resources, of international co-operation 
within the CMEA, of bilateral co-operation - mainly with the Soviet Union - and of 
co-operation with the IAEA. His country took active part in a long-term programme of 
co-operation aimed at meeting the requirements of CMEA Member States for the 
principal types of energy fuel and raw materials. His country had, as a result, 
signed two particularly important CMEA agreements on co-operation regarding scientific 
research and experience and design work on the problems of power plants with watercooled, 
water-moderated lOOO-MW(e) capacity reactors, and of large-capacity fastneutron 
reactors. It was also on the point of signing a CMEA agreement on the 
development of nuclear heating and power plants and nuclear heat supply plants. The 
results of that project would help to resolve problems relating to the production of 
industrial steam and steam for district heating requirements. His country also 
contributed to the development of scientific and technical co-operation within the 
IAEA and took an active part in the Agency's research programme, scientific meetings 
and the INIS programme. 
81. Mr. GROZA (Romania) noted that the present session of the General Conference 
was taking place in a period characterized by extremely dangerous tensions on the 
international scene, by military expenditures amounting to $500 000 million and by 
an arms race (including nuclear weapons) which was capable of destroying civilization 
and all humanity. For that reason his country strongly advocated a policy of dgtente 
and the solution of all disputes by political means. The responsibility of the 
Conference was all the greater in that its current session followed closely on 
the Second NPT Review Conference, the results of which had been far from 
satisfactory as far as the achievement of nuclear disarmament and the development of 
international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy were concerned. 
Romania had carried out all its obligations as a party to NPT and believed that all 
the parties, both nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States, should take 
the necessary steps to discharge their commitments under the Treaty, 
82. In his delegation's opinion the present session, the work of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply and the other meetings scheduled for the near future 

GC(XXIV)/OH.223 
page 24 

represented opportunities for promoting genuine and effective co-operation as well as 
unhindered access to the achievements of nuclear science and technology, and also for 
reinforcing the Agency's role in the solution of the major economic, technical and 
scientific problems of the present day. The ideas put forward by the Group of 77 and 
other countries at the Second HPT Review Conference warranted careful attention. 
More than ever it was essential that the developing countries should be enabled to 
participate in international co-operation and exchanges and that they should receive 
guarantees concerning the transfer of nuclear technologies, materials and facilities 
so that they could benefit from those things on an equal footing, in accordance with 
the Agency's Statute and with the provisions of NPT. The elimination of the 
phenomenon of underdevelopment and the creation of a new international economic order 
should be the goals. The imposition of monopolies in nuclear technology on the 
grounds that its extension would lead to nuclear arms proliferation was unacceptable. 

83. The Romanian delegation approved the annual report for l979t o f which it had 
made a careful study. Particular mention should be made of the Agency's programmes 
in nuclear power, nuclear safety, environmental protection, controlled thermonuclear 
fusion, and applications of radiation and radioisotopes. It wished to reiterate the 
value of the technical assistance programme and the need for maintaining a reasonable 
balance between allocations for technical assistance and promotion of the use of 
nuclear techniques the 
main task of the Agency and 
the resources intended for its 
control function. 

84. His delegation considered that, on the whole, the Agency's programme 
for 1981-1986 was in keeping with trends in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, with 
proposals that had been made by Member States and with the priorities which those 
States had assigned to nuclear power, research of major interest and applications of 
economic and social interest. However, it was absolutely essential that the Agency 
should try to extend and improve its technical assistance activities substantially in 
the period ahead. The consensus reached recently on funds for financing technical 
assistance during the next three years represented a minimum in that connection. The 
increasing attention being paid to financial problems and to measures designed to 
achieve economies and improve efficiency was a welcome development. His country also 
wished to express its appreciation for the contribution which the Agency had made 
to IKFCE and for its help in the drafting of the Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Materials. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 25 

85. As regards Romania's own nuclear programme, in accordance with the directives 
adopted by the 12th Congress of the Romanian Communist Party on technical development 
up to the year 2000, the programme for the construction of nuclear power plants 
would be making rapid progress. Its implementation would have substantial support 
from other programmes, such as those concerned with nuclear physios, nuclear materials 
and fuels, machine and equipment construction, electronics and electrical engineering, 
and radiation protection. Those programmes were predicated on the need to ensure 
energy sources for the country's social and economic progress and to achieve 
independence in fuel and energy supplies. The power plant construction programme 
called for the provision of an installed electrical capacity of 660 MW(e) in 1985, 
about 4000 MW(e) in 1990 and'around 10 000 MW(e) in the year 2000. In support of 
that programme, scientific research and engineering would contribute to speedier 
mastery - on the basis of an original concept - of the fabrication of equipment and 
the production of fuel and moderator. 

86. The construction of the first Romanian nuclear power station had been started 
in 1979 and the plant was expected to be commissioned late in 1985. During 1979 
Romanian scientists had obtained significant results in the solution of problems 
connected with energy, nuclear technology, heavy ion physics, relativistic nuclear 
physics, solid state physics and the physics of surfaces with a view to producing 
new materials with special properties, new stable and radioactive isotopes, radioactive 
sources and radiopharmaceuticals. Good results had been obtained with lasers and 
at plasma facilities. Progress had also been made in developing peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy in industry, agriculture and biology. 

87. In conclusion, he wished to express his appreciation to the Agency for its 
fruitful collaboration and support in the work of several Romanian institutes. At 
the same time, he had to point out that, because of the limited resources available 
to the Agency, it had been able to satisfy only part of the Romanian requests. As 
both a socialist and a developing country, Romania intended to contribute to the 
Technical Assistance Fund and at the same time to derive benefits from the very 
important activities that it financed. 
88. Mr. SAHABI (Iran) said that the Iranian Government, by the mandates of the 
constitution and the facilities of the legal apparatus, was fully committed to its 
/ 


GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 26 

programmes for research and development in science and technology, which were geared 
to the various industrial needs of the country. Within that context, Iran was 
studying and pursuing the peaceful applications of nuclear science and technology. 
He wished to state in that connection that the Iranian Government fully supported 
the balanced activities of the IAEA. 

89. 
Iran had one of the richest proven reserves of oil - 60 billion barrels - and 
12 3
about 14 x 10 m of natural gas, whose combined total could last well beyond the 
end of the next century. It was committed, however, to conservation of its fossil 
fuel resources as far as was possible, and in addition was pursuing a policy of 
diversification of energy sources. 

90. The Iranian concept of development programmes for the utilization of nuclear 
energy would be based on locally acquired or developed experience and would entail 
as well the sharing of resources with other interested countries. 
91. With regard to the Iranian Government's position regarding cancellation of the 
nuclear power plants in Iran, it had to be explained that an ill-conceived and 
executed nuclear energy programme had been inherited from the past and that its 
continuation would have meant total dependence on foreign suppliers. Such dependence 
would have encompassed planning, licensing, construction of the nuclear steam supply 
system, fuel, enrichment services, training, operation, maintenance, reprocessing, 
and various other aspects. The cost of generating electricity would have ended up 
by being several times higher than the comparable cost in the supplier countries. 
Furthermore, several significant factors, including the extent of local uranium 
reserves, the regionally high seismic and geodynamic activities, waste management, 
transmission line problems, and national grid size, had either received only 
perfunctory attention, or had been overlooked altogether. 
92. The Iranian Government could not approve the continuation of a project which, 
in terms of issues involving national sovereignty, safety, economy, and technical 
considerations, would compromise all acceptable standards. The nuclear power project 
had run counter to the very fabric and the spirit of Iran's revolutionary ideals, 
and had therefore been cancelled. 
93. Iran believed that the IAEA, in addition to its extensive activities in the 
realm of safeguards and non-proliferation, should also devote considerable effort to 
protecting the safety-related, economic and technical interests of some of the 
developing countries. Without sounding too pessimistic, it had to be stated that 
accidents similar to the one at Three Mile Island could become catastrophic in the 
extreme in a developing country lacking access to trained personnel, regulatory 
agencies and technical infrastructures. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.223 
page 27 

94. In conclusion, the Iranian Government wished to express its appreciation to the 
Agency's Department of Technical Assistance for the provision of expert services in 
connection with the radioisotope production and control programme in Iran. The 
Atomic Energy Organization of Iran was also grateful for the award of research 
contracts in plasma physics and in the area of trace elements in human nutrition and 
bio-environmental systems. The Atomic Energy Organization was also embarking on two 
new development projects in the coming years: the radiosterilization of medical 
products, and core conversion of nuclear research reactors from HEU to LEU, and it 
was hoped that the Agency could provide assistance in the form of fellowships and/or 
expert services for initiation of the programmes in question. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
March 1981* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 25 September 1980, at 10.15 a.m. 

President: Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 

later: Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) 
and 
Mr. MADEMBA SY (Senegal) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
6 General debate and annual report for 1979 
(continued) 1-7 8 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Austria 1-4 
Egypt 5-1 0 
Tunisia 11 16 
Viet Nam 17-2 0 
Turkey 21-2 7 
New Zealand 28 32 
Nigeria 33 37 
Mongolia 38-4 3 
United Republic ofMalaysia 
Israel 
Tanzania 44-4 9 
50-5 6 
57-5 9 
Uruguay 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
60-6 2 
63 69 
70 78 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 17 October 1980. 
**/ GC(XXIV)/637. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in documents 
GC(XXIV)/INF/l93/Rev.3, INF/l93/Rev.3/Mod.1 and INF/l93/Rev.3/Mod.2. 
80-6291 


GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 2 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1979 (continued) 

1. Mr. HOESS (Austria) said that the Director General's statement and the 
courageous and realistic assessment he had made of the world energy situation 
demonstrated once again the problems with which all countries were confronted and 
which they could not solve except by co-operation. One of the Agency's most 
important functions was the provision of technical assistance with a view to 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Austrian Government therefore 
welcomed the fact that a figure of $13 million had teen chosen as the target for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund for 1981 and that it had 
been possible to fix indicative figures for 1982 and 1983. Subject to the approval 
of Parliament, the Austrian Government would make a contribution of $93 600, 
representing an increase of $22 200 or 30$ over the previous year. 
2. As far as Austria was concerned, the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NFT) and the Agency's safeguards system were two of the three principal 
international instruments for preventing the spread of nuclear weapons, and support 
for an effective non-proliferation regime was and would continue to be one of the key 
elements of Austrian foreign policy. Unfortunately, the third of the instruments mentioned, 
the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, had not yet been signed. The Austrian 
Government urged the parties concerned to continue negotiations with a view to a 
speedy conclusion of the Treaty, and it remained convinced that, despite present 
tensions, the basis for negotiations between the big nuclear Powers must be 
preserved and, if necessary, restored. In that regard, it welcomed the desire 
of the parties to continue with the SALT negotiations. 
3. At the Second Review Conference of the Parties to NPT it had not been possible 
to reach a consensus on the final act. That was to be regretted, but the broad 
measure of consensus obtained on the matters examined by Committee II, which had 
shown that there were many points of agreement regarding the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and safeguards, should not be forgotten. In addition, it was 
most reassuring that the participants had again expressed their support for NPT 
and reaffirmed the need to strengthen the Agency's promotional and regulatory 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 3 

activities. The Austrian Government was therefore happy that the initiative 
taken at New Delhi by the Director General, which it had supported, had led to 
the establishment of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), which had been a 
political consequence of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (IKFCE). The 
questions which the Committee had to concern itself with were so important that 
the Austrian delegation urged all States to co-operate fully within the Committee 

in order to find specific and rapid solutions. The assurance of access to 
resources required for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy called for a broad 
consensus, which was essential if an improved non-proliferation regime was to be 
accepted. The importance of full-scope safeguards should again be emphasized. 
In addition, with regard to non-proliferation, he wished to mention the signing 
in Vienna on 26 October 1979 of the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material (CPNM), which marked a decisive step towards an international regime 
and which hopefully would result in the elaboration of common standards for 
utilization, storage and transport of nuclear materials for domestic purposes. 

4. With regard to the Agency's nuclear safety activities, the Austrian 
Government fully supported the opinion expressed by the delegate of the Netherlands 
concerning the need to find practical solutions for the disposal of radioactive 
wastes. That was a question of great political importance in countries in which 
public opinion was particularly vigilant and, for the future development of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a large number of industrialized countries, 
it might be essential to find a solution for that problem which was understood 
and accepted by the majority of the population. The Austrian Government welcomed 
the fact that the proposal put forward by the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs 
to study the effects of the use of nuclear power beyond the frontiers of each 
country had been favourably received and was to be discussed at the International 
Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues to be held in Stockholm in 
October. The purpose of the Austrian proposal in question was not to hinder the 
development of nuclear programmes in other countries but, on the contrary, to 
start a process in which international guidelines were drawn up on the basis of 
currently accepted safety criteria. 

GC(XXIV)/OR..224 
page 4 

5. Mr. OSMAN (Egypt) noted that the twenty-fourth session of the General 
Conference was being held at a time when the use of nuclear power was going 
through a critical phase. The Agency was meeting its responsibilities regarding 
the promotion of nuclear power for electricity generation, but it could not cope 
alone with the difficulties ahead and needed the full support of all countries. 
In that connection, the Egyptian delegation thanked the Director General for his 
work at the head of the Agency and for his statement at the opening meeting, which 
had been most informative and provided a realistic analysis of the energy 
situation and of the central role of nuclear power. It should be pointed out, 
in particular, that, despite a zero-growth budget, the programme for 1981 was 
well balanced and effective and that an appropriate role had been assigned to 
nuclear safety, waste disposal and environmental aspects. 

6. Since the closing of the twenty-third regular session of the General 
Conference, certain important events had taken place which had had consequences 
in the nuclear field and implications for the Agency's activities. The first of 
those events had been the holding in Munich two weeks earlier of the World Energy 
Conference, which had been attended by over 5000 participants and had pointed 
out the inadequacy of oil and other fossil fuel resources for future needs. 
Nuclear power as an economical and viable source of energy production had been 
shown to represent the only solution for the energy crisis in the short term. 
7. The second event had been the holding in Geneva in August of the Second 
Review Conference of the Parties to NPT, which had unfortunately not provided 
solutions to the important questions of non-proliferation and of the assurances 
of supply of nuclear materials, technology and services. The Egyptian delegation, 
which had always supported the objectives of NPT and international efforts aimed 
at preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, was convinced that nonproliferation 
was a political problem and not a technical one. Non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons required action on a world-wide scale involving the adoption 
of various measures, and the Egyptian delegation believed that all efforts 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 5 

aimed at the denuclearization of certain zones should be encouraged. Together 
with other countries, Egypt had taken the necessary initiatives with a view to 
the declaration of the regions of Africa and of the Middle East as denuclearized 
zones, and it was gratifying to note that those efforts had been favourably 
received by the General Assembly of the United Nations and by other international 
and regional bodies. Unfortunately, the attitude of certain countries in those 
two regions, which evidently had nuclear ambitions in the military sphere, had 
prevented the application of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly. 
In addition, those ambitions were an obstacle to the ratification of NPT by 
Egypt. For the Treaty to be an instrument which would make it possible 
effectively to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, it was necessary 
to encourage all countries to abide by its objectives and to take substantive 
measures to complement it by an effective international non-proliferation regime. 
Such measures would correct the imbalance between the obligations and the 
responsibilities of nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States, which was the 
cause of the disappointing results of the Review Conference. 

8. The Egyptian delegation noted with satisfaction that the Agency was paying 
considerable attention to the question of assurances of supply, and it welcomed 
the decision of the Board of Governors to set up a committee open to all Member 
States for the purpose of studying the question. The Egyptian delegation 
considered that the same emphasis should be accorded to assurances of supply as 
to non-proliferation. 
9. On the subject of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute with a 
view to giving appropriate representation on the Board to the areas of Africa 
and of the Middle East and South Asia, the Egyptian delegation urged the General 
Conference to adopt a resolution which would put an end to an injustice which 
had prevailed for a long time. 
10. The Agency's technical assistance programme was one of its most important 
activities from the point of view of developing countries. For that reason the 
Egyptian delegation had associated itself with other delegations in proposing 
that the technical assistance programme be financed from the Regular Budget in 
order to ensure stability and regularity which would enable the Agency to make 
long-term plans in response to the needs of developing countries. The 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 6 

Egyptian delegation noted with satisfaction that the Board had decided to 
establish the target for voluntary contributions for 1981 at J13 million and to 
recommend $16 million and $19 million as indicative planning figures for 1982 
and 1983 respectively. However, those sums remained much below the amounts 
which would be required for the projects needed by developing countries. 

Mr. Morozov (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) took the Chair. 

11. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) said that the requirements of economic and social 
development in both the industrialized and the developing countries made the 
utilization of nuclear power as urgent as it was necessary, in view of the 
progressive exhaustion of the sources of energy currently used and the 
uncertainty and limitations of the available alternatives. However, the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy continued to be subject to various ecological, technical, 
economic or political obstacles. 
12. In his statement, the Director General had summed up the evolution of 
nuclear programmes throughout the world and had shown that there was a siowingdown 
in the implementation of those programmes in many industrialized countries 
and a continually increasing gap between industrialized and developing countries 
in the realm of expertise in and utilization of nuclear technology. In that 
connection, disapproval should continue to be expressed about capricious 
desires to monopolize knowledge and tendencies to keep discoveries secret. It 
was, therefore, important to redouble efforts to reduce the gulf between those 
who had access to technical information and those who did not, and to begin a 
genuine dialogue between partners imbued with good faith and mutual understanding 
In the interests of the whole international community, developing countries must 
be able to acquire, master and use the technology essential for their development 
and progress. 
13. The Tunisian delegation was convinced that the Agency should provide the 
framework for such a process, and the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
established by the Board of Governors had the task of making a valuable contribution 
to that end. It should also consider the possiblity of setting up, under 
the auspices of the Agency, an international technology centre which would make 
it possible to respond to the pressing needs of Third-World countries. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 7 

14. With regard to the Agency's budget, which now showed zero growth, the 
Tunisian delegation wished once again to condemn the imbalance in the distribution 
of funds between the Agency's two main statutory activities, a situation which 
was thoroughly harmful to technical assistance. It associated itself with the 
consensus obtained in the Board of Governors on the targets for voluntary 
contributions for 1981, 1982 and 1983, but stressed their contingent nature and 
continued to believe that the Agency's technical assistance programme should 
be funded from the Regular Budget. 
15« The Tunisian Government, which was becoming increasingly interested in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, was drawing up for the period up to the year 2000 

an energy development plan under which renewable sources of energy were to play 

an increasing part and the use of nuclear power was being seriously envisaged. 
In addition, two projects were being carried out in Tunisia under the Agency's 
regular programme of technical assistance. As a country bordering on the Sahara, 
Tunisia set great store by the contribution of nuclear energy to solving the 

serious and complex problem of desertification. 

16. The Tunisian delegation was disappointed at the negative response which 
continued to be given to the legitimate request for equitable representation on 
the Board of Governors for the areas of Africa and of the Middle Bast and 
South Asia. The amendment of Article VI.A.2 proposed since 1977 by the countries 
of those two areas was in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Statute, 
in which the principle of equitable representation of the various areas was 
enshrined. Moreover, the Tunisian delegation had occasion yet again to regret 
the fact that member countries of the Group of 77 as a whole were under-represented 
in the Secretariat, and the presence of their nationals continued to be an 
exception, especially in the higher ranks. The time had come for the Agency and 
the Secretariat to make, in the spirit and in the structure of the Agency, the 
changes required by equity and by a concern to render the Agency increasingly 
democrat ic. 
17. Mr. NBUYBif MAMH CAM (Viet Nam) observed that on the threshold of the 
1980s his country hoped that common efforts would contribute to the maintenance of 
a lasting peace, to safeguarding the independence and security of peoples and to 
the happiness of mankind. In the struggle of peoples for a more deoent life the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy constituted an essential factor both at 
present and for the future. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 8 

18. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam supported co-operation and mutual aid 
between countries on the basis of equality. It was logical to expect that the 
advanced countries, as well as the Agency, should assist the developing countries 
in securing rapid access to the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. In a 
number of the Agency's areas of activity, such as technical assistance, fellowships 
and training, preferential treatment should be accorded to developing 
countries, especially those which had just established a programme for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. In that connection his country welcomed the 
co—operation programme of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance. 
19. Viet Nam was striving to remove the severe after-effects of war, and was 
currently devoting its energies to peaceful construction. Its efforts were aimed 
at realizing the peaceful application of atomic energy in agriculture and public 
health and at intensifying the training of personnel. At that initial stage of 
peaceful nuclear applications, Viet Nam had received assistance from the Agency, 
the Soviet Union and other socialist countries and also from a number of other 
friendly States. 
20. The Vietnamese people aspired to a real and lasting peace, and was determined 
to preserve its independence and freedom; hence its desire to see a peaceful and 
stable South-East Asia where genuine co-operation between all countries could be 
established. It was from that standpoint that Viet Nam endorsed the initiative 
taken by the Soviet Union and other peace-loving countries to promote peace, 
international detente and general disarmament, for it was necessary to strive to 
ensure dltente, security and the independence and sovereignty of peoples by contributing 
to the establishment of conditions conducive to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
21. Mr. BARUTQU (Turkey) emphasized that most of the industrialized and 
developing countries which did not possess sufficient local energy resources had 
been facing severe economic problems since the oil crisis of 1974. Nevertheless 
there had been stagnation and even a decrease in orders for nuclear power plants 
over the preceding three or four years in several developed and some developing 
countries because of increased activity by anti-nuclear pressure groups and 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 9 

uncertainties regarding the long-term supply of nuclear materials. However, in 
view of the fresh increases in the prices of oil and other fossil fuels, nuclear 
energy generation had re-emerged as one of the reliable alternatives to meet 
energy requirements until the year 2000. 

22. Since Turkey had limited conventional energy resources, nuclear energy 
would play an increasing role in electricity generation from 1990 onwards. The 
first power plant, 660 MW(e), which was scheduled to go into operation in 1987, 
would constitute an important milestone in the introduction of nuclear power in 
Turkey. Feasibility and siting studies for further nuclear power plants had 
already started. In that connection it should be mentioned that two institutes, 
dealing with the application of nuclear techniques in veterinary science and in 
agriculture, had been established with the technical assistance provided by the 
Agency. 
23. Countries had to have freedom of choice regarding each stage of the nuclear 
fuel cycle, and should not be constrained by unilateral decisions taken by one 
State or a group of States. Such restrictions would be in conflict with the 
Agency's Statute and with NPT. Although the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy 
meant that applications should not be directed towards nuclear weapon production, 
that requirement should not hinder the execution of civil nuclear programmes. 
That was why the rules for the provision of nuclear material, equipment, technology 
and nuclear fuel cycle services should be evolved on the basis of a consensus, 
with the participation of all countries which had nuclear research and development 
programmes. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) represented 
an exemplary approach in that respect, and so did the objectives of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply, which had been set up by the Board of Governors in 
June 1980. The conclusions and achievements of INFCE and the Committee would be 
of the utmost importance for the future programmes of all countries, particularly 
for those of the Third World. For example, the establishment of an international 
fuel bank, an international technology centre and an emergency safety network 
would be of great benefit. 
24. Turkey had become a party to NPT on 17 April 1980, and had already taken 
steps towards negotiating a safeguards agreement with the Agency under the Treaty. 
In addition, it intended to establish a national system of nuclear material 
accounting and control. It had benefited from the Agency's technical assistance 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 10 


in that respect. All nuclear activities in Turkey had been subject to inspections 
tiy the Agency even before the country's accession to HPT. 

25. The Turkish delegation noted with satisfaction that the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material had been opened for signature, and would 
make every effort to sign it at an early date. It hoped that the Agency would 
be able to provide the necessary assistance in the establishment of national 
physical protection systems in the developing countries. 
26. At the Second HPT Review Conference held in Geneva in August and September 1980 
the discussions on the application of Article III, relating to safeguards, and 
Article IV, dealing with the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
had revealed certain differences of opinion. Likewise, the process of rapid and 
deliberate transition to nuclear power generation, which was of vital importance 
for the developing countries, was beset with difficulties. That proved that the 
establishment of a system based on consensus regarding the peaceful application 
of nuclear energy, with the active participation of all countries which had 
nuclear programmes, would be the only means of achieving a more satisfactory 
development of international nuclear relations. It went without saying that the 
creation of an atmosphere of mutual trust was a sine qua non for such an 
understanding. 
27. In conclusion, he stressed the importance of the technical assistance 
provided by the Agency, and pointed out that his country had raised its voluntary 
contribution. Turkey was also pleased to host scientific meetings organized by 
the Agency and would continue to do so, since that was one of the ways of supporting 
the Agency's activities. For example, in the current year it was hosting 
an Agency seminar on the utilization of research reactors and neutron generators 
for developing countries, and it would organize other scientific meetings in 
1981 and 1982. 
28. Mr. SHALL (Hew Zealand) said that the annual report had once again 
demonstrated the progress made by the Agency in promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and in preventing the dangers of proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
It was of vital concern to all countries that the link between the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Agency's Safeguards System should be 
preserved. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 11 

29. However, on the subject of nuclear arms control, the annual report painted 
an excessively optimistic picture of what had been achieved during the past year. 
In that connection his Government deeply regretted the disappointing outcome of 
the Second HPT Review Conference, especially where arms control and disarmament 
were concerned. The New Zealand Minister of Foreign Affairs had considered 
that the Conference had given a warning to the nuclear-weapon States, and 
particularly the two super-Powers, that they must reduce their nuclear arsenals 
and negotiate other important measures of nuclear arms control if NPT was to 
retain its full significance. His delegation also noted the slow progress of 
the trilateral negotiations on a complete nuclear test ban and the non-ratification 
of the SALT II Treaty. All those negative elements had coincided with an increase 
in world tensions due to the Afghanistan and Kampuchea crises. During the 
preceding year the Pacific region had not remained free from the nuclear shadow. 
The New Zealand Government therefore considered that new decisions should be 
taken on nuclear disarmament and that the Agency should play a role in that field. 
A comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty had not yet taken shape and his country 
wished once again to call for the conclusion of such a treaty. 
30. As to positive achievements, the Director General had cited the increase in 
the volume of technical assistance and in the number of safeguards agreements, 
the continuation of the efforts which had led to the conclusion in 198O of the International 
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation and the finalization of the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. The last two were outstanding achievements, 
and his Government hoped to sign the Convention in the near future. In 
the matter of practical application of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, 
New Zealand, like other countries, had been affected by the events of the preceding 
few years and had consequently begun developing a new energy policy. Thus, the 
production of electrical energy had been reviewed in the context of energy 
possibilities and some significant decisions had been taken. Although three or 
four years earlier the generation of electricity by nuclear means had been 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 

page 12 

included in the country's power plan covering the following fifteen years, the 
nuclear option had been deleted from current planning. Instead, New Zealand 
was making a determined effort to utilize resources such as natural gas, coal, 
water power and geothermal energy. Nevertheless, that did not mean that New 
Zealand had turned its 'back on nuclear energy. It was only being guided 'by the 
recommendations of a commission of inquiry which had advised the Government to 
defer any decisions on the subject for the time being. 

31. The foregoing developments had not diminished his country's interest in the 
Agency's work. For example, as a producer of meat and agricultural commodities, 
New Zealand was greatly interested in the radiation preservation of various 
foodstuffs and hoped that the Codex Alimentarius would he amended so that several 
irradiated foods could he accepted for general consumption. It was pursuing 
its programme on the use of radioisotopes in industry and maintaining its interest 
in uranium ore prospecting. Work was also continuing in the area of nuclear 
medicine, and the activities of the National Radiation Laboratory now extended 
to monitoring radioactivity in the atmosphere, not only over New Zealand but 
also over the neighbouring Pacific islands. 
32. In conclusion he affirmed that, even if New Zealand was not directly 
involved in all activities of the Agency, it would continue to take a close 
interest in the Agency's work. 
33. Mr. AESNIJI (Nigeria) said that meeting energy needs had become one 
of the crucial problems of mankind. The problem was most serious for developing 
countries, which, whether or not they were oil producers, would be forced more 
and more to turn to other energy sources as oil reserves were depleted. However, 
those countries best placed to change the present situation seemed uninterested 
in that other proven energy source - nuclear energy. The energy situation was no 
longer as secure as it had been when the Agency was established, and nuclear 
power could not remain a prerogative of the rich countries. Although they might 
deny themselves nuclear power at the instigation of defenders of the environment 
and politicians, the rich countries could and must not prevent the developing 
countries from using it, provided the necessary safeguards were applied. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 13 

34. I*1 the past year Nigeria had undertaken a review of its energy programme, 
particularly as regards electricity generation, and had stepped up its uranium prospecting 
effort. For that reason his country looked to the Agency for the assistance 
needed in training personnel and acquiring technical and scientific knowledge; it 
was grateful to the Agency for the assistance and co-operation rendered in the past. 
35. If they were to meet the expectations of Member States, the promotional and 
regulatory activities of the Agency should be financed from the Regular Budget. 
That would help impart consistency, continuity and predictability to the Agency's 
programmes. It was thus alarming to note that the technical assistance budget 
for 1981 showed zero growth while the funds allotted to the financing of safeguards 
were increasing. The Nigerian Government had already demonstrated its commitment 
to international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by making a 
contribution distinctly greater than its calculated share to the Technical Assistance 
Fund in 1980, and it intended to do the same in 1981. 
36. Of course the Agency's safeguards activities were necessary, and the Agency 
should continue to play an important part in that field. However, the Second NPT 
Review Conference had brought out a regrettable polarization with regard to the 
dual objective of the Treaty: to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons on the 
one hand and to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy on the 
other. Moreover, any objective analysis of the application of NPT must take into 
account the development of the international situation, i.e. that the number of 
nuclear-weapon States should not increase and that those which had renounced nuclear 
weapons had the right to be free of the spectre of a nuclear holocaust. Furthermore, 
in order to be effective NPT should cover not only horizontal but also vertical 
proliferation; the regulatory role of the Agency in that respect should not hamper 
its promotional role. The Nigerian delegation wished to draw the attention of the 
General Conference to the attempt on the part of South Africa to destabilize the 
African continent by acquiring nuclear weapons through the collaboration of certain 
countries and in flagrant disregard of the Agency's safeguards. The fact that that 
country had exploded a nuclear device in 1979 gave rise to doubts about the Agency's 
ability to prevent the diversion of nuclear materials to military purposes in 
South Africa. His delegation appealed to all Members of the Agency to cease 
immediately all nuclear co-operation with South Africa and to prevent their transnational 
companies from utilizing the uranium resources of Namibia. If the 
apartheid regime would not respect international standards and obligations it must 
be totally isolated, as it had been during the twenty-third regular session of the 
General Conference. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 14 


37. Regarding the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, his delegation 
recalled that Nigeria had proposed to the Board of Governors that three additional 
seats should be given to Africa and two to the Middle East and South Asia, as those 
two areas were clearly under-represented on the Board. Since the situation had not 
changed his delegation was repeating its request before the General Conference in 
the hope that greater credibility would be given to the principle of sovereign 
equality of all Member States proclaimed in Article IV of the Statute. 
38. Mr. DALKHSUREN (Mongolia), recalling the great objectives of the Agency's 
work, stressed the importance of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and of 
international co-operation in that field at the present time. Numerous delegations 
had spoken before him on the subject of the Second HPT Review Conference; the 
questions discussed by that Conference did indeed have a direct connection with the 
Agency's activities. In the Mongolian delegation's view the principal result of 
the Conference had been to confirm the value of NFT. The exchanges of opinion 
which had taken place would make it possible to strengthen the non-proliferation 
regime and should promote international co-operation in the use of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. 
39. The Review Conference had attached great importance to examining suitable 
measures for ending the arms race. Unfortunately, a large number of initiatives 
and proposals originating from the socialist countries remained unrealized. While 
the Mongolian delegation shared the concern expressed during the Conference at the 
current situation, it also shared the positive appraisal of the Agency's activities, 
especially as regards safeguards. 
40. The development of nuclear power was accompanied by a considerable increase in 
world-wide exchanges of nuclear material and equipment. Great importance must be 
attached in that connection to the work which had led to the drafting of the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. His delegation was 
convinced that the ratification procedure for that Convention would soon be 
completed in his country. 
41. Mongolia supported the Agency's programmes on the establishment of international 
and regional fuel cycle centres and international plutonium and spent fuel storage 
centres. Such centres should not only facilitate effective control by the Agency, 
but should also accelerate the development of nuclear power, especially in countries 
with a low industrial potential. 
GC(XXEV)/OR.224 
page 15 

42. Concerning the annual report for 1979, his delegation was pleased.%with the 
results obtained by the Agency in the fields of nuclear power, nuclear safety, 
environmental protection, safeguards and the International Nuclear Information 
System. The technical assistance provided by the Agency in 1979 was particularly 
deserving of praise. The total funds available for that purpose had been 
817.5 million, which represented an increase of 17/5 over the previous year. 
A certain number of Agency projects were being carried out m Mongolia; some related 
to the development of nuclear science and technology, others to the applications of 
isotopes and radiation in scientific research, geology, medicine and agriculture. 
The Mongolian delegation was particularly grateful to the Agency for its assistance 
in the establishment of a national nuclear analysis laboratory in Mongolia. 
43. His delegation approved of the target of $13 million fixed for voluntary 
contributions, and his Government was prepared to pay its share. 
Mr. Mademba Sy (Senegal) took the Chair. 

44. Mr. CHAGULA (United Republic of Tanzania) said that he was happy to 
recommend that the General Conference adopt the annual report for 1979. Regarding 
INPCE, the Tanzanian delegation welcomed the fact that the Board of Governors had 
set up the Committee on Assurances of Supply. It proposed that the Agency organize 
a series of regional and sub-regional seminars to acquaint the developing countries 
with the most important results of INFCE. That should be done, as far as possible, 
in collaboration with national research councils, universities and other appropriate 
institutions. Such a programme would lay a firm foundation for the Agency's 
technical assistance to the developing countries, particularly the least developed 
anong them. 
45. As regards the "Matters of Interest to the Agency discussed by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations", there was one omission in particular which seemed 
significant: there was no reference to General Assembly Resolution 34/92 C which, 
in particular, requested all the specialized agencies and other organizations and 
conferences within the United Nations system to grant full membership to the 
United Kations Council for Namibia, so that it might participate in that capacity 
as the Administering Authority for Namibia in the work of those agencies, 
organizations and conferences. The Tanzanian delegation hoped that the Secretariat 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 16 

was already taking the necessary steps to enable the United Nations Council for 
Namibia to participate as a full member of the Agency. 

46. Regarding the Agency's programme for 198I-86 and its budget for 1981, 
he supported in general the proposals they contained, but reserved the right to make 
more detailed comments in the Committee of the Whole. The Tanzanian delegation was 
particularly pleased that new Secretariat Divisions had been established for the 
nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear power and nuclear safety. As a result of that 
reorganization the Agency would be able to respond more effectively to the developing 
countries' needs in those areas. The Tanzanian delegation also felt that the 
Agency's programme for 1981-86 should strike a fair balance between the amounts 
earmarked for safeguards and for technical assistance. That was the spirit in which 
it approved the target of 413 million for voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance Fund for 198l. Subject to those reservations it supported the adoption 
of the draft resolutions on the Agency's Regular Budget, Technical Assistance Fund 
and Working Capital Fund for 1981, contained in Annex, VI to document GC(XXTV)/630. 
47. Regarding the financing of technical assistance, the Tanzanian Government still 
strongly maintained that, in order to know what resources could be counted on for 
technical assistance and to be sure that the latter was accorded the same status as 
safeguards, the technical assistance programme should be financed from the Regular 
Budget as soon as possible. Since the Board of Governors had failed to reach a 
consensus on that matter, the General Conference should find a satisfactory solution 
to prevent many technically sound projects being left unimplemented for lack of 
resources, a situation which recurred annually. In response to the recommendation 
made by the Board of Governors, the Tanzanian Government was pledging a voluntary 
contribution of $1300 to the Technical Assistance Fund for 1981. 
48. Turning to the question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, he 
pointed out that the representation on the Board of the areas "Africa" and "Middle 
East and South Asia" was only about 22$, while that of the other areas ranged 
from 32 to 38$. That meant that, while the Member States in the other areas had 
only six years to wait before obtaining a seat on the Board, the Member States of 
Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia had to wait as long as nine years. 
That was a flagrant violation of the principle of equitable representation on the 
Board of Governors, The General Conference should therefore urge the Board to 
resolve that question without further delay. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 17 

49. Concerning NPT, Tanzania had not signed i t because it considered it more 
harmful than useful to the world's disarmament efforts. In the first place it was 
failing to achieve any abatement of the nuclear arms race and did not affect those 
few members of the "club" of countries which monopolized nuclear weapons. Secondly, 
it created a false sense of satisfaction and complacency, which in turn led to a 
slackening of efforts to attain disarmament; meanwhile the problem was growing more 
serious each year. Thirdly, it violated the sovereignty of Member States, since it 
made assistance from the Agency conditional upon signing NPT, contrary to 
Articles II and III of the Agency's Statute. Six years after the First NPT Review 
Conference the nuclear-weapon States had made no progress whatsoever towards 
achieving disarmament. Furthermore, the Second Review Conference had shown that 
double standards were being applied with regard to the implementation of the Treaty, 
depending on whether or not the States party to it possessed nuclear weapons. The 
nuclear-weapon States had continued to violate Articles VI and I of the Treaty by 
carrying on the arms race. The fact that the United States of America had only 
recently agreed to have its peaceful nuclear facilities placed under Agency safeguards 
was also symptomatic. 
50. Mr. NORAMLY (Malaysia) said that, on the opening day of the General 
Conference, an agreement had been concluded between Malaysia, the Agency and the 
United States of America for the supply to Malaysia of a TRIGA Mark II research 
reactor and its fuel. The reactor would be operated by the Tun Ismail Atomic 
Research Centre (PUSPATl) some 32 kilometres from Kuala Lumpur. Delivery of the 
fuel was scheduled for October 1981, and the reactor would be used for training 
purposes and for the production of radioisotopes. 
51. Malaysia was basically an agricultural country and had embarked on a modest 
nuclear programme. Apart from agriculture, his country also gave priority to the 
medical and industrial applications of atomic energy. It sought the co-operation of 
the industrialized countries in order to obtain research and training facilities. 
His delegation wished to thank both the Agency and the Governments of Australia, 
Austria, Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, 
the Philippines and the United States of America for their assistance in the PUSPATl 
project. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 18 

52. Although its nuclear programme was modest in scale, his country had 
encountered great difficulties in obtaining training facilities and had had to 
contend with very stringent conditions set by the exporting countries. The 
industrialized countries should facilitate the transfer of nuclear techniques to 
the developing countries for the benefit of mankind and in order to foster a closer 
understanding between the Agency's Member States. 
53. His delegation welcomed the establishment of the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply, which should bring substantial benefits to the developing countries. 
54. With regard to the Agency's programme and budget (GC(xXI?)/630), he was 
concerned to note that the indicative planning figures for voluntary contributions 
did not reflect the real needs of technical assistance, even though the targets had 
been increased and despite the generous additional contributions paid by certain 
Member States. As stated by the Director General, it had been possible to implement 
only one third of the technically sound projects for which no funds had been 
initially available. In order to solve that problem, the Agency should undertake a 
more ambitious programme modelled on the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA). The 
Department of Research and Isotopes had done some excellent work in promoting the 
UNDP funding of RCA projects concerning the industrial applications of radiation and 
radioisotopes. 
55. It was interesting to note that, although the Agency had problems in financing 
technical assistance, the same did not apply to safeguards. Any imbalance between 
the promotional and the regulatory aspects of the Agency's activities was detrimental 
to the Agency's statutory objectives. Those countries which were in a position to 
help the Agency restore that balance should do so. 
56. The failure of the Second HPT Review Conference gave cause for alarm. The 
agreements which had been reached in certain areas should nonetheless be fully 
implemented, and the outstanding differences should not obstruct future co-operation. 
It had also been recognized that excessively strict regulation was detrimental to 
the transfer of technology and that the indiscriminate application of safeguards 
would have resulted in economic losses. 
GC(XHV)/OR.224 
page 19 

57. Mr. EILAM (Israel) declared that his country valued the Agency's assistance 
to its Member States, particularly its efforts in the field of information, the 
environment, safety, quality assurance and physical security. He hoped that the 
Agency would play an increasingly active role in promoting nuclear activities and 
initiating public discussions on the many controversial aspects of nuclear energy. 
Much had still to be said and done to allay doubts and misplaced fears, and to 
provide objective information to the public. 
58. A greater effort should be made to induce the leading industrialized countries 
to devote more thought and resources to adapting existing power reactors to the 
conditions prevailing in the developing countries. The Agency had taken a wise 
decision in convening an advisory group on the interaction of grid characteristics 
with the design performance of nuclear power plants. The Agency should also devote 
more attention to the definition of criteria for underground nuclear power plants, 
which constituted an important option and a possible solution to site selection and 
environmental safety problems. Greater efforts should also be made to solve problems 
relating to the construction and safe operation of nuclear power plants situated far 
from the sea or from adequate water resources. Technology allowing a nuclear power 
plant to be constructed where it was really needed, and not just where it could be 
built, had still to be developed. His country was facing a real and pressing problem 
in that connection, since it already used its water resources to the full: the same 
would probably be true for other countries, even those with more plentiful water 
resources. 
59. Although Israel was a developing country with limited resources, his Government 
was ready to continue its tradition of co-operation with other developing countries 
through the Agency. 
60. Mr. MUSSO (Uruguay) stated that his Government, conscious of the need felt 
by all modern States to use nuclear technology, had in April 1980 approved the 
general outlines of the country's nuclear policy and had instructed the National 
Atomic Energy Commission to draw up a national nuclear programme. With the 
co-operation of the Agency, the Intern-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC) 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 20 

and the national commissions of Argentina, Brazil and Chile, the Uruguayan Atomic 
Energy Commission was continuing to implement its plans to use radioisotopes in 
medicine, agriculture and industry. His country's interest in the other potential 
uses of nuclear energy had led it to host, in May 1980, the Conference on Small 
and Medium Nuclear Power Reactors for Energy Generation and Industrial Applications, 
attended by 150 participants from 17 countries. 

61. Convinced as it was of the need to strengthen regional nuclear co-operation 
and of the role that the Agency could, and should, play as a catalyst in that process, 
his Government was pleased to note that the Regional Co-operation Agreement for 
Latin America was taking shape. That Agreement would allow better use to he made 
of the region's resources and of those provided by international bodies. In that 
connection, mention should be made of the regional non-destructive test project in 
which the countries from the region were collaborating, together with the Agency, 
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIK)), the Organization 
of American States (OAS) and the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission of OAS 
(IAMEC). 
62. The developing countries should constantly strive to make use of modern 
technology, including of course nuclear technology, in their energy production systems. 
His country welcomed the Agency's efforts in that direction but was concerned at the 
financial constraints which prevented the Agency from carrying out many of its 
technical assistance projects. Uruguay approved the target figure for voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund for 1981 and the recommended figures 
for 1982 and 1983. As in the past, Uruguay would make a voluntary contribution. 
63. Mr. AL-ESKANGI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) recalled that, at the previous 
session of the General Conference, his delegation had warned that the energy crisis 
could be expected to continue and had stressed that the Agency and its advanced 
Member States should make use of nuclear power, which constituted one of the main 
sources of energy production both now and in the future. 
64. Since then little had been done to develop nuclear energy to the greatest 
possible extent. A much more vigorous technological effort was required in order 
to construct safer, more economical and more reliable nuclear power stations. 
65. He wished to refer in particular to the nuclear power needs of the developing 
countries and to the serious problems they faced owing to their lack of know-how, 
GC(XXCV)/OR.224 
page 21 

their financial difficulties and their shortage of technical and scientific manpower. 
That was especially true for all stages of the fuel cycle, uranium prospecting, 
technical training and the development of nuclear industries. It was amazing 
to note that the developed countries had already used and were still using the 
resources of certain developing countries to the full, for instance, those of the 
oil-producing countries. However, there was no return in the shape of real 

assistance in the development of nuclear technology where it was needed. The Agency 

should make serious efforts in that direction. 

66. Another important issue concerned the commitment of Member States regarding the 
implementation of NFT and safeguards. His country had met its obligations by 
signing a safeguards agreement in accordance with Articles III.l and III.4 of MPT. 
It had thus demonstrated its goodwill in seeking to realize "atoms for peace" and 
to implement its programme for the development of peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. His country had already urged others to sign NPT and to apply the 
corresponding safeguards. Countries which had not signed BPT were creating a very 
dangerous situation by posing a regional nuclear threat. South Africa and Israel 
were obvious examples of countries which caused the terror of nuclear weapons to 
reign throughout the world. Those countries had committed illegal acts by, for 
example, stealing uranium from other States. The Agency and its Member States 
should take a firm stand on that vital issue and face up to their responsibilities 
before it was too late. 
67. The Libyan programme for the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear power 
was still proceeding according to plan. Like any other country with a nuclear programme, 
his country was in urgent need of uranium and had intensified prospecting 
operations in the vast Libyan deserts. Since the results were encouraging, the 
survey work would be extended. Furthermore, as soon as the nuclear programme had 
moved forward, efforts would be made to develop laboratory techniques for uranium 
processing as a first stage in the establishment of the nuclear fuel cycle. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 22 

68. Nevertheless, the main effort was still focused on the completion of the 
Nuclear Research Centre at Tajura. Some facilities, like the two neutron 
generators, were almost complete and were ready for testing prior to commissioning. 
The 10-MW research reactor would undergo trials in a few months' time. AL1 the 
other laboratories, including the Tokamak thermonuclear research facility, would be 
operational by the end of l98l. 
69. Equipment was of no use without the appropriate technical manpower, and 
training was therefore proceeding in parallel with the development of nuclear 
facilities. A large proportion of the university-trained scientific staff had now 
returned home to take up their duties. Major efforts were, however, still required, 
and his Government hoped that the Agency would take additional steps through its 
technical assistance programmes to ensure that the necessary staff was available 
to run the country's nuclear laboratories. 
70. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) observed that the 
recent deterioration in the international situation made the struggle for world 
peace even more important. The policy of peace and de'tente followed by the socialist 
countries had been demonstrated at the last meeting of the Consultative Political 
Commission of the Warsaw Pact States. At a meeting of parliamentary representatives 
of those States held in Minsk in June 1980, Mr. Brezhnev had declared that the 
considerable resources expended on the arms race should be devoted to peaceful 
purposes. The Agency's activities should, indeed, promote that cause. 
71. The annual report for 1979 illustrated the Agency's major contribution to the 
development of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
His delegation approved the report and the accounts for 1979. Among the positive 
points to emerge from the report, he would mention the conclusion of the Convention 
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the completion of INPCE, which 
had highlighted the importance of non-proliferation, the Agency's safeguards 
activities and plutonium storage projects. Within the necessary financial constraints, 
the Agency should continue to focus its attention on key activities and, first and 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 23 

foremost, on nuclear technology and the associated problems of safety and 
non-proliferation. The Agency's activities were running more and more in that 
direction. The Agency had responded to the worsening energy supply situation by 
arranging conferences and meetings and by supporting INPCE. Similarly, the Three 
Mile Island accident had prompted the Agency to extend its activities in the field 
of nuclear power plant safety. His delegation was satisfied with the results from 
the "Nuclear power and reactors" and the "Nuclear safety and environmental protection" 
programmes. It was also satisfied with the effectiveness of safeguards, which were 
an essential branch of the Agency's activities; the participants at the Second HPT 
Review Conference had concluded that safeguards were one of the main weapons in the 
fight against proliferation. 

72. The participants at the Review Conference had unanimously recognized the need 
for an agreement on a total and general nuclear test ban, and he wished to recall 
the Soviet proposals to halt the production of nuclear weapons, strengthen the 
guarantees given to non-nuclear States and respect nuclear-free zones. Most 
speakers had emphasized the merits of the SAI/T II agreement, which should be promptly 
ratified and supplemented by further negotiations. At the same time, the participants 
had expressed their concern at the increasing number of facilities in non-nuclearweapon 
States which were not under safeguards but which could produce material for 
use in the manufacture of nuclear weapons. Israel and South Africa had thus acquired 
the capability to produce such weapons. 
73. Assistance granted by the Agency to developing Member States had increased 
by 16.5$ in 1979, and there were favourable trends in the distribution of 
expenditure together with a net reduction of the surplus in non-convertible currency. 
Technical assistance should continue to be funded by voluntary contributions since 
financing from the Regular Budget would be contrary to the principles laid down in 
the Statute and would hamper efforts to improve the effectiveness of the programme. 
His delegation approved the increased target for technical assistance contributions 
and was able to announce that his Government would increase its contribution 
for 1981 to 40 000 roubles in national currency. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 24 

74. Byelorussia approved the Agency's programme for 1981-1986 and the draft 
budget for 1981, together with the preliminary estimates for 1982 and 1983, which 
latter provided a welcome overall view of trends in expenditure. He was pleased 
to note that a zero growth budget was proposed for 1981. The increases which were 
necessary, affecting the "Huclear safety and environmental protection" and 
"Safeguards" programmes and accompanied by increases in expenditure on technical 
assistance and training, seemed minimal in view of the demands which the Agency had 
to face in those key areas. Likewise, the increased expenditure on safeguards, 
which was estimated at $3 million per year, appeared minimal in the light of the 
expected increase in the number of inspections and in the number and range of 
installations under safeguards. 
75» The Agency's programme for 1981-86 made rather vague reference to plans 
relating to reactors for the co—generation of heat and electricity or the generation 
of low-grade heat alone. That aspect of the programme was, nevertheless, of great 
interest to countries with highly centralized district heating systems. His own 

country was preparing to build a reactor for the co-generation of heat and 
electricity in the city of Minsk. Since such plants had to be located near cities, 
the Agency's nuclear safety programme should be extended somewhat. 

76. The development of the Agency's activities in the field of fast reactors met 
with his delegation's approval, since the intensive use of such reactors currently 
offered the only long-term solution to the energy supply problem. Accordingly, his 
country was undertaking a complex programme of research and experiments with a view 
to using H?0. as coolant in gas-cooled fast neutron reactors. The feasibility of 
that type of reactor was confirmed by the design work for the BRIG-300 36O-MW 
power-plant project, by investigations into gas dynamics and heat exchange and by 
corrosion testing of materials exposed to K.O.. That work was continuing in 
conjunction with the other Republics of the USSR, Poland, Hungary and Bulgaria. 
77. Byelorussia was making greater and greater use of radiation and isotopes. The 
medical applications ranged from diagnostic work to the treatment of oncological 
diseases and sterilization of pharmaceuticals and instruments. Irradiation 
processes were being investigated for use in extending the storage life of fodder 
GC(XXIV)/OR.224 
page 25 

and other agricultural products. The sensitivity to radiation and the mutability of 
major crop plants was also being studied, together with the phenomena associated 
with mineral nutrition of plants. Lastly, radiosterilization was being used in the 

manufacture of bacterial fertilizers. 

78. Many institutes were carrying out fundamental research both in nuclear physics 
and into radiocatalytic and radiochemical processes for producing new materials. 
His country was participating in the Agency's international programme on the 
evaluation of nuclear data on the actimdes, and was also undertaking theoretical 
studies of the interaction of high-energy nucleons and nuclei with other nuclei 
and matter. 
The meeting rose at l.g p«m. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
March 1981* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


EBGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 25 September 1980, at 3.20 p.m. 

President? Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 
later: Mr. AL-KABBANI (Saudi Arabia) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 

Paragraphs 

agenda** 

6 
General debate and annual report for 
1979 (continued) 1 - 124 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Greece 1-19 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 20-2 9 
Ecuador 30-36 
Zambia 37-50 
Portugal 51 - 57 
Peru 58 - 70 
Sweden 71 - 82 
Ghana 83-90 
Ireland 91 - 100 
Republic of Korea 101 - 124 

*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 3 October 1980. 


**/ GC(XXIV)/637. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in documents 
GC(XXIV)/INF/l93/Rev.3, INF/193/Rev.3/Mod.1 and INF/l93/Rev.3/Mod.2. 


80-6295 



GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 2 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1979 (GC(XXIV)/627) (continued) 

1. Mr. KAFSAMBELIS (Greece) said that the energy crisis at the present time 
was extremely serious. The Agency's excellent report for 1979 reflected the 
worsening of that crisis, which had also been emphasized from various points of 
view in the statements which had already been heard. Even the headlines and 
unfortunate news of the past few days were a reminder of the urgency of the 
problem. 
2. Energy was vital for all countries, whatever their consumption. Food production, 
environmental conditions, the quality of life, general economic survival 
and political independence were closely connected with the assurance of energy 
requirements. Nuclear power had a vital part to play in meeting energy requirements 
not satisfied by coal and oil, which, moreover, presented technical, 
physical and political problems. Greece therefore attached ever greater importance 
to nuclear energy, despite the complexities involved, and welcomed the 
intensification of the Agency's activities in the fields of nuclear safety and 
radioactive waste management. It hoped that the Agency's initiatives would 
allay public concern about the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. No doubt public 
information on the relative advantages and risks of nuclear power could be made 
still more effective. 
3. The Agency had made good progress in its safety codes programme. Greece 
was among those countries that had already requested a visit of safety experts 
from the Agency to help the national authorities in applying the Agency's 
standards. 
4. It looked forward to the International Conference on Current Nuclear Power 
Plant Safety Issues to be held in Stockholm: that marked an important step in 
the same direction which, one hoped, would result in an agreement as satisfactory 
as the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPNM). Greece 
had been among the first to sign that Convention, early in 1980. 
5. Greece would particularly welcome an agreement or code of conduct covering 
those problems of nuclear safety which spanned frontiers - which were, in other 
words, truly international. 
6. He felt the past year had been a fruitful one for the Agency. Some of the 
positive results achieved were progress in the International Plutonium Storage 
(IPS) scheme and the study on spent fuel management, the contribution to the 
International Huclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), the establishment of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and the agreement to strengthen the 
GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 3 

technical assistance programme. Setbacks, such as those encountered in the UN 
Global Negotiations in New York or in the Second NPT Review Conference, rendered 
the Agency's work even more important and necessary. Although no consensus had 
been reached at the Second NPT Review Conference, the views expressed there could 
still have a positive impact on deliberations in the Agency. The Agency's role, 
at least, was undisputed. 

7. Greece had been among the first countries to ratify NPT and still considered 
the Treaty to be the keystone of the future international nuclear order. NFT was 
essential to a general reduction of armaments, and hence to disarmament, international 
stability and the security of its signatory States. Greece supported the 
ratification of NPT by all countries and congratulated the States which in the past 
year had ratified the Treaty or concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency. 
8. A safeguards system or international surveillance system was needed, and its 
existence demonstrated the presence rather than absence of political will and trust 
among nations. Such systems would remain necessary as long as both vertical and 
horizontal proliferation continued. Until effective safeguards were applied to 
all the nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States, the possibility of proliferation 
would continue to cause concern. 
9. Greece welcomed the safeguards report of the Agency and the provisions for 
the financing of safeguards agreed by the Board. However, experience had proven 
how difficult it was to prevent a country from switching from a peaceful nuclear 
programme to a military one. Even the Agency had been unable to withstand the 
political will of countries to do so, once they had decided on such a course. 
10. Non-proliferation and energy were political, rather than technical, problems 
and could only be solved by co-operation. That might seem a commonplace, but it 
was an important principle to be observed in such questions as the balance between 
the Agency's regulatory and promotional activities, technical assistance, the 
evaluation of INFCE results and further dialogue within the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply. 

11. The Director General had stated that "irrevocable safeguards must be 
accompanied by irrevocable supply assurances" and it was true that, although the 
danger of proliferation could be limited without jeopardizing the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, it could never be eliminated. 
12. Accession to NPT also implied the need to reinforce the security guarantees 
of the non-nuclear-weapon States, as well as guarantees covering the free use of 

GC(XXHT)/OR.225 
page 4 

nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The lack of consensus at the HPT Review 
Conference made the Committee on Assurances of Supply all the more important, 
and he stressed the importance of achieving as wide a consensus as possible on the 
conclusions of the Committee, whose deliberations would certainly help restore confidence 
in international nuclear relations. Greece had followed the IHFCE process 
carefully and would try to participate constructively in the work of CAS. 

13. During the past year much time and energy had quite rightly been given to the 
evaluation of the technical assistance programme. Greece recognized the need to 
ensure sufficient resources for the technical assistance programme and to expand 
its scope, in particular with respect to the training and advisory services. It 
therefore welcomed the establishment of indicative planning figures for 1982 and 
I983 and the agreement reached in the Board on the 1981 target; he pledged 
Greece's full share (#45 500) of that target. 
14. Greece was at once a contributor to and a grateful recipient of technical 
assistance. It appreciated the Agency's assistance in its uranium exploration 
work around the Strimon basin in the Serres area of northern Greece, where a 
medium-scale experimental mining operation was under way. There was, of course, 
a considerable lead time between exploration and production. 
15. Greece was pursuing a programme of primary energy source diversification to 
reduce its dependence on imported oil. At present, approximately 3556 of the 
country's electric energy requirements were met by oil, 5 $ ty lignite and 13$ 
by water power. According to the plans of the Greek Public Power Corporation, 
by 1984 the electric energy requirements met by oil would be reduced to 27$, while 
61$ of the requirements would be covered by lignite and 12$ by hydroelectric 
stations. In 1989 those figures would be 2$ for oil, 77$ for lignite, 8$ for 
coal, 12$ for water power and 1$ for nuclear energy. 

16. The Thassos-Prinos oil wells, which would come into operation in the Spring 
of 1981, were expected to cover 13$ of domestic oil needs during the first 10 years 
of operation. 
17. The Greek Government had authorized the Greek Public Power Corporation to 
proceed with preparatory planning for a nuclear power plant to be operational in 
1989-90. The Public Power Corporation, assisted by a consulting agency, was 
carrying out a site selection and qualification study. At the same time, the 
recently formed Nuclear Regulatory Service, which was attached to the President of 
the Board of the Greek Atomic Energy Commission and responsible for all nuclear 
regulation matters, was preparing siting regulations based on the IAEA Huclear 
Safety Standards. 
GC(XXCV)/OR.225 
page 5 

18. He expressed his delegation's deep appreciation to the Secretariat for its 
excellent work in preparing the annual report and its invaluable contribution to 
the smooth functioning of the Agency. Messrs. Hall, Kakihana and Abbadessa 
deserved particular thanks for their devotion in promoting the Agency's goals. 
He reaffirmed his delegation's full confidence in the Director General, Sigvard 
Eklund, and in his wise, able and tireless guidance. 
19. Although Greece's term on the Board of Governors had come to an end, it would 
continue to support the Agency's work fully and to participate constructively in 
its activities. Its work within the Agency would be complemented by its participation 
in CEHH and, more particularly, EURATOM, of which Greece was to become a 
member on 1 January 1981. 
20. Mr. BELODED (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that one of the 
main aims of the foreign policy of the Soviet Government was to bring the arms 
race to an end and avert the threat of nuclear war. In that connection, he 
stressed the importance of HPT, a Treaty which also promoted co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. The recent HPT Review Conference had reaffirmed 
the value of the Treaty and had emphasized the need to strengthen the 
Agency's safeguards system. 
21. Since the twenty-third session of the General Conference, there had been 
further, although only slight, progress in the development of nuclear power. 
The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was expanding its own programme in that 
field as part of the current five-year plan, under which more than one half of its 
electrical energy was intended to come from nuclear sources. 
22. Theoretical studies carried out in the Ukraine had provided new information 
about nuclear processes. Work was continuing at the Kiev and Kharkov scientific 
research centres on fundamental and applied nuclear and plasma physics. Huclear 
sources were being used for studies in physics, chemistry, materials science, 
geology and biology. Radioisotope instrumentation had been developed for applications 
in a wide range of fields. Instruction on the use of isotope methods and 
equipment had been given at IAEA courses for scientists from developing countries 
in 1978 and 1979. 
23. Future economic development plans for the Ukraine envisaged an average annual 
increase of 7-8$ in electricity generation, mainly through the construction of new 
nuclear plants. Two 2-GW installations were already in operation at the 
Chernobyl site and a third was being prepared for start-up. Other plants were 

GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 6 


under construction. Particular attention was being given to the problem of using 
nuclear power to produce heat, and it was planned in the 1980s and 1990s 
to provide several large towns with plants generating both district and industrial 
heat. 

24. Scientific research was proceeding on problems related to the reliable, safe 
and economic operation of nuclear power plants. The subjects being investigated 
included the behaviour of materials, the production of high-reliability components 
and the physics of high-power reactors. Great attention was being paid to the 
training of properly qualified personnel. Problems of special importance were 
protection of the environment and the safety of the operating staff and surrounding 
population. The Ukrainian delegation strongly supported the Agency's programme 
in nuclear safety, especially the work on the preparation of codes and 
guides. 
25. Nuclear power could only develop effectively if full use was made of natural 
uranium resources. Work was continuing in the Ukraine on the design physics and 
engineering of a breeder reactor with dissociating coolant proposed by the 
Byelorussian Institute of Nuclear Power. Preliminary calculations gave optimistic 
forecasts of the main parameters. 
26. The scientific and technical co-operation between the Ukraine and the Agency 
was increasing, especially in connection with the organization of courses and the 
exchange of information through the International Nuclear Information System (IMS). 
27. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic attached great importance to 
technical assistance. Its voluntary contribution had increased from 80 000 to 
100 000 roubles between 1978 and 1979, and would rise in the current year to 
135 000 roubles. That was an example of the kind of understanding and cooperation 
that the socialist countries accorded to developing nations. They 
believed that technical assistance should be granted without imposing restrictive 
conditions on the recipients. 
28. Effective Agency safeguards formed a most important part of the measures 
designed to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Considerable progress 
had been made in improving safeguards techniques and methods for the treatment 
of safeguards information. However, some,problems stil l remained, for example 
the development of systems suitable for all types of reactor and the long-term 
storage of spent fuel. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 7 

29. The Ukrainian delegation was satisfied with the Agency's programme for 
1981-86 and the budget for 1981. For the first time in the Agency's history 
the budget showed zero growth in real terms. The Secretariat was to be congratulated 
for working out an acceptable order of priority for the various 
activities, with the highest places being given to safeguards, nuclear safety and 
technical assistance. The savings that could be made in certain non-priority 
areas might be used to extend the woric on nuclear power and the fuel cycle. The 
Committee on Assurances of Supply would play an important role in strengthening 
non-proliferation. The Ukrainian delegation believed the Committee could help 
to increase understanding about the application of Agency safeguards to the entire 
nuclear activity of non-nuclear-weapon importing States which were not party 
to APT. 
30. Mr. SUAHEZ HIEDA (Ecuador) said that since the Director General's visit 
to Ecuador one year ago, considerable progress had been made in his country 
towards the development of nuclear &nergy. Ecuador had a well-defined nuclear 
energy programme, which came under the General Development Plan that had been in 
force since August 1979, and by 1984 it would have a research reactor and the 
laboratories needed to make optimum use of it. 
31. Thanks were due to the Agency for its assistance with the programme. Ecuador 
had been one of the first countries to benefit from Agency technical assistance on 
the basis of non-convertible currencies, and he was confident that the activities 
planned together with the Agency were being carried out in the appropriate fashion, 
non-convertible currencies were also being used for technical assistance with 
nuclear medicine equipment for provincial hospitals. 
32. Ecuador wished to begin systematic exploration for radioactive minerals, and 
had requested UNDP and the Agency for assistance with that task. 
33. Thanks to the assistance of the Spanish Junta de Energia Nuclear (JEN), since 
April 1980 technical specifications had been ready for the facilities at the Nuclear 
Research Centre. Although the JEN was in charge of designing the facilities, it 
was being assisted by many Ecuadorian professionals; in that way a transfer of 
technology was being effected. 
34. He also expressed his country's gratitude to the atomic energy commission 
of Argentina for expert and training services, and to those of Chile and Peru 
for support and co-operation. It would be seen that co-operation in the Latin-
American region was extensive, and he invited countries in the region to participate 

GC(X3aV)/OR.225 
page 8 

in the Workshop on Comparison of Legislation Relating to the Prospecting for 
and Mining of Radioactive Minerals, which was to tie held in Qiito in the second 
week of October under the auspices of the Inter-American Huclear Energy Commission 
and the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission. 

35. His Government wished to endorse the resolutions adopted at the meeting of 
non-aligned countries on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy from 30 June to 
4 July 1980 in Buenos Aires. It was high time that sufficient attention he given 
to the influence of nuclear energy on the development of the Third World. 
36. The various training courses organized by the Agency on aspects of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes were valuable, hut experience showed that, in order 
to solve the serious problems faced by States, large numbers of staff with 
scientific training at a high level were required, and training only in specific 
techniques was insufficient. The Agency should therefore organize, as a matter 
of priority, post-graduate courses lasting for a minimum of two years. In that 
way those working in atomic energy would receive a suitable basic scientific 
training which would enable them to make better use of techniques involving 
radioisotopes and radiation, thereby assisting countries to find effective and 
even original solutions to their problems. 

37. Mr. SAMP A (Zambia) welcomed the fact that the sister Sepublics of Burundi 
and Upper Volta had that year been accorded observer status at the session and 
urged not only them but also other African States, in particular those 
in the part of Africa near Zambia, to become full members as soon as 
possible. He strongly believed that part of these countries' immediate development 
needs could be met through the uses of nuclear techniques in such fields as 
agriculture, medicine, water resources and further exploration for energy sources. 
38. He wished to reaffirm Zambia's strong belief in and support of the Agency's 
Statute, particularly the Agency's two major promotional and safeguards functions. 
He recognized the difficulties arising from the various interests of Member States 
and praised the Director General and his staff for their untiring efforts in meeting 
the diverse needs of Member States. 
39. During 1979, the Agency had assisted Zambia in its agriculture, nuclear 
electronics, radioactive raw materials and training activities. He was happy to 
report that the project on the use of radioisotopes in agriculture at the Central 
Agricultural Research Centre in Zambia was being successfully implemented. The 
only difficulties experienced were in the supply of radioisotopes, owing to 
GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 9 

flight changes from the supplier side. Projects in nuclear physics, nuclear 
electronics, uranium analysis and ore processing were progressing at a far 
slower pace, however, chiefly through delays in the arrival of experts and/or 
the provision of equipment out of phase with expert services, which tended to 
make the assistance given less effective. 

40. Along with the majority of Member States, Zambia wished to see the technical 
assistance programme substantially funded from the Regular Budget. However, 
despite the continuing low level of funding, the interim solution had, at least, 
introduced an element of predictability. 
41. Zambia was fortunate to have adequate hydroelectric energy sources to cater 
not only for its needs but also some of the needs of its neighbours, with the 
potential to further develop those resources. The supply of hydroelectricity 
would remain adequate for quite a long time. However, Zambia was well aware that 
after the turn of the century there might be need for other sources of energy, 
including nuclear electricity, and it therefore opposed any imposition of unilateral 
conditions that hampered nuclear trade. 
42. Zambia had been privileged to observe the Second Review Conference of the 
Parties to NPT, and regretted that in spite of some progress in some areas, the 
Conference had been unable to produce a consensus document. Ha looked forward 
to the time when outstanding issues would be resolved in a manner ensuring 
universal adherence. 
43. Zambia still maintained that the representation formula for the Board of 
Governors was grossly unfair to the regions of Africa and the Middle East and 
South Asia. Like other progressive countries in the Agency, it urged that the 
serious imbalance be remedied, and he reiterated Zambia's firm support for the 
original proposal to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute so as to give the areas in 
question three and two additional seats respectively. The proposal was based 
solely on the principle of equitable geographical representation in the Agency, 
and the principle had been cherished in the entire UN system. He was dismayed 
that for a third time the Board of Governors had made very little progress 
in finding a just solution to the problem and appealed to the General Conference 
to try hard to do so. 

44- He believed that one of the most effective ways of strengthening the nonproliferation 
regime was to declare regions with no known nuclear weapons to be 
nuclear-weapon-free zoneB. Since 1964 the efforts of Member States from the 
African region, and in particular the efforts of the Organization of African 


ac(mv)/oR.225 

page 10 

Unity (OAU), to declare the African continent a nuclear-weapon-free zone had been 
frustrated by the action and intentions of the apartheid regime of South Africa. 

45. He quoted from Zambia's statement in 1978» 
".. . My Government has always expressed grave concern and reservations 
over tendencies, from any quarter that abets the vile system of apartheid. 
We have cautioned against actions that give the apartheid regime a semblance 
of international respectability." 

46. Zambia strongly opposed the existing association between the Agency and South 
Africa in the field of nuclear science and technology, because that association 
only benefited a minority section of that country's population. 
47. It had appealed to Western countries, members of the Agency, to out off 
collaboration with South Africa in the field of nuclear science and technology. 
Such collaboration had enabled the apartheid regime to acquire nuclear weapon 
capability. 
48. Document GOV/INF/377 contained "Matters of interest to the Agency discussed 
by the General Assembly of the United Nations". Among those matters was the 
question of Namibia. He drew attention to General Assembly Resolution 34/92C, 
entitled "Action by intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations with 
respect to Namibia", by which the General Assembly - inter alia - requested all 
specialized agencies and other organizations and conferences within the United 
Hations system to grant full membership to the United Nations Council for Namibia, 
so that it might participate in that capacity as the Administering Authority for 
Namibia in the work of those agencies, organizations and conferences. Namibia 
was illegally occupied by the apartheid and racist regime of South Africa against 
the wishes of the Namibian people and in the face of international opinion. 
49. 
The UN Council for Namibia was not represented at the present conference. 
He appealed to the General Conference to resolve that it be invited to become a 
full member of the Agency, so that at the next General Conference, in 1981, the 
people of Namibia would have their own representatives. 
50. Zambia, as always, pledged to contribute to the General Fund for 1981 in 
accordance with its assessed rate of contribution, which reflected its commitment 
to the Agency's activities, especially the provision of technical assistance. 
51. Mr. NOVAIS MACHAPO (Portugal) thanked the Agency for the benefits and 
valuable services it provided to all Member States including Portugal. 
52. He stressed the value of the technical assistance given to his country, which 
was particularly vital in the fields of uranium exploitation and exploration, the 
planning of nuclear activities and nuclear safety. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 11 

53. The Agency's efforts in publishing safety guides and codes filled an 
important gap and would certainly contribute to greater public confidence in 
nuclear power, but there was still a great deal of work to be done to win public 
acceptance of nuclear energy. 
54. His delegation attached much, importance to the work done by the Agency in 
implementing safeguards which were aimed at preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. Having signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
in 1977, his country observed with great pleasure the growing number 
of States party to the Treaty and had taken part with great interest in the 
recent Second NPT Review Conference. 
55. His Government had followed closely the work of the International Nuclear 
Fuel Cycle Evaluation and hoped that its conclusions would be fruitful. The 
results of INFCE should increase the feasibility of the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes. 
56. The current world energy crisis was affecting his country severely, 
especially as it did not possess significant quantities of fossil fuels. A 
nuclear energy programme based on its uranium resources could reduce his country's 
considerable energy dependence on foreign countries, simultaneously promoting 
development and improving the welfare of the people. To date, no decision had 
been taken on whether or not to install nuclear power plants in Portugal and 
electricity was provided by fossil fuel plants. 
57. Preparations were going ahead to create the conditions required for a nuclear 
power programme by developing infrastructure and carrying out manpower training 
for the event that the Portuguese authorities took a positive decision. 
58. Mr. BARHEDA DELGADO (Peru) said that the Peruvian Nuclear Plan, drawn up 
in 1977, divided up into two stages, the first of which, for the period 1977-1983, 
was basically aimed at training the requisite manpower, constructing small 
operational facilities, amassing technical information for subsequent nuclear 
development, ascertaining the country's uranium potential, and studying the 
feasibility of building nuclear power plants. The second stage, running from 
1983 to 2000, was intended to reap the benefit from the present investment and 
effort by effectively transferring the nuclear applications of interest to the 
population and productive sectors of Peru. 
59. The results of the first stage had so far included training programmes for 
the staff working at the Huarangal Nuclear Research Centre, backed up by fellowships 
awarded by the Agency, and among the training facilities and laboratories 

GC(XXIV )/OR.225 
page 12 


bein•g constructed was a neutron physios laboratory, at which a neutron generator 
would be installed in 1981. Those measures would permit a steady flow of 50 
professional staff and 100 technicians per year from 1981 onwards. 

60. A nuclear research centre was being built at Huarangal, 30 kilometres to 
the north-east of Lima, under a contract with the Argentine National Atomic Energy 
Commission and in pursuance of the Bilateral Co-operation Agreement between Peru 
and Argentina,, The construction was scheduled for completion in two years, which, 
together with one year more for the installation of equipment and trial run, meant 
that the centre would come into operation early in I984. Jurthermore, the 
submission of international tenders for the supply of 20jt-enriched uranium and the 
fabrication of reactor fuel elements was nearing its end. The co-operation between 
Peru and Argentina had been very fruitful and was a good example of mutual understanding 
between two developing countries. 
61. To evaluate the uranium potential of Peru, the Suclear Plan provided for 
projects aimed at identifying uranium deposits on national territory and at 
developing the capacity essential for important decision-making in the area of 
nuclear fuel, together with Peru's participation in the near future in the international 
uranium market, with a view to economic and technological self-sufficiency. 
62. The Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute (IPEU) had divided the country into 
uranium-bearing regions, further split up into uranium prospecting units (minimum 
area two million hectares). In one such area in the south of the country an aerial 
prospecting project based on gamma spectrometry had been carried out jointly with 
the Agency, producing interesting results, and a British firm was at present 
analysing the relevant data with a view to evaluation of the feasibility of mining 
the deposits. 
63. In view of the fact that the country's energy requirement by the end of the 
century might be almost six times what it was at present, the IPEN and the State 
Electricity Company of Peru, supported by UNBP and the Agency, was developing the 
nuclear power planning programme on the basis of the WASP system. 
64. Priority areas in the application of nuclear energy were medicine, agriculture 
and food production. In that connection, nuclear biology and medicine centres 
were being set up jointly by the Ministry of Health and the University of Peru, and 
the Loayza Hospital Centre at Lima had already been working for two years. In 
1980 construction of another centre had started at the hospital complex, which was 
being built by the Peruvian Institute of neoplastic Diseases. 
CC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 13 

65. In agriculture and food production an experimental radioisotope laboratory had 
been inaugurated in 1979 at the La Molina Agricultural University. Pour lines of 
research would be followed at the centre, namely soils, fertilizers and irrigation; 
fflrimq-i food production, reproduction and health; plant improvement by induced 
mutations (maize, potatoes, sorghum, etc.); and plant physiology and carbon-14 
phot osynthes is. 
66. In 1980, a National Nuclear Safety and Radiological Protection Authority 
had been set up for the purpose of formulating safety standards and issuing nuclear 
facility licences. By a law passed in July 198O, both the IPEN and the abovementioned 
Authority now came under the Presidency of the Republic, thereby gaining 
more administrative independence and acquiring greater authority for planning and 
directing the country's nuclear development. 
67. The present status of nuclear energy in the world showed that there was a 
nuclear economic cycle, in which a small number of nuclear countries were responsible 
for producing 90j£ of the available nuclear technology, equipment and facilities, 
which they sold to the rest of the world. At the other end of the cycle were all 
the other countries, at different stages of development, many of which supplied the 
nuclear raw materials needed by the nuclear countries, such as uranium, thorium 
and cobalt. Those countries naturally wanted to market their products at an 
aggregate value ensuring a maximum amount of work and an improved standard of 
living for their populations. But that aggregate value was represented by 
technology, which they had to buy from the developed countries on an exchange 
basis that was not always just or equitable. Much of the technology required 
was jealously guarded by the nuclear countries under the pretext of the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons, but that was in fact a thinly-disguised and 
dangerous form of technocratic colonialism. Moreover, that policy had in many 
instances inhibited Peruvian development plans and forced Peru at times to squander 
its nuclear efforts, at the expense of the priority objective of combating hunger 
and poverty among the population. 
68. In addition to the Bilateral Agreement on Co-operation with Argentina, 
mentioned earlier, in January 1980 Peru had signed a similar agreement relating 
to nuclear development with the United States of America. It was hoped that it 
would prove to be a worthy example of bilateral co-operation between a developing 
and a developed country. 
69. It was encouraging to see the increase in voluntary contributions for 
technical assistance, together with the offer of supplementary funds to cover 

GC(XXIV)/0H.225 

page 14 

technica l• assistance projects requiring a substantial outlay for implementation of 
the Peruvian Nuclear Plan. 

70. In conclusion, he hoped that the Agency would spare no effort to seek the 
most suitable ways by which the whole of mankind could benefit from nuclear science 
and technology, without hegemony and with the help of all. 
71. Mr. TEAM (Sweden) after congratulating the President on his election, 
observed that nuclear power was not only an important source of energy but also a 
cause of political controversy, his own country's experience being a case in point. 
The debate on the merits and hazards of nuclear power had lasted more than five 
years and had finally been settled by a national referendum held six months 
previously. As a result the Swedish Parliament had decided that the nuclear 
energy programme should comprise a total of 12 commercial-scale nuclear reactors 
which should be used for their technical lifetime, after which other energy 
sources should be introduced. The share of electricity generated by nuclear 
power would thus grow from 29$ to 45$ by the end of the 1980s. His country made 
extensive use of the Asea-Atom BWR-type reactor which had been developed in Sweden 
and was free from foreign licences. Sweden had developed a fabrication facility 
and formulated a domestic programme for spent-fuel storage away from the reactors, 
together with plans for a specialized maritime transportation system for spent fuel 
and nuclear waste. Sweden compared favourably with most industrialized countries 
in the scope and technological level of its nuclear industry and related infrastructure. 
72. His Government attached particular importance to the unique and vital role 
played by the Agency in the implementation of international safeguards against the 
diversion of nuclear materials, (The wide acceptance of Agency safeguards 
undoubtedly added a measure of international confidence in nuclear energy programmes, 
and that confidence was largely based on the fact that no diversion of 
nuclear material from facilities under Agency safeguards had been reported. 
73. Nevertheless, a general feeling of reassurance was not enough. Safeguards 
were still not as universal and non-discriminatory as they should be. Confidence 
both in nuclear energy and in the cause of non-proliferation would be greatly 
enhanced if all non-nuolear-weapon States were to place both present and future 
nuclear activities under IAEA safeguards. Such action would help to eliminate 
a quite unnecessary element of discrimination arising from differences in the 
scope of safeguards and would also improve the prospects for international 
GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 15 

co-operation and strengthen the predictability of nuclear supply. Sull-scope 
safeguards should indeed be made a common requirement for supply; non-nuclearweapon 
States party to NPT already met that requirement. 

74. Every effort should continue to be made to improve both the effectiveness and 
the efficiency of Agency safeguards. Jurther research and development had to be 
carried out, and action was required on a number of main priorities. All steps 
should be taken to maintain and reinforce confidence in the Agency's ability to 
deal effectively with its increasingly difficult safeguards task. The results 
would directly affect the degree to which States found it necessary to apply 
supplementary measures of control. 
75. Many Member States had participated in the Second MPT Review Conference. 
The absence of a final document expressing a consensus on the substance covered 
in the review could not detract from the fundamental importance of the Treaty, 
and the Conference could be seen as a reaffirmation by the parties of their 
commitment to the letter and spirit of the Treaty. Some encouraging results had 
been reached on the central theme of the Treaty, which was to prevent the 
acquisition of nuclear explosives. However, recent disturbing reports on the 
transfer of sensitive equipment to an area of tension were an acute reminder of 
the need to exercise restraint and prudence in nuclear trade. 
76. Real efforts were necessary to establish sound, predictable and reliable 
supply arrangements fully consistent with non-proliferation. The attention 
given to those matters during OTFCE had been most helpful. XNFCE had provided 
an excellent data base and generated a greater awareness of many current technical 
and institutional matters. The need for a common approach to supply consistent 
with non-proliferation had also been established. The work of INFCE should continue, 
and his delegation therefore welcomed the setting-^up of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply. The aim of the Committee should be to provide 
assurances concerning both satisfactory non-proliferation measures and the predictability 
and stability of nuclear supply. 
77. His Government attached particular importance to the establishment of an 
international scheme for the storage and management of plutonium and had commissioned 
a study on the subject in 1975. He welcomed the fact that an Agency 
expert group, actively supported by his country, seemed to be making considerable 
progress towards an agreed international plutonium storage regime, although agreement 
had yet to be reached on a number of crucial, non-proliferation issues. If 
those issues could be satisfactorily resolved, international plutonium storage 
could greatly facilitate bilateral co-operation by improving predictability. 

GC(XXIV)/OH.225 
page 16 

78* Recent years had witnessed an intensive debate on the risks associated with 
the operation of nuclear installations and that debate had Drought home the need 
to make every effort to deal with the problems of nuclear safety. The concept of 
nuclear safety should also embrace the other parts of the nuclear fuel cycle, 
including nuclear waste and mill tailings after mining operations. That was a 
problem to be handled mainly by individual Governments, but it might also have farreaching 
international implications. A serious accident in a reactor close to 
a State border could also have grave consequences for the health and environment 
of the neighbouring countries. Moreover, experience had shown that the political 
ramifications of a reactor accident in one country could extend to many other 
countries. A solution to the problems of nuclear safety would, therefore, 
require close international co-operation. 

79. Sweden would lend its full support to all efforts to further the cause of 
nuclear safety. In particular, his delegation would welcome efforts to develop 
sets of minimum criteria for the safe operation of nuclear facilities. The 
Nuclear Safety Standards (BUSS) programme should be continued until a comprehensive 
set of safety guides and codes had been established for the whole nuclear field, 
and those documents should, perhaps, be considered as more than recommendations. 
He hoped that the International Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety 
Issues to be held in Stockholm in October 1980 would be a milestone in the path 
of common efforts to ensure the safety of nuclear power. 

80. In recent years, the Agency's budget and programme procedures had shown a 
marked improvement, inter alia through the introduction of indicative planning 
figures for voluntary contributions to the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
The planning of technical assistance, both by the Member States and by 
the Secretariat, should be greatly facilitated as a result. His Government had 
pledged its share of the 1981 voluntary contribution target, namely US $172 900. 
His delegation was of the opinion that technical assistance from the Agency 
should be increasingly provided through UNDP. Technical assistance would thus 
undergo UNDP country programming and be tested in a wider context. 
81. The Agency deserved credit for presenting a zero-growth budget. Most Member 
States were obliged to exercise severe budgetary restraint at home, and the Agency 
might do well to plan for budgetary prudence and restraint for several years to 
come. Against that background, he wished to appeal to the Director General and 
GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 17 

his staff to make renewed efforts to promote cost-effectiveness and to take a 
long, hard look at programmes in order to establish realistic priorities. There 
might also be room for additional savings in administration and overhead costs. 
These savings had to be made in order to protect the most important programmes of 
the Agency, namely safeguards, nuclear safety and technical assistance. 

82. In conclusion, he wished to reaffirm his country's trust in and support for 
the Agency. The staff had earned an excellent reputation for professionalism 
and efficiency. Under the able leadership of their Director General, they had 
helped to set a record for the Agency that was second to none among multilateral 
institutions. 
83. Mr. ALLOTET (Ghana) said that two points in the Director General's statement 
required comment: the first related to the perennial problem of technical 
assistance and its funding. Ghana had repeatedly argued in favour of funding 
technical assistance from assured and predictable sources. While welcoming the 
idea of projecting the technical assistance targets into the future, his 
Government was far from satisfied with the fact that the funding was largely 
voluntary. The promotional functions of the Agency were as important as the 
regulatory functions. Any discrimination in favour of one against the other 
should not be allowed to continue. It was hoped that the Agency would respond 
positively to the appeals of the developing countries for a change in that regard. 
It was regrettable that it had only been possible to implement one third of the 
projects in the 1979 programme that were technically sound due to lack of funds. 
84. The second point related to the question of the zero-growth budget. He was 
sorry to see that many projects of special interest to the developing countries 
would be thereby affected. 
85. Article VI of the Statute continued to engage the attention of the Board of 
Governors and the present General Conference. The need to amend Article VI.A.2 
arose from the under-representation of Africa and of the Middle East and 
South Asia on the Board of Governors. The arguments for extra seats for those 
regions were fully in keeping with the principle of equitable geographical 
representation. It was hoped that a satisfactory solution would be found in the 
near future to that problem. 
86. Regarding the NPT Review Conference, which had ended a short while before in 
Geneva, Ghana shared the increasing concern of countries of the Third World that 

ac(xxnr)/0H.225 
page 18 


NPT should not be used to hamper the implementation of national nuclear power programmes 
by developing countries, and that the nuclear States should take the lead 
in stopping the stock-piling of nuclear weapons in order to remove the horrors of 
the nuclear threat to the world. 

87. His country was distressed at the under-representation of the developing 
countries in the Agency's Secretariat. In the selection of staff, as well as in 
the choice of experts for assignments, many technically competent persons from the 
developing countries had often been sidestepped. That imbalance would have to 
be corrected. 
88. As far as Ghana's programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was concerned, 
the projects continued to receive the support of the Agency and various 
friendly countries. The programmes concerned covered studies in food preservation, 
plant breeding, soil fertility and plant nutrition, uranium prospecting, and 
elemental analysis based on X-ray fluorescence and neutron activation analysis. 
89. With regard to contacts between the Ghana Nuclear Research Establishment and 
the developing countries of Africa and outside Africa, in July and August 1980 the 
Ghana Atomic Energy Commission had hosted a five-week regional training course on 
nuclear analytical methods and their application, jointly sponsored by the IAEA, 
UNDP and the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission, and attended by graduate participants 
from 15 countries in Africa and one country in the Caribbean. 
90. Ghana fully supported the work of the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste, and hoped that the Agency would provide the Centre with more 
funds to enable it to carry on its good work for scientists in the developing 
countries. 
91• Mr. O'SOLLIYAN (Ireland) said that the past year had been a significant 
one for the Agency where non-proliferation and energy problems were concerned. 
The Agency had provided the framework in which INPCE had been able to produce 

fruitful and constructive results. The conclusion of the International 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials had been another useful 
addition to the protective structures provided by the Agency. However, the 
failure of the Second NPT Review Conference to reach agreement and the insufficient 
commitment to reduce nuclear weapons arsenals were causes for concern. The 
nuclear energy path was neither the easiest nor the least expensive way to acquire 
nuclear weapons, but if it were to be employed that would do much to discredit 

GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 19 

the concept of a purely peaceful use of nuclear energy. That was one reason why 
further efforts must be made to extend the scope of safeguards and to ensure that 
as far as possible sensitive nuclear facilities and materials were placed under 
international supervision and multinational ownership. 

92. The energy problem had become a major preoccupation of all Governments. For 
the next half century nuclear energy would have an important function in providing 
the world with energy. In Ireland the nuclear option had been under extensive 
consideration for two years. The international recession, which had reduced 
national growth expectations, together with the long lead time before the project 
could come to fruition, had rendered the need for a nuclear power station less 
pressing; however, it was not an option which Ireland would wish to renounce 
unless alternative energy sources were available to fill the gap. Ireland, like 
other States, was anxious to see the Agency continue its work and devote its 
resources to clarifying and removing, where possible, some of the obstacles, 
imagined or real, to the adoption of nuclear power. 
93. Nuclear power stations must form part of an integrated system, both with 
regard to the fuel cycle as a whole and with regard to the total available electricity 
and to the energy system. In both respects small countries suffered 
from some disadvantages. For a small country a nuclear power station was an 
expensive investment in imported capital equipment. Enrichment and reprocessing 
were services which a small country must procure from outside. No settled system 
of arrangements for the disposal of radioactive waste was available on the market, 
even though the technology was familiar. In the interest of non-proliferation, 
as well as of energy supply and economic management, Ireland endorsed the concept 
of regional and multinational nuclear services such as enrichment, reprocessing 
and waste disposal. In Europe enrichment centres already existed, and national 
reprocessing facilities were open to other nations. It seemed only right that 
those nations which had effectively created the nuclear industry and stood to 
benefit most from its development should provide the full range of ancillary 
services, including waste disposal. It was not realistic to expect that each 
small country, within which there might exist considerable public doubts about 
the merits of a nuclear programme, should have to take its own decisions on such 
sensitive matters as, for instance, the principle and the location of a nuclear 
waste disposal system because there was no regional or multinational system of 
that sort. A nuclear power programme in a small country also faced the problem 

GC(XXtV)/OR.225 
page 20 

that the power network was scarcely large enough to accommodate a large base-load 
plant and interconnection with other energy systems was therefore necessary, which 
might entail considerable costs. 

94. The Harrisburg disaster had made a considerable impression on public opinion, 
particularly in countries little familiar with nuclear power. It must be convincingly 
demonstrated that the risks of nuclear power, whether to human safety or 
to the economy, were not significant or could be systematically avoided by adopting 
particular precautions. It must further be shown that the only alternative to 
such a very slight risk was the certainty of a massive slump in living standards 
because alternative energy sources were lacking. It was not enough for countries 
or agencies involved in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy simply 
to promote nuclear energy as such; they must also create the conditions in which 
the nuclear option was a viable, realistic and even popular one. 
95. The progress made in completing safegverds agreements and the report of the 
inspectorate that no significant diversion of nuclear material had been detected 
were encouraging, although of course they would be more reassuring if the scope 
of safeguards were world-wide and fully comprehensive. Despite difficult economic 
circumstances, Ireland was again able to pledge to the Technical Assistance Fund 
its full share of US $20 800. His Government would also be able to host again, 
in Trinity College, Dublin, the Interregional Training Course on Nuclear Electronics 
It attached great importance to the work of the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply, and hoped the Committee would also tackle the problems of countries which 
could not themselves take care of the whole fuel cycle, but had to rely on 
services from other States. 
96. His Government also approved of the valuable work done by the Agency in the 
field of nuclear safety, in particular the publication of a series of guides on 
quality assurance and safety operation. One of the tasks of the Agency and all 
those engaged in producing nuclear energy was to satisfy the public that it was 
being kept informed and that only negligible risks were being accepted on its 
behalf. For that reason his Government welcomed the proposal of the Austrian 
delegation that close study should be given to the possible effects of nuclear 
energy on areas across national borders: bilateral or international co-operation 
on that problem should cover not only nuclear installations and activities near 
land frontiers, but also those on coastlines or in the sea near other States. 
GC(XXrV)/OR„225 
page 21 

97. His Government also had an interest in procedures for the dumping of lowlevel 
radioactive waste at sea. If that activity was to continue with the 
acquiescence of coastal States, the system would have to be subjected to the same 
stringent international inspection controls as other phases of the fuel cycle. 
Countries with nuclear power programmes should devise methods of waste dumping 
which could be properly monitored and which allowed of appropriate corrective 
action if disturbing features appeared. 
98. For many Member States the past year had been a difficult one financially, 
and the Agency«s budgetary restraint was appreciated. The consensus reached by 
the Board of Governors on the question of the financing of technical assistance 
was also to be welcomed. Forward planning was clearly often necessary, and the 
introduction of indicative figures for voluntary technical assistance contributions 
in 1982 and 1983 would facilitate such planning. 
99. The delays encountered before the acceptance of designated inspectors and the 
consequent financial losses to the Agency were a cause for concern. The Director 
General's proposal to utilize staff in the General Service category for certain 
routine inspection activities seemed both practical and economical, as was his 
suggestion that safeguards costs could be reduced and effectiveness increased if 
safeguards technology were incorporated into the design of nuclear plants. 
100. The tasks facing the Agency in the 1980s would be formidable, but its past 
record showed that the IAEA was a most effective international body whose work 
was characterized by a special spirit of co-operation arising from its Members* 
common interest in the vital tasks entrusted to it . Given that spirit of cooperation 
the Agency should be capable of meeting the challenge of the future. 
101. Mr. SHIM (Republic of Korea) said that nuclear energy was the most 
practical and the cheapest answer to Korea's steadily growing demand for energy, 
since it had no other energy sources. The comparative power generation cost 
between oil-fired and nuclear power plants of the 600-MW class was approximately 
in a 2—to—1 ratio. 
102. Korea was therefore deeply concerned about the long-term assurance of nuclear 
fuel supplies and the fullest possible exchange of scientific and technological 
information. 
103. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation had been a great challenge 
in solving fuel cycle problems related to nuclear power programmes. The INFCE 
had given rise to two projects: firstly, consultations to help develop a system 

GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 22 

of international plutonium storage under IAEA auspices in accordance with 
Article XII.A.5 of the Statute and, secondly, a study on international spent fuel 
management• 

104. In principle, he accepted the conclusions and agreed to their implementation, 
hut pointed out that the long-term growth of nuclear power would eventually 
require more advanced reactor systems. 
105. The best way of saving natural uranium resources was to introduce fast 
reactors as early as possible; the next best method was the use of heavy-^water 
reactors or plutonium recycling. The current once-through nuclear fuel cycle 
was the least efficient option. Past reactors and recycling, either individually 
or in combination, would constitute a major breakthrough in nuclear energy. 
106. The Korean Government was therefore pleased that the INPCE had identified 
the reprocessing and fast-breeder deployments as essential in the effective 
utilization of uranium resources. It hoped to introduce the commercial fast 
breeder by the end of the century. 
107. The risk of the proliferation of nuclear weapons was a matter of universal 
concern. Korea valued the efforts being made by the IAEA to secure safeguards, 
noted its implementation record with satisfaction and attached great importance 
to both national and international assurances to minimize the threat of nuclear 
weapons without jeopardizing energy supplies. 
108. The Agency's safeguards were an essential condition for international nuclear 
co-operation. One of the most urgent and important tasks ahead was to establish, 
through international co-operation, the ways and means of harmonizing the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy with nuclear non-proliferation so that the development of 
nuclear energy did not lead to its use for destructive purposes. At the same 
time peaceful nuclear efforts should not be placed under unnecessary controls 
resulting from non-proliferation requirements* He hoped that his Government's 
observance of the Non-Proliferation Treaty would contribute to achieving the 
Treaty's universality. Wider accession to the Treaty would further promote 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology 
with due regard to the special needs of the developing countries. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 23 

109. He welcomed the fact that the Committee on Assurances of Supply would hold 
its first meeting the following Monday to deal with important post-IHFCE issues 
such as the assurance of a continued supply of nuclear material and the willingness 
of the recipient countries to accept Agency safeguards. 
110. However, it was estimated that within a few years, the nuclear power programme 
would face a serious spent-fuel storage problem due to the lack of 
reprocessing capability. 
111. The growing importance of nuclear energy meant that multinational or national 
reprocessing centres were urgently needed. In view of the advantages offered by 
fuel cycle centres as regards non-proliferation, they would benefit developing 
countries as well as industrialized countries with small nuclear power programmes. 
112. Korea had accordingly proposed at the Second KPT Review Conference that 
the Secretariat should continue the study for the establishment of such a centre 
in order to increase mutual trust. 
113. Korea's electric power demand had increased at an average annual rate of over 
20$ during the last decade, and the nuclear share of total installed power capacity 
would grow steadily from the current 7$ to over 35$ and 60$ by 1991 and 2000, respectively, 
regardless of future economic growth rates. 
114. The success of the nuclear power programme depended on highly advanced design, 
engineering and manufacturing technologies, skilled engineering manpower, and 
enormous capital. Korea was therefore working hard to meet the challenges facing 
the nuclear power industry, including public acceptance, waste disposal and nuclear 
fuel cycle supply assurance. 
115. The major emphasis of it s nuclear power development was on the development 
of indigenous nuclear power technology, combining advanced technology with local 
research and development capabilities. This would ensure that domestic resources 
were utilized to give maximum benefit and also that the nuclear plants constructed 
were safe and reliable,, 
116. He was fully aware of the need for long-term manpower development, which was 
a prerequisite to the success of Korea's nuclear power programme. 
117. With the collaboration of the Secretariat, a seminar on quality assurance for 
nuclear power plants was to be held in early November that year at the Korea 
Atomic Energy Research Institute. He believed that such an approach was one of 
the best ways of meeting the rapidly expanding manpower requirements of Korea's 
nuclear power programme. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.225 
page 24 

118. Korea intended to intensify technical training for nuclear reactor safety 
and expand it to cover in-service inspection and other important areas. It 
therefore sought the technical support of the Secretariat. It was prepared to 
expand the course to accommodate the needs of Member States in its region, with 
a view to the possible development of a Regional Oo-operative Agreement training 
centre in the future. 
119. Korea would take an active part in Regional Oo-operative Agreement projects, 
particularly the 5-year UNDP industrial project aimed at promoting radiation processing 
techniques. 
120. It was also deeply involved in the isotope applications to hydrology and 
sedimentology project which would be holding a review meeting in the middle of 
October at the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute. The Institute had 
established a tritium counting centre with the co-operation of the Australian 
Government and offered to make it available for regional use and training. The 
regional emergency net system could also come under the RCA programmes. 
121. As regards the Agency's proposed budget for 1981 and the financing of 
technical assistance and safeguards, he felt it was reasonable to havo a zerogrowth 
budget during world-wide economic recession. However, the Agency would 
have to plan its programme carefully and selectively and channel assistance 
chiefly towards national safeguards systems. The latter should be regarded 
as the principal means of implementing the Agency's safeguards activities. 
122. As regards the financing of technical assistance, he welcomed the fact that 
a formula for predicting future budget requirements was emerging, even though it 
fell far short of the figures requested. Since the predictability of the 
technical assistance budget was being established and in view of the important 
statutory function of the Agency in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
the target figure for technical assistance should be fully met by voluntary 
contributions and the necessary procedures be initiated by the Board of Governors 
and the Director General. 
123. Korea believed that the developing countries should be given greater opportunities 
to serve at higher-level posts in the Secretariat. The experiences 
and problems of the developing countries would thereby be better reflected in 
the implementation of the Agency's programmes and due regard given to the 
equitable geographical representation of the Member States. 
GC(XHV)/OR.225 
page 25 

124. Korea hoped to preserve and increase the essential role of nuclear power, 
but that would require greater public as well as international co-operation. 
125. It also hoped that the Conference would produce useful results not out of 
political or commercial motivations but in a spirit of mutual co-operation and 
trusto The General Conference should make every effort to establish a scheme 
for the stable supply of nuclear fuel and fuel cycle services. 
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
March 1981* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION! 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 26 September 1980 at 10.15 a,m. 

President: Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 
later: Mr. HAMAMOTO (Japan) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 

Paragraphs 

agenda** 

13 Examination of delegates' credentials 1-2 

6 
General debate and annual report for 1979 
(resumed) 3 - 54 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Sri Lanka 3-7 
Saudi Arabia 8-1 3 
Cuba 14-20 
Sudan 21 - 23 
Cyprus 24 - 29 
Chile 30-36 
Panama 37 - 40 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 

(and replies) 41 - 46 
German Democratic Republic 47 - 54 

14


 Election of Members to the Board of 


Governors 
55-57 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 20 October 1980. 

**/ GC(XXIV)/637. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in documents 
GC(XXIV)/INF/l93Rev.3, 193/Rev. 3/Mod. 1 and 193/Rev. 3/Mod.2. 

80-6299 


GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 2 

EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXIV)/638) 

1. The PRESIDENT drew the attention of the General Conference to document 
GC(XXIV)/638 containing the report by the General Committee on the examination of 
delegates' credentials. Pursuant to Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, the 
report stated that the General Committee had met as a Credentials Committee on 
Thursday, 25 September. An account of the way in which the General Committee had 
approached its task and of the opinions expressed during the discussion was given 
in paragraphs 1-13 of the document. The last paragraph included a draft resolution 
which the General Committee recommended the General Conference to adopt. 
2. The resolution set out in paragraph 14 of document GC(XXIV)/638 was adopted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT EDR 1979 (GC(XXIV)/627) (resumed) 

3. Mr. PHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) observed that his delegation was once 
more attending a session of the General Conference cognizant of the importance 
of nuclear energy in the last quarter of the twentieth century. The major 
problems facing the General Conference concerned the depletion of traditional 
sources of energy and the need to use nuclear technology to develop, for instance, 
agriculture, hydrology, industry and medicine, which were the most important 
activities as far as his country was concerned. 
4. His Government's foremost concerns were food and public health, followed by 
the development of the economy in order to create employment. In order to 
achieve its objectives, his country was in need of the active co-operation and 
assistance of the Agency and friendly countries. In recent years, Sri Lahlca had 
increased its participation in the Agency's activities; several seminars, 
courses and meetings had been held there, and an important IAEA symposium on 
food preservation was to take place in Sri Lanka towards the end of 1980. 
5. Nuclear proliferation was of two types, one serving peaceful purposes and 
the other purposes of domination. It went without saying that Sri Lanka was 
among those countries which used nuclear power for peaceful purposes. His 
Government had, therefore, not only signed and ratified the Treaty on the Uon-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NFT) but had also outlawed any activity that 
might lead to a nuclear explosion. Infringement of that law carried a 
20-year prison sentence. 
6. Although safeguards were useful in some cases, they should not obstruct the 
development of nuclear programmes by imposing superfluous conditions or by 
diverting funds which were needed for development. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.226" 
page 3 

7. The importance of nuclear energy for a country like Sri Lanka, which had no 
oil coal or gas, could not be overstated. At present, his country relied on 
hydroelectric power stations which were subject to the vagaries of the weather. 
Preparations therefore had to be made for the introduction of alternative sources 
of energy, especially in view of the increasing rate of growth of demand for 
electricity. 
8. Mr. AL-KABBANI (Saudi Arabia) said that the annual report showed an 
encouraging trend in the use of nuclear power. The oil-producing and -exporting 
countries were just as interested in nuclear power as the main consumers. By 
making greater use of nuclear power, the industrialized countries would undoubtedly 
allow the oil-producing countries to economize their reserves. 
9. His country attached great importance to safety and wholeheartedly supported 
the Agency's activities in that field. The nuclear industry could not afford 
another accident like the one at Three Mile Island without suffering very serious 
consequences. Any delay in the commissioning of a nuclear power plant would have 
a disastrous long-term effect on the energy situation. 
10. Safety matters could not be discussed without mentioning safeguards. As had 
been stated by the Director General, the Agency's safeguards system could be 
effective only if it were universally applied. Drawing the Conference's attention 
to paragraphs 31 and 2,2 of the annual report, his delegation wished to stress that 
Saudi Arabia was ready to sign and ratify NPT if, in accordance with Resolution 34/77 
of the General Assembly of the United Nations, all countries in the Middle East 
agreed to place their nuclear activities under Agency safeguards. Detailed information 
regarding the implementation of the resolutions quoted in those two paragraphs 
should be included in the next annual report. 
11. Two other urgent matters should be considered by the General Conference at its 
present session. The first was the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. 
The Board had still not submitted useful observations to the General Conference, 
His delegation very much regretted such a delay in rendering justice to the areas 
of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia. 
12. The other important matter was the financing of technical assistance. A 
satisfactory solution had to be found since the developing countries regarded that 
question as one of principle. If technical assistance was one of the Agency's 
major functions, and of that there could be no doubt, it should be treated 

GC(XXTV)/OR.226 
page 4 

accordingly and funded from the Regular Budget. Saudi Arabia attached great importance 
to that activity and would continue to contribute more than its due share. 

13. He wished to conclude by recalling the statement he had made at the previous 
regular session of the General Conference, drawing attention to Resolution 33/71 A 
of the General Assembly of the United Nations concerning the transfer of nuclear 
equipment or fissionable material or technology to a certain country. He noted 
with regret from document GC(xXEV)/INF/l91 that the Agency had provided that 
country with direct assistance worth more than US $120 000 in 1979. 
14. Mr. CABALLERO (Cuba) expressed his country's concarn at the non-peaceful 
nuclear activities of countries such as South Africa and Israel. It was because 
of that concern that Cuba supported United Nations General Assembly 
Resolutions 34/89t 34/76 and parts A, E and 0 of Resolution 34/93, which condemned 
the nuclear policies of Israel and South Africa and requested the Secretary-
General to report to the 35th and 36th sessions of the General Assembly on the 
status of nuclear armament in Israel and on the plans and capacity of South Africa 
in the nuclear field. It was no secret to anybody that Israel and South Africa 
were receiving help and co-operation in the matter from certain developed countries 
of the West. That being so, how could one reconcile the repeated assurances of 
those Western countries regarding their adherence to the nuclear non-proliferation 
regime and that veiled co-operation in the nuclear field with Israel and South 
Africa? 
15. As for nuclear weapons, mankind was likewise concerned about the need for 
concluding the SALT II agreement on the limitation of strategic weapons. Deep 
concern was also caused by the plans to deploy new medium-range nuclear weapons 
in Western Europe and by the fresh aggressive steps taken in the Caribbean Sea, 
in the Persian Gulf and in the Indian Ocean involving nuclear-weapon carriers 
and areas containing military bases where they could find shelter. The foregoing 
facte once more showed that before a fair balance could be established between 
the transfer of nuclear technology and international safeguards it was first 
necessary to put an end to the military uses of nuclear energy0 In that context, 
Cuba considered that, for the application of NPT to be more effective, mutual 
trust between the suppliers and the recipients of nuclear technology must be 
developed and strengthened. Genuine progress in that sphere required the 
exercise of political will, persistent efforts and specific measures. Cuba, for 
its part, had recently concluded with the Agency agreements on the application 
of safeguards to the Juragua nuclear power plant and to the reactor of the 

GC(XXIV)/OB.226 
page 5 

Cuban Nuclear Research Institute, and was willing to contribute its utmost to 
the creation and propagation of a climate conducive to international co-operation. 

16. Following the sixth summit conference of non-aligned countries in Havana, the 
first regular meeting of non-aligned co-ordinating countries on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy had been.held in Buenos Aires. Various sectors of cooperation 
in the nuclear field had been identified or explored and an ad hoc committee 
established with a view to carrying on the work between the group's 
meetings. There had also been an exchange of views on the non-aligned countries' 
stand in international bodies and meetings dealing with nuclear matters. 
17» Cuba was making modest but steady progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, and had recently concluded with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics a 
co-operation agreement on the expansion of the Nuclear Research Institute, which 
would have facilities for technical support activities relating to the nuclear 
power plant now under construction, for national production of radioisotopes and 
labelled compounds and for basic research. Also, Cuba was continuing to implement 
sizable training programmes to meet the needs of nuclear power development. At the 
same time, it was offering to other countries belonging to the non-aligned group 
its modest possibilities of co-operation appropriate to its level of nuclear 
development. 

18. As for the financing of technical assistance, he noted that the number and 
worth of technical assistance projects which were technically sound but could not 
be fully financed was tending to grow. The figures - 61 projects amounting to 
more than US $2.5 million - were revealing. Therefore, Cuba could not but endorse 
the proposal requesting the Board of Governors to make a fresh study of the question 
of financing technical assistance and to submit a report on all possible effective 
means of providing such financing. In that context, the Agency should pay particular 
attention to its least developed Member States. Furthermore, he reiterated 
that his country could not approve any initiative purporting to make the provision 
of technical assistance by the Agency conditional on adherence by the recipient 
country to a certain international treaty. Cuba was moreover in favour of striking 
a fair balance between the financing of safeguards and that of technical assistance. 
19. Cuba considered that Member States should have adequate geographical representation 
in the various bodies and activities of the Agency. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 6 

20. Lastly, his country duly appreciated the Agency's contribution to international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It would continue 
to play its part in reconciling the regulation of international transfers of 
nuclear technology with the need to meet the energy requirements of a large part 
of mankind. 
21. Mr. HABASHI (Sudan) said that the world energy crisis which had been 
mounting over the preceding few years was already having retarding effects on 
the economic and social development of many Third World countries, the whole of 
whose export earnings was hardly sufficient to pay for their essential imports 
of fossil fuels. The threat which that trend posed to the very existence of 
such countries was evident. Sudan shared the Director General's view that to 
survive the world needed every advanced form of energy technology, including 
nuclear energy. In that respect, the Agency had a significant role to play, 
which demanded the full support of all Member States. Sudan was pledging its 
full support for the Agency's present and future activities in that direction. 
22. Unfortunately, in the endeavours aimed at overcoming the energy crisis, and 
in all other problems of the present time, the developing countries, especially 
the African countries, were relegated to the role of consumers instead of being 
regarded as full partners. They felt frustrated because their level of development, 
in which they had not had any say until some 20 years ago, was such that they 
needed massive technical assistance to develop their natural and human resources. 
Only a fraction of Africa's potential had been tapped to date. The peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy would certainly help the development of agriculture 
and industry and the protection of the environment. However, the capacities 
of the African countries were quite limited in the sense that it was 
difficult for them to obtain equipment and to maintain what they had. The technical 
assistance which they received to alleviate those problems was not always 
put to the best use because of a lack of co-ordination, the responsibility for 
which lay not only with the countries themselves but also with those who provided 
the assistance, including the international agencies. Since the Agency's 
technical assistance, limited as it was, was financed from voluntary contributions, 
a well-planned programme could not be prepared. The developing countries had 
GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 7 

for years been advocating in vain the inclusion of technical assistance in the 
Regular Budget. They did not intend to be discouraged and would continue to 
appeal to the other Member States to show their goodwill in solving that problem. 

23. Another cause of frustration was that the developing countries, and in particular 
the African countries, were unfairly under-represented in the Board of 
Governors. Every time the issue was raised at the General Conference, it was 
referred to the Board, which was requested to give the matter further consideration 
and to report back to the following session of the Conference. He had 
learnt with regret from the Director General's note (GC(XXIV)/632/Add.l) that 
the Board had merely transmitted to the General Conference the records of its 
debate on the item. The African countries did not intend to yield on that issue 
either, which it was high time to resolve. 
24. Mr. PAPATOFOUIfiS (Cyprus) said that, in adopting the Agency's Statute, 
Member States had undertaken a commitment to increase the contribution of nuclear 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. At a time when the 
international economy was passing through a crisis, the importance of attaining 
those aims - particularly that of enlarging the contribution of nuclear energy 
to international economic life - was all the greater. The Venice Summit had 
declared only recently that the role of nuclear energy had to be increased if 
world energy needs were to be met. 
25. In his statement, the Director General had sounded very pessimistic in 
referring to the paradox of hostility to nuclear energy at a time when oil consumption 
was so high that it threatened to exhaust reserves within a few decades 
and when the rising price of oil was causing grave imbalance in the world 
economy. However, Governments were increasingly aware that energy policies 
should be directed at reducing dependence on oil and had taken measures in that 
direction. At an international level, the World Energy Conference had affirmed 
the need to use nuclear energy in order to reduce oil consumption. The Agency 
thus had an essential role to play in restoring confidence in nuclear power, 
disseminating objective information and stabilizing the world nuclear supply 
system. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 8 

26. Through its -technical assistance programme} the Agency had already accomplished 
a great deal in an area of high priority. While welcoming the target of 
US $1J million for voluntary contributions in 1981 and the indicative planning 
figures of US $16 million and US 319 million for 1982 and 1983 respectively, 
his Government believed that much remained to he done to satisfy the needs of the 
developing countries. 
27. The Agency's safeguards system was the only way of allowing access to nuclear 
techniques and at the same time preventing nuclear weapons proliferation. The 
safeguards implementation report for 1979 stated that no diversion of significant 
quantities of safeguarded material had been detected, and that was very 
encouraging. The Three Mile Island accident had demonstrated that existing 
nuclear power plant safety standards had to he improved at an international level. 
The Agency was very active in that field, as was witnessed by the International 
Conference on Current Huclear Power Plant Safety Issues to be held in Stockholm in 
October. Another welcome development was the recent decision of the Board of 
Governors to establish the Committee on Assurances of Supply, open to all 
Member States. It was to be hoped that the supply mechanisms devised by that 
Committee would correspond to the needs of the developing countries. 

28. The Second HPT Review Conference in Geneva had been disappointing in that 
it had proved impossible to adopt a final declaration but some positive aspects 
had also emerged, particularly the widespread support for HPT and the appeal to 
countries which had not yet signed the Treaty to do so. His Government had 
emphasized the urgency of universal acceptance of the Treaty because it was aware 
of the serious threat posed by proliferation and because it wished to see an end 
to the arms race, which had by now assumed such proportions that it threatened 
the very existence of mankind. The need to conclude a comprehenisve nuclear test 
ban treaty should not be forgotten either; that was all the more justified now 
because verification methods had been greatly improved and because it would help 
to make NPT universally acceptable. Further, the participants at the Review 
Conference had recognized the important role played by the Agency in applying 
the safeguards provided for by HPT. His country, along with others, had expressed 
its confidence in the Agency's safeguards programme, which should be further 
strengthened. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 9 


29. In an interdependent world where each country was both donor and recipient, 
it was dangerous to believe that immediate individual interests justified policies 
which disregarded that interdependence. The international community should use 
the instrument at its disposal, the Agency, and should strengthen its prestige 
through co-operation and understanding so as to make IX a means of ensuring the 
safety, peace and prosperity of all. 
30. Mr. RODRIGUEZ VELIS (Chile) said that his country's election to the 
Board of Governors at the last session of the General Conference had enabled 
it to work more closely with the Agency. 
31. Uranium prospecting activities carried out in Chile with the help of the 
United Hations Development Programme (UHDP) had revealed 34 favourable regions 
in which more detailed studies had already begun. His Government had decided 
to suspend activities relating to the nuclear power project until 1985, but the 
Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission was keeping up to date the technical information 
necessary to take a decision at that time. He thanked the UUDP for the 
assistance it had provided since 1977 in connection with that project. With 
respect to physical metallurgy and pyrometallurgy, the necessary basic laboratory 
equipment had been installed. Experiments on the calcination of concentrates 
carried out in temporary facilities had produced 98$ pure uranium trioxide, 
which was almost the theoretical maximum. Regulations had been drawn up on 
radiological protection, the transport of nuclear materials and the licensing 
and physical protection of facilities. Furthermore, measurements of pollution 
levels over the whole national territory had revealed no abnormalities. As 
was usual, inspections had taken place of equipment and radiation sources 
belonging to users not affiliated to the Commission. 

32. Excellent results had been obtained in the use of radiation to preserve 
foodstuffs and sterilize surgical equipment. Two meetings with experts from 
various countries in the region had taken place, one on radiotherapy, organized 
with the help of the United States National Cancer Institute, and the other on 
nuclear medicine, organized with the help of the University of California. 
Chilean experts had presented twenty original papers to various congresses and 
seminars. They had also worked with the institutes of other countries particularly 
universities — on research and experimental projects. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 10 

33. His Government thanked the Agency for its valuable co-operation, particularly 
in uranium prospecting, manpower training and the provision of expert services 
and equipment; it also supported the Agency's non-proliferation, safeguards and 
technical assistance activities. 
34. He hoped that resources would in future he distributed more justly between 
technical assistance and safeguards. Once again, delegations had debated the 
financing of technical assistance in the Board of Governors: on the one hand, 
the developing countries were fighting to secure equitable targets, while on the 
other, the main donor countries opposed any real increase in those targets. It 
seemed as though one group was asking but giving nothing, while the other gave 
and received nothing in return. In reality, however, all countries participated 
in technical assistance in accordance with their means and all benefited from it: 
some because they could thus partially finance certain projects and others 
because they could see new outlets opening up for their technology. His delegation 
felt that the indicative planning figures would not satisfy requests for 
technical assistance, as the increase in the target, although seemingly high, in 
fact represented no growth in technical assistance in real terms. Nonetheless, 
the technical assistance provided by the Agency, especially in the form of 
expert services and fellowships, was of enormous value to the developing countries, 
who greatly appreciated it. 

35. He welcomed the creation of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS). In 
allowing developing countries access to the most modern techniques and equipment 
under fair conditions and under arrangements in which both suppliers and buyers 
had confidence, the Committee would do much to reduce the gap separating those 
countries from the developed ones. He was sure that the Committee would put to 
good use all the information gathered during the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle 
Evaluation (INPCE). 
36. His country would in 1981 again put its material and human resources at the 
disposal of Member States, acting as host to training courses and study tours 
aimed particularly at nationals of other developing countries. It had begun in 
1980 to make a special contribution in the form of fellowships for trainees from 
the least developed countries in the region to study nuclear techniques. Finally, 
he thanked those countries which had given their support to the Chilean programme. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 11 

37. Mr. KOREF (Panama) said that the Agency had given Panama valuable help 
for the utilization of nuclear energy in medicine and agriculture and the study of 
its energy needs. A mission sent by the Agency for that purpose had recommended 
that the Government concentrate on developing all its water-power resources for 
the generation of electricity, indicating that Panama could give itself until the 
year 2000 to build up the infrastructure and train the personnel necessary for 
the construction of nuclear plants. 
38. Like other delegations, the Panama delegation was extremely concerned about 
the failure of various recent international meetings to reach a consensus or 
agreement on questions of great importance. One notable example was the Second 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, the outcome of which could have dramatic consequences for the 
whole world. It was to be hoped that "the spirit of Vienna" would enable the 
outstanding issues to be resolved. The key problem, and one which was more 
urgent than ever, was that of reducing nuclear weapons and transferring nuclear 
techniques to the developing countries lacking adequate national energy resources; 
it was also necessary to guarantee those countries sufficient financial aid on 
favourable terms for the construction and operation of nuclear plants. The 
countries in question had considerable debts, the servicing of which could mean 
economic ruin. Panama had been able to count on fraternal aid from Venezuela 
with respect to oil imports, but not all countries were in such a fortunate 
position. 
39» The Board of Governors had finally reached a consensus on the financing of 
technical assistance for the years ahead. Nonetheless, it was still necessary 
to improve on the system of annual negotiations, especially as assistance to 
the developing countries, one of the Agency's main functions, met an urgent need 
for those countries which were potentially very important markets for the 
industrialized countries. The Panama delegation welcomed the fact that countries 
possessing safeguarded nuclear facilities were prepared to pay most of the costs 
of applying safeguards, but felt that those countries should also pay all the 
administrative costs. 

40. Panama had taken part in the discussions which had led to the formulation of 
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, as it wanted all 
nuclear material passing through the Panama Canal to be fully protected. It 
accordingly requested all countries involved in the transport of such materials 
to sign the Convention. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 12 

41. Mr. PAK HYENO GYP (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) felt that in 
1979 the Agency had satisfactorily performed its task of increasing the 
contribution made by atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity. Despite 

certain difficulties, the development of nuclear energy had progressed throughout 
the world during the past year. The Agency had contributed to that progress, 
notably through the measures it was taking to ensure the safety of nuclear plants 
and nuclear fuel cycle facilities. The Agency's work with respect to the utilization 
of isotopes and radiation was also helping to promote the use of nuclear 
techniques in the developing countries. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea 

fully supported the Agency's scientific and technical activities. 

42. Under the Statute, technical assistance constituted the Agency's main activity. 
It was deplorable that some countries were attempting to turn accession to the 
Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons into a pre-condition for 
receiving technical assistance from the Agency. Such an attitude was contrary to 
the spirit of the Agency's Statute, in particular Article III.C thereof. Over the 
past few years the resources made available for technical assistance had increased 
but they were still insufficient. It was necessary, therefore, to support all 
measures aimed at giving better guarantees of resources for the technical assistance 
programme. The delegation of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea approved 
the target of US 813 million set for the Technical Assistance Fund for 1981 and 
announced that its Government would pay its contribution, 
43» The construction of socialism in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
was accompanied by scientific research work on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Similarly, broad utilization of nuclear techniques in industry, agriculture, 
medicine and other fields was to serve as a basis for the country's nuclear power 

industry. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was able to draw on abundant 

coal and hydroelectric power resources. In 1984 electricity production should 
reach 56-6O thousand million kWh and coal production 70-80 million tonnes. 
However, rapid economic growth meant that it was necessary to harness new energy 

sources, the most important of which was nuclear energy. Consequently, the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea was concentrating on training specialists 

in that area. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 13 

44» The people of Korea were all hoping fervently for an end to the tension on 
the Korean peninsula and the re-unification of a country which had been divided 
for over 35 years. Five years had already passed since the United Nations 
General Assembly at its 30th session had adopted a Resolution under which all 
foreign armies were to withdraw from South Korea. However, the United States had 
not only failed to withdraw from the peninsula, but had actually increased its 
military potential, and its nuclear stockpiles, in particular. The potential of 
its nuclear stockpiles in South Korea was one thousand times greater than the 
equivalent of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs. The new leaders of the South, 
brought to power at the instigation of the United States of America, continued to 
stir up antagonism between the North and the South. The resulting aggravation 
of tension on the Korean peninsula was endangering peace not only in Korea, but 
throughout Asia and the entire world. In conclusion, he once again stated that 
the United States of America must withdraw its armed forces, with their nuclear 
weapons, from South Korea in accordance with the Resolution of the United Nations 
General Assembly. 

45« Mr. SHIN (Republic of Korea) declared that the insulting remarks made 
by the delegate of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea concerning his 

country were groundless. Such political remarks were particularly out of place 
in the Agency, which was a technical organization set up to promote the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 

46. Mr. KIRK (United States of America) also rejected the accusations 
levelled by the delegate of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which were 
totally unjustified and particularly out of place in the Agency. 
47. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) recalled that, since the last 
session of the General Conference, the two most important events in the nuclear 
field had been the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation and the Second 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons. INFCE had shown that regional nuclear fuel cycle centres could help to 
guarantee the supply of nuclear materials and equipment and also that of fuel 
cycle services. The newly formed Committee on Assurances of Supply would also be 
seeking ways of promoting the development of co-operation with respect to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and of strengthening non-proliferation controls. 
The delegation of the German Democratic Republic was prepared to take an active 
part in the work of that Committee. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 14 


48. While the Second HPT Heview Conference had brought to light differences of 
opinion on certain points, it had also shown that HPT had, in the course of a 
decade, become a reality of international life which was especially important as 
it could make a positive contribution towards enhancing peace and security. Far 
from hampering the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, universal 
accession to HPT would create conditions which were far more conducive to the 
development of international scientific and technical co-operation and the 
provision of assistance to developing countries. The Review Conference had felt 
that the Agency had admirably performed its task of ensuring that certain 
provisions of NPT were implemented, and it had recognized that the Agency's role 
had evolved as the amounts of nuclear material and the complexity of facilities 
subject to safeguards increased. The German Democratic Republic considered that 
placing all the nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States under safeguards 
would strengthen confidence and help foster international co-operation. On the 
other hand, it shared the views of many delegations regarding collaboration in 
the nuclear field with the racist regimes of South Africa and Israel. 
49. Turning to the documents submitted annually to the General Conference, the 
delegation of the German Democratic Republic felt that the activities foreseen in 
the programme for 1981-86 under the headings of technical assistance, safeguards 
and nuclear safety were well balanced. 
50. Regarding nuclear safety, during the past year the Agency had taken all 
necessary measures and, in particular, had co-operated closely with a great many 
Member States in its Nuclear Safety Standards Programme and on the question of 
waste management and disposal. As the World Energy Conference had emphasized, it 
was essential to find a solution to the problems presented by the production of 
nuclear power. And nuclear power was of paramount importance, particularly for 
the German Democratic Republic, which planned to increase its installed capacity 
in close collaboration with the Soviet Union and other member countries of the 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance. The conclusion, under the auspices of the 
Agency, of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, which 
the German Democratic Republic had signed, was an important step towards 
increased safety and security. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.226 
page 15 

51. Concerning safeguards, the German Democratic Republic was pleased that no 
anomalies indicating the diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear 
material had been detected in 1979« The Safeguards Implementation Report for 1979 
noted the improvements made to the system, but the goal of inspections had not yet 
been attained to the extent required, especially in certain major facilities. The 
measures to be taken were largely dependent on the Agency's Member States, which 
should try to collaborate even more closely with the Agency than they had in the 
past. The German Democratic Republic considered it its duty to fulfil all its 
obligations under the safeguards agreement it had concluded with the Agency, and 
would continue to lend its full support to the Agency's work. 
52. The German Democratic Republic also attached very great importance to the 
technical assistance programme and would be increasing its voluntary contribution 
to the Technical Assistance Fund to 325 000 marks in 1981. For that programme to 
be effective, it was not enough that the Agency should have adequate funds; it 
was also essential that the administrative and organizational problems presented 
by technical assistance should be resolved, and that depended on the Agency as 
much as on the donor and recipient countries. Technical assistance should be 
adapted to the true needs of the countries receiving it. It should be borne in 
mind that the Agency was providing assistance not only under its technical 
assistance programme: the thrust of all its technical activities went in that 
direction. In that regard, he stressed the value of the International Nuclear 
Information System (IHIS), which benefited all Member States and showed how the 
problem of disseminating information could be tackled economically and effectively. 
53. For 23 years, the Agency had successfully been working to reconcile its two 
essential functions of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and applying 
controls to prevent those applications from being diverted for military purposes. 
Since nuclear energy was assuming ever greater importance, it was vital that all 
Member States should co-operate to create a climate of mutual trust in which the 
uses of nuclear energy could be developed for the benefit of all, and particularly 
the developing countries, in conditions which prevented any diversion for 
military purposes. That climate of peace and trust could only be created if 
States strove harder to achieve dStente and strengthen peace. The international 
community should therefore oppose the arms race, which was intensified by the 
development of new nuclear weapons and strategies. In that connection, he cited 
the appeal made by the Heads of Government of the Warsaw Pact Member States, who 

GC(XXIV)/OR.226 


page 16 


had declared themselves in favour of ratifying the SALT II agreements and swiftly 
concluding negotiations on a general and complete prohibition of nuclear weapon 
tests, on the prohibition of radiological weapons and on the guarantees to be 
accorded to non-nuclear-weapon States. It was also important to begin negotiations 
with a view to ending the manufacture of nuclear weapons, gradually reducing 
stockpiles and prohibiting the development of weapons of mass destruction. 

54. The Government of the German Democratic Republic was convinced that through 
such measures it would be possible to strengthen peace, freedom, national 
independence and social progress in the 1980s, in accordance with the aspirations 
of the whole of mankind. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERHORS (GC(XXIV)/628, 636) 

55. The PKSSIBEMT reminded the Conference that 11 Members had to be elected 
to the Board from the geographic areas specified in paragraph 2 of document 
GC(XXIV)/636 to ensure that the Board was constituted in accordance with 
Article VI.A of the Statute. 
56. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Mexican delegation and 
a member of the Swiss delegation acted as tellers . 
57. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members of the Board of 
Governors. 
The meeting rose at 12.35 P.m. 


GC(XXIV)/OR.227 
March 1981* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FOURTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1980 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 26 September 1980, at 3.20 p.m. 


President; Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 


CONTENTS 


14 Election of Members to the Board of 
Governors (continued) 1-17 


15 Report on voluntary contributions pledged 
to the Technical Assistance Fund for 1981 18 - 19 


- 
Report by the Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole on the following itemss 20 - 40 
The Agency's accounts for 1979 
The Agency's programme for 1981-86 

and budget for 1981 
The financing of technical assistance 
The financing of safeguards 
Scale of assessment of Members1 

contributions for 1981 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute 

- 
Closing of the session 41 - 50 
* A provisional version of this document was issued on 2 October 1980, 
**/ GC(XXIV)/637. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
documents GC(XXIV)/INF/l93/Rev.3, 193/Rev.3/Mod.1 and 193/Rev.3/Mod,2. 

80-6303 


GC(XXIV)/OR.227 
page 2 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXIV)/636) (continued) 

1. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of the 
voting which had taken place at the preceding meeting. 
2. The result of the election of three Members from the area of Latin America 
was as follows; 
Abstentions; 22 
Valid votes; 220 
Required majority; 37 
Votes obtained; 


Peru 75 
Argentina 74 
Uruguay 71 


3. Having obtained the required ma,iorityt Peru, Argentina and Uruguay were 
elected to the Board. 
4. The result of the election of two Members from the Area of Western Europe 
was as follows; 
Abstentions; 15 
Valid votes; 147 
Required majority; 37 
Votes obtained; 


Sweden 74 
Turkey 73 


5. Having obtained the required majority, Sweden and Turkey were elected to 
the Board. 
6. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Eastern Europe 
was as follows; 
Abstentions; 8 
Valid votes; 73 
Required majority; 37 
Votes obtained; 


Poland 73 

7. Having obtained the required majority, Poland was elected to the Board. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.227 
page 3 

8. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was as 
follows; 
Abstentions: 13 
Valid votes; 149 
Required majority: 38 
Votes obtained: 


Nigeria 76 
Sudan 73 


9. Having obtained the required majority, Nigeria and Sudan were elected to 
the Board. 
10. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes; 72 
Required majority: 37 
Votes obtained: 


Iraq 72 

11. Having obtained the required majority, Iraq was elected to the Board. 
12. The result of the election of one Member from the area of South East Asia 
and the Pacific was as follows: 
Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes; 72 
Required majority; 37 
Votes obtained: 


Malaysia 72 

13. Having obtained the required majority. Malaysia was elected to the Board. 
14. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Africa or of the 
Middle East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific was as follows: 
Abstentions: 7 
Valid votes: 74 
Required majority: 38 



GC(XXIV)/OR.227 

page 4 

Votes obtained; 

Lebanon 74 

15• Having obtained the required majority, Lebanon was elected to the Board. 

16. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, recalled 
that under Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold office from the end of the 
current session until the end of the twenty-sixth regular session of the General 
Conference, i.e. for a period of two years. 
17* He thanked the delegations of Mexico and Switzerland, which had provided 

tellers, the two tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistants. 

REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FUND TOR 
1981 (GC(XXIV)/635/Rev.4) 

18. The PRESIDENT stated that by 6 p.m. on 25 September 1980, 48 Member 
States had pledged voluntary contributions amounting to US 19 469 663, to which 
had to be added pledges of $1300 by Mongolia, J1300 by Niger, 8I5O 602 by Poland 
and $27 300 by Romania, making a total of $9 650 I65. Because of the dates 
fixed for the adoption of their national budgets, some Member States were not yet 
able to pledge their contributions but would do so at a later stage. 
19. It was encouraging that the pledges so far amounted to 74.23$ of the target 
figure, the highest ever achieved at any session. He hoped that Member States 
which had not yet pledged their voluntary contributions would do so at their 
earliest convenience, for which purpose they should get in touch with the Agency 
Secretariat. Finally, it was to be hoped that developed countries would make 
voluntary contributions in amounts corresponding at least to their base rates of 
assessment. 
HEPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

20. Mr. SIAZON (Philippines), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the Committee's report on items 7, 8, 9» 10, 11 and 12 of the agenda, 
which had been referred to it by the General Conference for examination. 
21. In connection with the Agency's accounts for 1979 (item 7 of the agenda), 
the Committee recommended that the Conference should adopt the draft resolution 
contained in Part I of document GC(XXIV)/629. 
GC(XXIV)/OR.227 
page 5 

22. With regard to item 8, the Agency's programme for 1981-86 and budget for 
1981, the Committee recommended that the Conference should adopt the three draft 
resolutions contained in Annex VI to document GC(XXIV)/630. 
23. Many of the representatives who had spoken on the subject had welcomed the 
fact that the budget for 1981 provided for near-zero real growth in the Agency's 
activities as compared with 1980, but several had felt that near-zero real 
growth would in the long run impair certain important promotional activities and 
had expressed the hope that a balance could be achieved between the Agency's 
regulatory and promotional activities. The importance of the Agency's technical 
assistance activities had been emphasized by almost all speakers. 
24. Considerable attention had been paid to the preliminary estimates for 1982 
and 1983i which many had considered to be too high. However, the Secretariat 
had pointed out that the projections for 1982 and 1983 provided for an increase 
to cover inflation only. Some speakers had expressed themselves in favour of 
continuing efforts to keep real growth at the near-zero level, while others had 
felt that a resumption of real growth after 1981 would be essential. 
25. Concern about the level of administrative costs, especially those connected 
with the running of the Vienna International Centre (VIC), had been widely 
expressed, and the Director General had been urged to do all in his power to keep 
administrative costs to a minimum. 
26. The Director General and his staff had been commended on the presentation 
of the six-year programme and the 1981 budget and on the efforts which had 
obviously gone into their preparation. 
27. Concerning item 9t *n e financing of technical assistance, the Committee 
recommended that the Conference should take note of the report by the Board of 
Governors contained in document GC(XXIV)/63l/Rev.l and of the documentation 
annexed to document GC(XXIV)/631 and that, recalling General Conference 
Resolution GC(XXIII)/REs/368, it should request the Board of Governors to continue 
studying the matter of the financing of technical assistance and to report 
to the General Conference at its twenty-fifth regular session on all possible 
effective means to assure the financing of technical assistance. 
28. In that connection, the recommendation by the Board of indicative figures 
for future years had been generally welcomed as a means of providing a sounder 

0C(XXIV)/OR.227 

page 6 

basis for technical assistance planning. However, some Committee members had 

said that the recommendation of indicative planning figures was in itself not a 

complete solution to the problem of technical assistance financing. On the 

question of financing technical assistance from the Regular Budget, opposing 

views had been expressed in the Committee. 

29. Concerning item 10, the financing of safeguards, the Committee recommended 
that the General Conference should adopt the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XHV)/633. The discussion had focused on the question of cost allocation; 
several representatives had urged in particular that supporting costs of 
administration and general services and VIC operating costs should be allocated 
to the Agency's safeguards programme. However, other representatives had stated 
that they could only agree to the resolution on the understanding that further 
cost allocation to the safeguards programme would not be considered before 1983. 
30. With respect to item 11, the scale of assessment of Members* contributions 
for 1981, the Committee recommended that the Conference should adopt the draft 
resolution set forth in document GC(XXIV)/634. 
31 • Regarding item 12, amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, the Committee 
recommended that the Conference should adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXIV)/639« The representatives of several African countries had 
stated that they would maintain the proposal whereby three additional seats on 
the Board would be created for the area of Africa. In addition, it was made 
clear in the Committee that adoption of a resolution relating to Article VI.A.2 
would not prevent the Board from considering Article VI as a whole. 

32. The PRESIDENT thanked the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and 
suggested that the draft resolutions and proposals relating to the items of the 
agenda that had been referred to the Committee could now be considered by the 
General Conference with a view to their adoption. 
33» It was so agreed. 

The Agency's accounts for 1979 

34» The draft resolution contained in Part I of document GC(XXIV)/629 was adopted. 

The Agency's programme for 198I-86 and budget for 1981 

35» The draft resolutions contained in Annex VI to document GC(XXIV)/630 were 
adopted. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.227 
page 7 

The financing of technical assistance 

36. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference would agree to endorse the 
recommendations presented by the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole concerning 
the financing of technical assistance. 
37. It was so agreed. 
The financing of safeguards 

38. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIV)/633 was adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1981 

39* The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIV)/634 was adopted. 

Amendment of Article VI .A.2 of the Statute 

40. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIV)/639 was adopted. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

41. Mr. DALAL (India), speaking on behalf of the countries belonging to the 
area of the Middle East and South Asia, thanked the President for his wise leadership 
and expressed his gratitude to the Austrian Government and people for their 
hospitality. 
42. Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada), speaking for the countries of North America, 
paid tribute to the President for the efficient and even-handed manner in which 
he had conducted the discussions. He thanked the host country for helping to 
make the Conference enjoyable and successful. 
43. Mr. KBNYERES (Hungary), acting as spokesman for the countries of 
Eastern Europe, thanked the President for his patient, wise and efficient guidance 
and commented on the spirit of mutual understanding and co-operation in which the 
session had been held. 
44. Mr. GARCfA-LO>EZ SANTAOLALLA (Mexico), on behalf of the countries of 
Latin America, commended the President for the skill he had shown in guiding the 
deliberations to a successful conclusion. He congratulated the new Members of 
the Board of Governors and thanked the Austrian Government for extending such 
generous hospitality. 

GC(XXIV)/OR.227 
page 8 

45. Mr. XOTO (Thailand) said that the countries of South East Asia and the 
Pacific were most impressed by the success of the twenty-fourth session, which 
was due in large measure to the President's able leadership and guidance. He 
wished to convey his appreciation to the Austrian Government and people for 
according the delegates such a warm welcome. 
46. Mr. MALU wa KALEHGA (Zaire) wished to thank the President, on behalf of 
the countries of Africa, for his effective guidance, and the host country for the 
hospitality it had shown. 
47« Mr. YAMATO (japan), speaking on behalf of the countries of the Par East, 
paid tribute to the President for his astute guidance. His Government believed 
that with such effective leadership the Agency would succeed in strengthening its 
role and increasing co-operation among its Member States. 

48. Mr0 GOLDSCHMIDT (Prance), as spokesman for Western Europe, referred to 
the spirit of co-operation and mutual understanding in which, thanks largely to 
the President's calm leadership, the session had taken place. He commented on the 
fact that it was Hahn and Strassmann, compatriots of the President, who had discovered 
uranium fission, without which the Agency would not have come into being. 
49. The PRESIDENT thanked all the delegates for their kind words and expressed 
his gratitude to the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, the Chairman 
of the General Committee, the Director General and the Secretariat, and to all 
participants, for their help in making the twenty-fourth session a success. 
Before closing the session, he invited all those present to observe a minute's 
silence for prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

5O0 The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-fourth session of the General 
Conference closed. 

The meeting rose at 4»5 P»mo 


