CC(XXV)/OR.228 
January 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 21 September 1981, at 10.40 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) 
President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** 
Pars tg'raphs 
Opening of the session 1 4 
Election of the President 5 -24 
Election of officers and appointment of the 
General Committee 25 — 28 
Application for membership of the Agency 29 -40 
Message from the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations 41 — 46 
Statement by the Director General 47 88 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 24 September 1981, 
**/ GC(XXV)/640. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


81-6469 



GC(XXV)/OR.228 


page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the twenty-fifth regular session 
of the General Conference open. 


2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed the delegates, observers, 
representatives of the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and 
representatives of other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. 
He expressed his gratitude to the Government of Austria for once again making 
available the Hofburg Palace. He also thanked everyone present for the cooperation 
they had extended to him during his period of service as President 
of the General Conference at its twenty-fourth session and expressed his 
Government's appreciation for the tributes paid to his country on that 
occasion. 
4. The Agency had played an important role for almost a quarter of a century 
in fostering the peaceful uses of atomic energy and had assumed a central 
role in international nuclear relations. He expressed his confidence that 
it would successfully continue in that role. Recent events had confronted 
the Agency with some difficulties, to be sure, but he firmly believed that 
with the co-operation of Member States those difficulties could be overcome. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
6. Mr. GEORGE (Australia) said that, on behalf of the South-East Asia 
and the Pacific regional group, he had great pleasure in proposing Mr. Xuto, 
delegate of Thailand, as President of the twenty-fifth regular session of the 
General Conference. Mr. Xuto had long experience of international affairs 
and had participated actively in a wide range of international conferences. 
The current session of the Conference had before it a number of issues 
discussion of which needed the guidance of a person possessing Mr. Xuto's 
wisdom, objectivity and experience. 
GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 3 


7. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77, 
seconded the nomination of Mr. Xuto. The ability which Mr. Xuto had demonstrated 
as Chairman of the Group of 77 and his reputation as a fair negotiator 
would be an asset for the Conference. 
8. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America), on behalf of the North America 
regional group, Mr. VAN BARNEVELD KOOY (Netherlands), on behalf of the Western 
Europe regional group, and Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic), on behalf 
of the Eastern Europe regional group, supported the nomination. 
9. Mr. Xuto (Thailand) was elected President of the General Conference 
for its twenty-fifth regular session by acclamation. 
10. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, congratulating Mr. Xuto on his election, 
said that his experience and skill would certainly stand him in good stead 
in conducting the business of the Conference. 
Mr. Xuto (Thailand) took the Chair. 


11. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for electing him as President 
of the General Conference and expressed his appreciation to the delegate of 
Australia for his kind words and also to the delegates of Tunisia, the United 
States, the Netherlands and the German Democratic Republic for their support. 
12. In taking the chair he was aware of the high standard set by so many 
outstanding predecessors, in particular Mr. Haunschild, who had presided over 
the Conference's deliberations at its twenty-fourth session. On behalf of 
all the delegates he wished to express his appreciation to Mr. Haunschild 
for the able manner in which he had guided the business of the Conference 
the previous year. 


13. The fact that it was the twenty-fifth session reminded everyone that 
the Agency had completed almost a quarter of a century of its existence. 
It was time to reappraise the Agency's work and judge how it had fulfilled 
the objectives for which it had been established. 

GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 4 


14. United Nations General Assembly resolution 810, adopted at its ninth session, 
had clearly laid down the aims and purposes of the Agency as well as the cardinal 
principles which had led to its establishment. The United Nations had expressed 
a belief that the benefits arising from the momentous discovery of atomic energy 
should be placed at the service of mankind. The aim had been to promote the use 
of atomic energy so that it would serve only the peaceful pursuits and ameliorate 
the living conditions of mankind. The United Nations had recognized the importance 
and the urgency of international co-operation in developing and expanding 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy to assist in removing the burdens of hunger, 
poverty and disease. It had also expressed its belief that all nations should 
co-operate in promoting the dissemination of knowledge in the realm of nuclear 
technology for peaceful ends. 


15. Thus, the Agency's primary mission was to seek to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world. The Agency had carried out that mission mainly through its technical 
assistance programme, and had gradually become the organization through which 
countries preparing to embark on nuclear power programmes or to use nuclear 
techniques in particular fields could obtain the help of highly qualified 
experts, acquire scientific equipment and impartial advice, and participate in 
advanced scientific and technical activities. 
16. The past 25 years had witnessed enormous changes on the international scene. 
Increasing numbers of developing countries had made significant strides in the 
use of peaceful nuclear technology and its application to their development. 
In that connection, the Agency had a clear role. Being a multilateral development 
institution, it must work for the benefit of mankind as a whole. Since 
the majority of mankind lived in the developing world, it was precisely there 
that the Agency should focus its primary attention. 


17. Developing countries had their aspirations as well as legitimate interests 
and concerns. Their efforts towards development could never succeed unless and 
until some of the fundamental disparities were eliminated - equitably and 
expeditiously - at the international level. 
18. The establishment of a New International Economic Order must take account 
of energy problems, and in particular the use of nuclear power in overcoming the 
energy crisis which had seriously affected the developing world. He agreed with 
GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 5 


the Director General's view that nuclear energy could make a substantial contri


bution by providing a cheap and reliable source of energy. 


19. With almost 25 years behind it, the time had come for the Agency to chart 
a new path to meet new challenges. As part of the global effort to restructure 
world society on the basis of equity, partnership, and community of interests, 
the Agency had an important role to play. 
20. In its management, the Agency should make fuller use of the growing 
technical competence of the developing areas of the world and the contributions 
they were now able to make. In fulfilling its mission, the Agency should be in 
a position to secure substantial increases in its resources so that it could 
meet the ever-growing needs of developing countries: to that end it should 
expand its promotional activities at least as much as its safeguards activities, 
which continued to be of the utmost importance for reducing the risk of nuclear 
proliferation and hence were of interest to all nations. Everyone should 
recognize that technical assistance and safeguards were the two main pillars of 
the Agency and deserved equal emphasis. 
21. Delegates were no doubt aware that the present session of the General 
Conference was of particular importance and that the deliberations might be 
long and difficult. The debate on the Board's annual report would provide an 
opportunity for reviewing developments in the field of atomic energy throughout 
the world and the main problems which Member States had encountered in that field 
together with the solutions envisaged. One must hope that in discussing the 
budget, and in its search for ways and means of financing technical assistance, 
the Conference would be able to reach a consensus which would make the session 
a milestone as the Agency entered its silver jubilee year. 


22. One of the important matters which the General Conference would have to 
consider was the implications of the situation created by the military attack on 
the Iraqi nuclear research centre in June, which constituted an unprecedented 
challenge to the Agency and to each of its Members and could seriously affect 
the very foundations of international nuclear trade. He fervently hoped that 
the Conference would arrive at a solution which would reinforce the efficiency 
of the agency and strengthen confidence in Agency safeguards and international 
co-operation aimed at promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 6 


23. The process of choosing a new Director General had also served to focus 
attention on the deep-seated problems resulting from the vast changes in the 
international landscape. The appointment of the new Director General by consensus 
would certainly contribute to strengthening the foundations of international 
co-operation, which was essential not only for the Agency but also for 
the world at large. 
24. In conclusion, he appealed to all delegates to demonstrate a sense of 
responsibility and to help in finding positive solutions to the extremely 
difficult problems before them. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


25. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rules 34 and 40 of its Rules of 
Procedure, the General Conference had to elect, on proposals of the President, 
eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and five 
additional members of the General Committee. Following consultations which 
had been held between representatives of the eight geographical areas, he 
proposed that the delegates of the following Member States be elected as Vice-
Presidents of the General Conference: Canada, Ecuador, France, Hungary, Iraq, 
Japan, Nigeria and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 
26. He further proposed Mr. Dalai, the alternate to the delegate of India, as 
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and the delegates of the following 
States as additional members of the General Committee: Algeria, Czechoslovakia, 
Peru, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United 
States of America. 
27. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
28. The General Committee was thus duly appointed. 
APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(XXV)/641) 


29. The PRESIDENT said that the General Conference had before it document 
GC(XXV)/641, referring to an application for membership of the Agency by 
the Government of Zimbabwe. He asked for delegates' comments on that application. 
GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 7 


30. Mr. AGIOBU-KEMMER (Nigeria) said that it was a privilege to be able to 
approve Zimbabwe's application for membership. With its application Zimbabwe 
had demonstrated very soon after becoming independent that it shared the desire 
of many developing countries, especially African ones, to have access through 
the Agency to the peaceful uses of nuclear technology for power production and 
other purposes and thereby to raise its standard .of living. After a long and 
hard struggle Zimbabwe had gained independence and had already proved itself a 
responsible member of the international community. Its short history as a 
nation showed how people of different cultures and backgrounds could live in 
peace and concord. Zimbabwe would certainly prove to be a worthy Member of the 
Agency and Nigeria strongly recommended that the General Conference approve 
Zimbabwe's application by acclamation. 
31. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America), speaking on behalf of the North 
American group, approved Zimbabwe's application for membership. His delegation 
had welcomed the opportunity of participating in the decision of the Board of 
Governors to approve by acclamation the recommendation in respect of Zimbabwe's 
membership. In his opinion the Government of Zimbabwe fully met the criteria 
for membership laid down in the Statute. 
32. Mr. CALISTO VARELA (Ecuador), speaking on behalf of the Latin American 
group, approved Zimbabwe's application for membership. He firmly believed that 
Zimbabwe's participation in the Agency's work would be most valuable; African 
countries would in the future be playing an increasingly important role in the 
development of nuclear energy. 
33. Mr. MANLEY (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), 
speaking on behalf of the member countries of the European Community and the 
Western Europe group, strongly supported Zimbabwe's application for membership. 
The United Kingdom, which had close ties with Zimbabwe, would particularly 
welcome it as an Agency Member State. At the Board's meetings in June the 
delegation of Nigeria had declared that Zimbabwe was fully able to absorb 
nuclear technology. The United Kingdom delegation shared that view and believed 
that Zimbabwe would not only benefit from the Agency's technical assistance but 
would also make a valuable contribution to the Agency's work as a whole. 

GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 8 


Zimbabwe had already shown that it was determined to play a full and responsible 


role in the international community; its prompt application for membership 
would be welcomed by all who supported international efforts aimed at making 
nuclear energy available for peaceful purposes, and by all who wished to see 
science and technology develop in Africa. 


34. Mr. OSZTROVSZKY (Hungary), on behalf of the Eastern Europe group, gave 
his full support to the proposed admission of Zimbabwe as an Agency Member State 
Zimbabwe had emerged as a nation from a long and complex struggle and had 
managed to cast off the yoke of colonialism. As an Agency Member State it 
would be able to use atomic energy for peaceful purposes which would contribute 
to its spiritual and economic development. 
35. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), speaking on behalf of the countries of the Middle 
East and South Asia, warmly welcomed Zimbabwe's application for membership. 
Zimbabwe, whose struggle for independence had been admired by many, would beyond 
any doubt make a valuable contribution to the Agency's work; moreover, 
Zimbabwe would doubtless assist its fellow developing countries by endeavouring 
to ensure that their rights to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes were 
respected. 
36. Mr. GEORGE (Australia), speaking on behalf of the South East Asia and 
Pacific group, strongly supported Zimbabwe's application for membership. He 
was confident that Zimbabwe would make a useful and constructive contribution 
to the work of the Agency. Australia and Zimbabwe had close and cordial links 
in addition to those arising out of their membership of the Commonwealth; 
indeed, Australia had been privileged to participate in some of the arrangements 
that had led up to Zimbabwe's independence. The countries of South East Asia 
and the Pacific well understood the aspirations embodied in Zimbabwe's decision 
to joint the Agency and thereby to benefit from technical assistance, which 
would contribute to its development and prosperity. 
37. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to adopt the 
draft resolution in paragraph 2 of document GC(XXV)/641. 
GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 9 


39. Mr. CHIVIYA (Zimbabwe) said he wished to express his Government's 
gratitude to the Agency's Member States for approving Zimbabwe's application for 
membership. Zimbabwe intended to participate fully in all the Agency's 
activities, believing as it did that the development and utilization of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes would contribute to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. 
40. The energy crisis had affected both developed and developing countries, but 
the latter had had to face more serious difficulties than the former as a result 
of the higher cost of energy. The desire to solve that problem in an equitable 
fashion had led to the holding in August 1981 of the United Nations Conference 
on New and Renewable Sources of Energy. Although the Conference had not discussed 
nuclear power, the nuclear contribution to world electricity requirements 
was already considerable. Twenty-three countries, including seven developing 
countries, now used nuclear power, and those figures would increase as plants 
currently under construction began to operate. However, nuclear power was being 
challenged by some members of the public on grounds of safety, environmental 
effects, international security, economics and social and political implications. 
All the issues involved were fundamental concerns of the Agency, and his small 
country, Zimbabwe, would play a positive role with a view to achieving a peaceful 
and equitable international energy order. 

GC(XXV)/OR.228 


page 10 


MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


4^ The PRESIDENT welcomed the representative of the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations, Mr. Mowaffak Allaf, and invited him to take the floor. 


42. Mr. MOWAFFAK ALLAF said he wished to convey a message to the General 
Conference from the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. 
43. Developments during the past year had once again focused attention on the 
central role assigned to the Agency by the world community in the continuing 
effort to extend the benefits of the peaceful application of nuclear energy without 
increasing the risk of spreading nuclear weapons. The safeguards system administered 
by the Agency was a vital element in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Recent events had underscored the need to defend 
the integrity and effectiveness of that system. But although the safeguards 
system was at the heart of the non-proliferation regime, that regime contained 
other components as well, including institutional arrangements. One of the most 
urgent tasks facing the entire international community was to extend and strengthen 
the entire regime so as to erect a reliable barrier against proliferation and 
thus establish a truly world-wide system which would be generally accepted and 
uniformly and fairly administered. Only then could the world live with the 
assurance that the possibility of the spread of nuclear weapons had been 
effectively eliminated. 


44_ It was natural that the world's growing energy requirements should result 


in an increasing demand for nuclear energy and for the developing countries to 
have access to it. At the same time, the need for efforts to enhance public 
acceptability, including safety assurances, remained imperative. There had 
been an increase in installed nuclear capacity in only a small number of 
industrial countries. At present, most developing countries chose not to have 
recourse to nuclear power in meeting their energy requirements. That was 
probably due to a variety of causes, among them the very high capital cost 
involved. As all were aware, the General Assembly had decided to convene, in 


1983, the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Cooperation 
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. The discussion in that 
forum of the role of nuclear energy, especially in the developing countries, 
could have an important bearing on the Agency's work in fulfilling a vital 
function in that field. 


GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 11 


45. He wished, in conclusion, to express his appreciation for the close cooperation 
which he had enjoyed with the Director General of the Agency over 
the past ten years. The Director General had discharged his complex responsibilities 
in an exemplary manner. Under his leadership, the Agency had grown 
into the efficient organization that it now was, and it could be confidently 
said that the excellent co-operation existing between the United Nations and 
the Agency would continue in the years ahead. 
46. At its present session, the General Conference was faced with important 
decisions that would help to shape the Agency's future course, and he wished 
it every success in its endeavours. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


47. The PRESIDENT invited the Director General of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, Mr. Sigvard Eklund, to take the floor. 
48. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that he wished to report on the Agency's 
activities since the last session of the Conference and to outline the programme 
and budget recommended by the Board of Governors for adoption. 
49. At the end of 1980, more than 300 research reactors in 48 Member States 
and 253 power reactors in 22 Member States had been in operation, the power 
reactors generating 8% of the world's electricity. Nuclear power had thus 
already made a substantial impact in a field which had previously been reserved 
for conventional sources of power. By 1985, 17% of all electricity in the 
world was expected to be generated by nuclear means. Undoubtedly, therefore, 
nuclear energy would retain its importance for a considerable time, because 
the world would not easily find a substitute means of generating that much 
electricity. 


50. However, the situation beyond 1985 looked far less satisfactory: according 
to available information, the annual rate of construction work on new nuclear 
power plants outside centrally planned economies was expected to be less than 
5000 MW, as compared with more than 10 000 MW per year between 1981 and 1985. 
If orders for more new plants were not forthcoming soon a general slow-down 
of nuclear power programmes beyond 1990 would be inevitable, with serious 
consequences for the nuclear industry in many countries. 



GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 12 


51. A new market, and a vast one in countries with cold climates, where 40% 
or more of energy consumption was for the simple purpose of heating buildings, 
might be opened up through the use of nuclear reactors for district heating, 
as had been the case in Sweden for a decade beginning in 1963. In the Soviet 
Union two district heating plants were under construction and their operational 
experience might represent a breakthrough for such a use of nuclear energy. 
52. One important inhibiting factor was the lengthy lead time between commitment 
and commercial operation for nuclear plants. At present the average lead 
time was 61 months for Japan, 63 months for France, 82 months for the Federal 
Republic of Germany and 121 months for the United States. In view of the high 
cost of money, it was not surprising that, while in France the cost of nuclear 
electricity was a third of that of oil-fired and one half of that of coal-fired 
plants, in the United States the balance was often tipped towards coal. 
53. In the developing countries, unfortunately, nuclear power would give little 
direct help in solving energy problems in the present or the next decade. So 
far, nuclear power plants were in operation only in four developing Member States 
(India, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea and Argentina), and only 17. of the 
electrical generating capacity of all developing countries collectively was 
nuclear, the corresponding figure for the developed world being almost 8%. 
54. The introduction of nuclear power in the developing countries essentially 
depended on the technical development and availability of small reactors which 
could be installed in those countries in spite of the absence in many of a 
well-established electric grid and an elaborate technical infrastructure. There 
were a few manufacturers, in the Federal Republic of Germany, France, India, 
the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union, who were designing medium-sized 
(200-400 MW(e)) reactors which would be economic. The work done by Swedish 
and Finnish experts on an inherently safe reactor for district heating purposes, 
the SECURE (Safe and Environmentally Clean Urban Reactor), might also contribute 
a solution to the problem of designing an inherently safe nuclear power reactor 
in the 300-MW(e) range. Such reactors would be able to provide large consumers, 
such as metropolitan areas with populations of 10 million people or 
more, with the necessary electricity. With the passage of time, the Agency 


GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 13 


should increasingly provide assistance to developing countries in that field, 


in particular where training and the establishment of regulatory infrastructures 


were concerned. 


55. An aspect of nuclear power of particular interest to the developing countries 
related to the impact of the oil price crisis, which was most strongly felt 
in the developing countries, where the high cost of oil and coal had in recent 
years often reversed the trend of economic growth, as the recent Nairobi 
Conference had shown. As much as half the total export earnings of countries 
like Brazil and India went toward meeting the mounting costs of oil imports. 
It had been estimated that by the year 2010 the developing countries' needs 
for oil, if growth targets were to be met, might exceed the present total world 
demand. Through an expansion of nuclear power in the industrial countries 
the pressure on oil demand and oil prices could be relieved, which would 
indirectly help developing countries lacking oil. 


56. The need for nuclear power in the developed world depended upon the need 
for energy in general and on the availability and cost of other sources of 
energy. Underwater drilling had revealed large new oil reserves. Coal was 
the object of much interest, and the use of liquefied or gasified coal in 
refined form was beginning to seem not only a technical, but also an economic 
possibility. On the other hand, combustion of fossil fuel had environmental 
consequences, owing to the release into the atmosphere of oxides of carbon, 
nitrogen and sulphur and other elements leading to globally dispersed contamination. 
57. A survey of nearly 90 published assessments of the risks at each stage 
of electricity production from coal, oil and nuclear fuel, performed in 1980 
by the United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive, had shown that suitably 
sited, constructed and maintained nuclear systems currently in operation involved 
no more, and probably less, risk than oil- or coal-burning systems, if the 
entire fuel cycle were taken into account in each case. 
58. In the long term, logic and reason must prevail. Surely those who were 
truly concerned about protecting the environment and safeguarding health and 
safety would come to perceive that the nuclear path carried no unacceptable 
risk of short-term damage to the environment or of long-term climatic change. 

GC(XXV)/0R.228 


page 14 


In relation to the environment it should not be forgotten that the developing 
countries' need for wood and charcoal as a basic energy source might alone 
lead to the destruction of one third of the world's forest area during the 
next 20 years if no acceptable substitutes were available. 


59. With regard to the safety aspects of nuclear power, the Agency was in 
an advanced stage of establishing an up-to-date set of internationally agreed 
safety standards for nuclear power plants, called NUSS. The Agency was also 
assisting Member States in implementing NUSS recommendations by means of 
advisory missions and training courses. The i960 Stockholm Conference on 
Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues had contributed to achieving uniformity 
in methods of handling safety issues. The Agency was also in the final stage 
of issuing the revised IAEA Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection. 
60. It was generally agreed among specialists that the basic technology was 
available for adequate disposal of radioactive waste. Remaining technological 
questions were being answered. It was expected that most countries with nuclear 
power programmes would in the 1980s define appropriate waste disposal systems for 
their programmes, including the establishment of repositories for low- and 
intermediate-level radioactive wastes. The Agency had initiated the development 
of a series of guidelines for underground disposal. 
61. Two major international conferences were to be held on questions specifically 
related to nuclear power, one in September 1982 on nuclear power experience 
over a period of nearly three decades, and another, scheduled for spring 1983, 
on radioactive wastes. 
62. A proposal originating in the United States concerning the establishment 
of an international convention on nuclear safety co-operation and mutual emergency 
assistance in connection with nuclear accidents was likely to come up for consideration 
by the Board in 1982. A Nordic Mutual Emergency Assistance Agreement 
in connection with radiation accidents had been concluded in 1963 between Denmark, 
Finland, Norway, Sweden and the Agency, and a number of bilateral agreements on 
the exchange of information on nuclear safety and radiation protection had been 
concluded in recent years between several countries of Western Europe (Denmark, 
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the 
United Kingdom). 
GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 15 


63. The question of the trans-boundary effects of nuclear power stations had 
been raised by a Member State. That was a question with broader implications 
and the appropriate forum to deal with it would be the United Nations General 
Assembly. The United Nations, and especially the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), had already been active in that field for some time. 
64. The controversy over nuclear power in some affluent societies had begun 
to affect national policies. Over the years, calls from world leaders for 
stronger support of nuclear power had been heard repeatedly. In the communique 
of the Ottawa Summit in July 1981 leaders of the Western nations had stated 
that, in most of their countries, progress in constructing new nuclear facilities 
was slow. They intended in each of their countries to encourage greater public 
acceptance of nuclear energy, and to respond to public concerns about safety, 
health, nuclear waste management and non-proliferation (of nuclear weaponry). 
They would further their efforts in the development of advanced technologies, 
particularly for spent fuel management. The Prime Minister of India had said 
in Nairobi in August 1981 that nuclear energy was the only power source able 
to meet India's demands and that, unless something positive were available 
to take its place, there could be no question of replacing it. 


65. The reality was, however, that, although energy experts ten years previously 
had predicted that nuclear power would provide 50% of the world's electricity 
by the turn of the century, recent projections had fallen to 22% of a reduced 
overall world energy production figure. If that trend was to be reversed, 
prompt, decisive action would be needed to translate the declaration of intent 


into effective policy decisions with appropriate legislative measures designed 
to assure shorter lead times for the construction of nuclear plants, prompt 
operational licensing and assured supplies of fuel and material. The worldwide 
energy system of the 1990s would be determined by the decisions that Governments 
took at the present time, and the very survival of the nuclear industry might 
depend on that. 


66. The very vocal minority which did not want to accept nuclear energy and 
which had a considerable political influence might well turn pro-nuclear if 
faced with an energy shortage caused by a worsening oil situation, or if the 

GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 16 


energy-related financial burden were to have drastic effects on the entire 
economy of a country, and hence on the social life and standard of living of 
its people. On the other hand, that minority might become more anti-nuclear 
if accidents occurred in nuclear .plants, irrespective of whether or not they 
involved any release of radioactivity. The public media therefore bore the 
heavy responsibility of ensuring that the public was always correctly informed, 
so as to avoid creating unfounded fears. The dynamics of technical developments 
were often simply not considered in planning for the future. Thermal reactor 
systems, however, merely represented a temporary contribution to the world 
energy supplies, on a time scale comparable to the oil period; a long-term 
contribution must assume the development of fast systems or breeders. What 
should be understood in that respect was that the development from the thermal 
to the fast breeder stage was part of a continuing process. 


67. The Agency's responsibility in the sphere of safeguards resulted from 
both the Statute and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT). The latter should be regarded as based on mutual trust between 
the nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States and not upon mistrust. 
68. A few years previously it had seemed as if the number of States party to NPT 
had reached its ceiling. However, since then a number of countries had acceded, 
including Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Turkey and, most recently, Egypt. 
In all, three nuclear-weapon States and 110 non-nuclear-weapon States belonged 
to NPT. Several were in regions which had witnessed armed conflicts in recent 
years. Their willingness to accept NPT was therefore of considerable significance. 
It was to be hoped that their example would be followed by those who 
had not yet done so, and that the day would come when NPT was universally 
accepted by all nations of the world. The process would be greatly facilitated 
by the early conclusion of an agreement on a comprehensive test ban and the 
implementation of both Articles IV and VI of NPT. 


69. What was also necessary was that Member States with existing or planned 
nuclear activities of significance that had acceded to NPT but had not yet 
concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency should do so without further 
delay. 
GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 17 


70. Of the group of countries which had not yet acceded to NPT, there were a 
few which were developing significant nuclear activities. The concern felt by 
the international community over the possible growth of unsafeguarded facilities 
and nuclear materials was clear. The situation required even greater consideration 
in view of the growing complexity of nuclear matters in those countries 
which would inevitably require more attention from the safeguards point of 
view. The gap remaining in the universal application of full-scope safeguards 
was not large, but any gap at all could only serve to diminish the utility 
of the entire regime, while at the same time increasing tension. 


71. It was a matter of deep regret that a blow had been inflicted on the Treaty 
in connection with the recent air attack on the Iraqi research reactor centre. 
The matter had been discussed in the Board of Governors and in the UN Security 
Council, and it could only be added that the incident underscored the urgent 
need for enlarging the scope of the Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva 
Convention of 1949. In its present form the Protocol prohibited military 
attacks against nuclear power plants, and the Disarmament Committee should 
consider a general prohibition against attacks on nuclear establishments as 
a whole. It was horrifying to think of the consequences of a military attack 
on any of the existing 260 nuclear power reactors, not to speak of the situation 
around 1985, when their number might have increased to over 400. The same 
held true with regard to the many research reactors. Radiological warfare 
could indeed in that manner be initiated through the use of conventional weapons. 


72. Regarding the operations of the Agency's safeguards system itself, the 
system could only be as effective as the Member States collectively wished 
it to be. The Agency would continue to discharge its safeguarding responsibilities 
with the greatest possible efficiency and economy, but it was up to 
Member States to contribute financial means, equipment and well-qualified 
specialists so as to further strengthen the Agency's safeguards operations. 


73. The installation of new safeguards equipment, together with an increase 
in the number of new installations expected to come under safeguards during 
the next few years, would inevitably lead to extra cost. But the growth of 
nuclear power generation and 'other peaceful nuclear activities could only go forward 
successfully within a non-proliferation and safeguards framework in which the 

GC(XXV)/OR.228 


page 18 


world at large had confidence. Such a framework was of vital importance for 


both the industrialized and the developing countries. 


74. The technical assistance activities of the Agency, first launched on a 
modest scale in 1958, had now come of age and had grown into a stable system 
of worldwide technical co-operation in the nuclear field. In view of that , 
development the old term "technical assistance" with its implied donor-recipient 
relationship should no longer be used by the Agency, but should be replaced by 
the more appropriate and commonly used term "technical co-operation". 
Accordingly, it was intended to rename the Department concerned the "Department 
of Technical Co-operation". 
75. It was not often appreciated that, in addition to the technical assistance 
activities financed out of voluntary contributions made by Member States, there 
were a number of other Agency programmes related to the needs of the developing 
countries - for example, such activities as the application of radioisotopes 
in medicine, food and agriculture, hydrology, industry, etc. and various 
forms of assistance in the field of nuclear power, radiological protection 
and nuclear safety. 


76. The target for voluntary contributions had been increased to $16 million 
for the year 1982 and a system of indicative planning figures had been approved 
by the Board of Governors for a three-year period. That had facilitated the 
programming task of the Secretariat and would help in implementing large-scale, 
multi-year projects appropriate to the needs of developing countries as their 
nuclear programmes progressed. 
77. As in the case of safeguards, the Agency's technical assistance programme 
could also only be as effective as the Member States wished it to be. All were 
therefore requested to help the Agency in improving and expanding the aid programme 
for the developing countries by increasing contributions to the maximum 
extent. 
GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 19 


78. The budget for 1982 amounted to $86.3 million, which represented an increase 
over 1981 of 2.37„ assuming a dollar/schilling exchange rate of 15.50. Professional 
staff had increased by 5, from 607 to 612, and GS and M&0 staff by 9, from 
854 to 863. The budget was again one of zero real growth. Because of the 
expanding requirements of safeguards, technical assistance and nuclear safety, 
the zero-growth approach applied over a longer period would mean in practice 
significant curtailment for other activities, such as the applications of radiation 
and radioisotopes and the utilization of research reactors. That was 
particularly regrettable as those activities were of relevance to the needs 
of developing countries. 


79. During the 24 years of the Agency's existence, an enormous technical development 
had taken place in the nuclear field. That had been reflected in changes 
in the programmes of many national organizations, energy in general and regulatory 
activities having been transferred to new bodies set up for that specific purpose. 
A large number of applications of radiation and isotopes had been absorbed 
in different branches of science and technology. 
80. In that context he wished to draw attention to an interesting proposal 
made by the Prime Minister of Jamaica at the recent Nairobi Conference on New 
and Renewable Sources of Energy, suggesting a somewhat enhanced role for the 
Agency. In discussing the establishment of a centre for research on and the 
development of new and renewable sources of energy, the Prime Minister had 
expressed the view that such a new centre should be associated with an existing 
agency of common interest such as the Agency. He found that an interesting idea, 
and one which deserved careful consideration. 
81. All the changes he had just mentioned inevitably had an influence on the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and should be reflected in its programme 
and structure. To what extent, for example, did the activities in the Seibersdorf 
or Monaco Laboratories continue to respond to the needs of Member States? 
Could the Monaco Laboratory be useful in the context of the international 
arrangements contemplated in the Law of the Sea discussions? 
82. The United Nations General Assembly had decided to convene, in 1983, a 
conference for the promotion of international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. In the relevant United Nations resolution, the Agency 

GC(XXV)/OR.228 
page 20 


was invited to fulfil what was described as "its appropriate role within the 


scope of its responsibilities at all stages of preparation of the Conference". 
However, the meaning of the term "appropriate role" was not clear. The Agency 
had been engaged in promoting international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy ever since its establishment 24 years previously, and that 
was indeed its primary responsibility. A conference of that nature would 
thus seem more appropriately to come directly within the sphere of the Agency's 
activities. 


83. In the resolution to which he had just referred there was particular 
reference to the Agency's Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), the conviction 
being expressed that progress in the work of the Committee would greatly 
contribute to the success of the Conference. CAS had been established by 
the Board of Governors in June 1980 to consider ways and means in which supplies 
of nuclear material, equipment and technology and fuel cycle services could 
be assured on a more predictable and long-term basis in accordance with mutually 
acceptable considerations of non-proliferation. It had held three sessions 
so far, but had still to come to grips with the substantive issues involved. 


84. Turning to another matter, he recalled that the Agency's Statute stated 
that the organization's permanent staff should be kept to a minimum. He was 
of the opinion that that provision had been very useful in permitting rotation 
of personnel, making it possible to maintain a cadre of competent staff familiar 
with scientific and technical developments as well as with national policies 
in their home countries. The staff of the inspectorate had in general been 
given long-term contracts after a short trial period; it might be advantageous 
to strive at rotation of safeguards inspectors also, when the cadre had become 
so large that a turnover of a few per cent each year would not affect the 
efficiency of the Department of Safeguards. 


85. In that context, he wished to touch upon a staffing matter which had come 
up on several occasions lately, namely the proper representation of developing 
countries on the staff of the Agency, particularly at the senior level. 
GC(XXV)/0R.228 
page 21 


86. By the very nature of the Agency's work, it was perhaps inevitable that 
the bulk of the staff had been initially recruited from the advanced countries. 
However, over the years the developing countries had been showing increasing 
interest in the work of the Agency and many had also developed a high degree 
of expertise in manpower problems. It was understandable that they should 
expect a larger share in the operation of the Agency. 


87. Within the framework of administrative possibilities, he had therefore 
endeavoured to increase the number of staff from the developing world at all 
levels, and it had been his policy that, given equal qualifications and experience, 
preference would be accorded to candidates from the developing countries. 
It needed hardly to be added that that process would inevitably imply a readjustment 
of the posts now held by the advanced countries. Their co-operation was 
indispensable in that regard, and he trusted that he could count upon it. 


88. In conclusion, it was his pleasant duty to express the Agency's appreciation 
and thanks for the co-operation and help which the host country, as usual, 
had generously extended to it in the past year. 
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.229 
April 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Monday, 21 September 1981, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisionalagenda** 
Paragraphs 
6 Voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance Fund for 1982 1 
- Arrangements for the General Conference 2-3 
7 General debate and annual report for 1980 4-58 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of AmericaIraqUnited Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern IrelandFederal Republic of Germany 
4-20 
21 32 
33 - 44 
45 58 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 25 September 1981 
**/ GC(XXV)/640. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


81-6526 



GC(XXV)/OR.229 


page 2 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FUND FOR 1982 


1. The PRESIDENT said that according to the Statute technical assistance 
was one of the principal functions of the Agency. Activities under that 
programme had increased considerably over the years but their extent and the 
method of financing them continued to be the subject of intense debate amongst 
Member States. Since the previous year, the Board of Governors had tried to make 
the technical assistance budget more predictable and more stable so as to permit 
better planning and in particular a better evaluation of the needs of Member 
States through multi-year predictions of available sources. It was extremely 
important to know as soon as possible whether the target adopted for 1982 would be 
achieved. In order to permit an early assessment of the total funds available, 
all delegations who were in a position to do so were urgently requested to announce 
the voluntary contributions to be made by their countries before the end of the 
session. He would then be able to report that a large percentage of the target 
figure for 1982 had been reached. 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE GENERAL CONFERENCE 


2. The PRESIDENT said that Article V.E.4 of the Statute required the 
General Conference to examine the annual report irrespective of the decisions 
taken on the other items on the provisional agenda. He therefore proposed that 
the provisions of Rule 42(a) of the Rules of Procedure should be waived and the 
Conference proceed immediately to the general debate, while waiting for the 
meeting of the General Committee which would examine the provisional agenda. 
3. It was so decided. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1980 (GC(XXV)/642, 642/Corr.1, 642/Corr.2) 


4. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) reaffirmed the central importance 
of the Agency as the principal international institution devoted to realizing 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy under safe and secure conditions and expressed 
his heartfelt appreciation to Mr. Eklund for the capable way in which he had 
led the Agency over so many years. It was of great importance for the success 
of the Agency's mission to have at its head an effective Director General who 
enjoyed unanimous support. It was to be hoped that a new Director General 
would be appointed before the end of the session. 
GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 3 


5. He then read to the General Conference the following message from the 
President of the United States of America: 
"On behalf of the American people I send warm greetings to all 
participants at the twenty-fifth General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. 


"As this session opens, the international nuclear community continues 
to face major challenges. Nuclear energy offers the prospect and the 
promise of helping many nations achieve greater energy abundance and security. 
At the same time, it is more apparent than ever before that we must remain 
vigilant in preventing the misuse of nuclear technology and material. 
The proliferation of nuclear explosives will threaten international 
security. The United States is firmly committed to meeting these 
challenges. 


"The International Atomic Energy Agency has a critical role in promoting 
the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, protecting against its 
misuse, and contributing to international security. World attention will 
continue to focus on the Agency's role. Success requires an effective and 
credible safeguards system. 


"As noted in my July 16 policy statement on non-proliferation and 
peaceful nuclear co-operation, I am committed to strong support of the 
Agency and to active international co-operation in the civil nuclear 
field. 


"At home in the United States, my Administration is determined to 
create a climate that would permit a revitalization of civil nuclear power 
without compromising health and safety. I am confident that nuclear power 
will be an important energy source for the United States and other nations. 
Internationally, we are determined to strengthen the United States as a 
reliable nuclear supplier under effective safeguards, at the same, time 
that we work together to avoid the spread of nuclear explosives. We will 
also work towards verifiable and equitable nuclear arms control to reduce the 
chances of nuclear war. 


"I extend my best wishes to the participants at the Conference and 
wish you every success in your constructive efforts." 


6. Describing the new look in the nuclear energy policy of the United 
States, he noted that, first, the United States Government, working in close 
collaboration with industry, was endeavouring to breathe new life into the 
domestic nuclear energy programme, which had lost its momentum during the 
preceding years. Secondly, the Government was well aware that, in an interdependent 
world, other nations were seriously affected by its nuclear and 
energy policies and its attitude towards nuclear exports. It was therefore 
determined to be a major participant in international nuclear affairs and to 

GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 4 


co-operate actively with other countries, working on the principle that nuclear 
energy was an essential element for ensuring energy supplies and guaranteeing 
the economic development of many countries. Thirdly, it believed that the 
full benefits of nuclear power could only be realized if the non-proliferation 
regime was maintained and strengthened. 


7. In many respects, the health of the United States nuclear programme was 
linked to domestic economic recovery. That was why the Government was 
actively working to bring down inflation, and it had already made significant 
progress in that direction. 
8. The light-water reactor (LWA) had proved to be a stable and reliable 
energy source and its fuel efficiency had been substantially improved. The 
United States Government would try to promote accelerated use of such reactors 
by improving the regulatory, safety and financial climate in which the United 
States industry had to function. 
9. The lessons drawn from the events at Three Mile Island were being 
incorporated into plant design and operation, and the goal of the United 
States was to further reduce the already low probability of nuclear accidents. 
The possibilities of streamlining licensing procedures without compromising 
safety was being explored and the new measures would be put into effect as soon 
as possible. The United States was also expanding its uranium enrichment 
capacity - a step which would enable it to remain a major supplier of enrichment 
services. 
10. In connection with the safe disposal of radioactive waste, a detailed 
evaluation of a limited number of possible sites for underground depositories 
situated in stable geological formations was under way and the United States 
hoped to be able to pass to the demonstration stage at the beginning of the 
1990s. 
11. It was seeking ways to overcome regulatory, economic and political 
barriers to the establishment of a private industry for the reprocessing of 
spent LWR fuel. Such reprocessing was essential for the commercial deployment 
of breeders. For economic and non-proliferation reasons, however, the number 
of reprocessing plants in the world was expected to be limited. The United 
States was now moving forward again with the development of breeders so that 
they would be available when needed. Since in the last analysis, the future of 
GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 5 


breeders would depend on the attitude of domestic industry, the United States 
Government would invite industrial concerns to play a major role in defining the 
future nature of the programme. All those steps should lead to new orders for LWRS 
and re-establish momentum towards the development of advanced technologies. 


12. On the international front, the United States intended to re-establish its 
role as a reliable supplier of nuclear equipment, fuel services and technology 
under appropriate safeguards and controls. Since it was essential that 
countries which made large investments in nuclear plants should enjoy longterm 
security of supplies, the United States Government would operate to 
facilitate long-term planning by its partners. 
13. At the same time, the United States intended to combat vigorously the risks 
of proliferation. Apart from the evident danger which it represented to the 
security of all countries, the spread of nuclear weapons would jeopardize the 
ability of all Member States to profit fully under co-operation arrangements 
from the advantages offered by the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that 
connection, the United States considered that material violation of safeguards 
agreements or the explosion of a nuclear device by a non-nuclear-weapon State 
would have profound consequences for international order and for bilateral 
relations with the United States. 


14. The United States would continue to support the accession of new countries 
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the 
Tlatelolco Treaty, which were critical cornerstones of the international nonproliferation 
system. The President of the United States had announced that he 
would seek the Senate's advice and consent for the ratification of Protocol I 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty. The United States would also continue to give 


preference, as far as technical assistance was concerned, to countries which 


were parties to those treaties. It would also continue to seek a consensus on 


the principle that the application of Agency safeguards to all the nuclear 


activities in non-nuclear-weapon States should be a condition for any signi


ficant new supply commitment. In any event, no significant transfer of nuclear 


equipment, materials or technology should be made without the application of 


safeguards. The Agency's safeguards system was obviously essential for the 


international non-proliferation regime. 



GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 6 


15. The key to the success of the Agency was often the ability of all Member 
States to exclude extraneous political considerations from the Agency's work. 
In connection with the initiatives which certain Members intended to take 
following the Israeli attack on the Iraqi reactor the previous June, it should 
be noted that any punitive action in that sense could do great harm both to 
the Agency, which was a technical organization, and to the non-proliferation 
regime as a whole. His Government would view such punitive action with grave 
concern. 
16. The United States delegation strongly urged that the Agency and its 
Members should instead promote universality of the safeguards system and 
strengthen its effectiveness. It would be necessary still further to improve 
surveillance and containment measures and the application of safeguards to bulk 
handling facilities and continuously fuelled reactors. Safeguards inspectors 
should be charged to perform their duties rigorously and should recognize the 
trust that had been placed in them by the world community. For its part, the 
United States would continue to provide the Secretariat with the results of its 
extensive research and development programme on safeguards. It would also 
support work in progress aimed at the possible development of an international 
plutonium storage system, which might provide useful supplements to the Agency's 
safeguards. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) could also prove a 
valuable instrument for achieving better mutual understanding and confidence in 
the field of nuclear trade. 
17. The United States Senate had recently voted in favour of the United States 
acceding to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials and 
it was to be hoped that many other countries would ratify that instrument. 
The United States also intended to continue working with others for the replacement 
of highly enriched uranium by low-enriched uranium as a fuel for research 
reactors, and for the development of methods for enhancing the security of the 
international transport of weapons-usable nuclear materials. 
18. The technical assistance programme and the international training courses 
would continue to receive the strong support of the United States. In collaboration 
with the Secretariat, the United States would develop new manpower 
training programmes for countries intending to establish a national nuclear 
power industry. 
GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 7 


19. The United States delegation continued to hope that a multilateral convention 
on nuclear safety co-operation and mutual emergency assistance would be negotiated. 
20. The nuclear policy of the United States rested on three principles: 
firstly, the creation of a favourable climate for revitalization of the United 
States domestic nuclear power programme; secondly, the assignment of high 
priority to the international non-proliferation regime; thirdly, a firm commitment 
to international co-operation, including the determination to be a 
reliable nuclear supplier. The United States delegation hoped that the Agency 
would continue to play a central role in those three areas. The achievements 
of the Agency had been unmatched in the past and it was up to the Member States 
to ensure that they were even better in the years to come. 
21. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said it was a matter for regret that the Board 
of Governors had not yet been able to settle the fundamental question of the 
appointment of a new Director General. He hoped that the Board would ultimately 
come to a decision, bearing in mind the principle of equitable geographical 
distribution, both on the Board and in the Secretariat, and also the necessity 
of promoting technical assistance. In addition, he was in favour of an 
amendment of Rule 86 of the Conference's Rules of Procedure which would make 
it possible to include Arabic among the official and working languages of the 
General Conference. 


22. In the name of the Government of Iraq he wished to affirm that all 
countries had an inalienable right to develop the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy independently and without hindrance. That right was recognized 
by the Agency's Statute, notably Article II, and by the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Article IV in particular. Both the 
Statute and NPT ensured that all Member States had the right to engage in the 
economic and technological development of their peaceful nuclear activities 
under Agency safeguards designed to ensure that those activities would never 
serve military purposes. Iraq had tried to utilize the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy for its own development, while respecting both the Statute 
and NPT. Iraq had been party to NPT since 1970; it had signed a general 

GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 8 


safeguards agreement in 1972, and the Agency had since then been applying 
safeguards to all of Iraq's nuclear activities. The Agency had always 
considered that Iraq was fulfilling its obligations, and Iraq had always 
co-operated fully with the Agency by participating in the sessions of the 
General Conference and in meetings of the Board of Governors and its various 
committees, notably CAS; also it had participated in studies such as the 
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), as well as in numerous 
seminars and scientific conferences organized under the auspices of the 
Agency. The Government of Iraq had invariably discharged its financial obligations 
and had always co-operated with the Agency in an effort to ensure an 
appropriate balance between promotional and safeguards activities. 


23. Iraq attached special importance to international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and had concluded bilateral co-operation 
agreements with several Member States - notably with France, in 1975, with a 
view to developing co-operation between the two countries in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, subject to existing bilateral and international 
arrangements concerning non-proliferation. A number of facts relating to that 
co-operation deserved to be recalled: France, though it had not signed NPT, 
had invariably said that it would act as though it were a party to the Treaty 
and would moreover ensure that effective non-proliferation measures were 
applied to transfers of nuclear technology to any second party. The Franco-
Iraqi co-operation agreement provided that Agency safeguards should be applied 
to all equipment and nuclear materials transferred, even if Iraq should cease 
to be a party to NPT. Under that co-operation agreement Iraq had accepted 
measures - in particular physical protection measures applicable to all 
materials and equipment furnished by France - which went well beyond the 
requirements of NPT. That was a fact familiar both to EURATOM and the Agency. 
Furthermore, Iraq and France had concluded a co-operation agreement in the 
area of peaceful nuclear research with a view to making joint use of the 
installations constructed by France in Iraq. That being so, French personnel 
would always have been present on the site if the reactor had entered into 
service. Finally, Iraq had entered into negotiations with other countries in 
the hope of establishing co-operation in peaceful scientific research with 
them, too. 
GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 9 


24. Despite all those measures, Israel, which was not a party to NPT and had 
refused on a number of occasions to allow safeguards to be applied to its 
nuclear installations, had bombarded the Iraqi nuclear research centre on 
7 June 1981, seriously damaging certain installations and causing loss of 
human life among both Iraqi and French personnel. That aggression, universally 
condemned, had been judged to be particularly serious by the international 
community. The Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, 
had immediately declared his profound concern at an attack that was contrary 
to international law, an attack which deserved condemnation not only 
because it was extremely serious in itself, but also because it would have 
grave consequences for international peace and security. On 10 June 1981, 
replying to an intervention by the representative of Israel at the United 
Nations, Mr. Waldheim had again stated that the Israeli attack might have 
serious consequences for international peace and security, for which he bore 
clearly defined responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations. 
The Secretary-General had also said that the attack called NPT into question, 
and in particular the Agency's system of safeguards and inspections, required 
by the Treaty, which had in fact been applied to the Iraqi nuclear facility. 
25. Recalling that the Board of Governors had made known its views on the 
issue at its series of meetings beginning on 9 June, he requested the 
Secretariat to distribute the records of the 564th, 565th, 566th and 568th 
meetings of the Board. 
26. The Israeli military action, the first of its kind against a nuclear plant, 
increased the danger of nuclear war by adding the new dimension of a preventive 
strike. It constituted a flagrant violation of international law and of the 
Charter of the United Nations as well as an attack upon the Agency, its 
objectives, its responsibilities and its safeguards system, and it was a 
serious blow to the credibility of NPT. It set a very dangerous precedent in 
international relations, for co-operation between Israel and South Africa 
already existed - among other things in the nuclear field - and South Africa 
could well resort to a similar act of aggression in order to prevent the 
African States from developing their science and technology. It was thus 
clear that Israel was guilty of violating its obligations under the Statute, 
particularly under Article IV.B. 

GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 10 


27. Furthermore, the Israeli raid on the Iraqi nuclear installations was just 
one more in a series of premeditated crimes and acts of aggression against 
personnel and facilities belonging to Iraq. As soon as the Franco-Iraqi 
mutual co-operation agreement had been signed in 1975, Israel had launched 
a press campaign aimed at undermining NPT and the Agency's safeguards system, 


discrediting France's commitment to act as if it were a party to NPT and 


convincing the world that France was helping Iraq to make an atomic bomb. In 


1979 Israeli agents had, by acts of sabotage, procured the destruction in 
France of equipment destined for Iraq. Two Iraqi scientists had died in 
mysterious circumstances at Geneva and Paris, and an Egyptian physicist 
associated with the project had been assassinated in Paris. French and Italian 


experts working on projects with Iraq, together with their families, had been 


threatened with death. Bombs had been planted and exploded in offices in 
Rome. Israeli aircraft had staged a preliminary aerial attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear centre on 27 September 1980. The Richter case was another example of 


the unceasing effort by Israel and its supporters to undermine the credibility 


of the safeguards regime. Moreover, the Israeli Prime Minister had told the 
world that his American-made aircraft stood ready to destroy the Iraqi reactor 


again if it were rebuilt. 


28. The arrogance of Israel could only be explained by the help it was 
constantly receiving from the United States of America. Two months after the 
attack the United States had resumed its supply of F-16 military aircraft to 
Israel and had even formed a strategic alliance with the aggressor. The 
Security Council's efforts to apply sanctions to Israel had been frustrated 
by the veto power of the United States. The Security Council had nevertheless 
adopted a resolution calling upon Israel to submit all its nuclear installations 
to Agency safeguards, but that appeal had been immediately rejected by Israel. 


GC(XXV)/0R.229 
page 11 


29. All those actions constituted persistent violations of the provisions 
of the Agency's Statute, and thus made it plain that Israel had no right to be 
a Member of the Agency. To invoke the principle of universality in that 
connection was to contradict the provisions of the Statute, Article IV.C in 
particular. Moreover, under Article XIX.B any Member which persistently violated 
the provisions of the Statute could be suspended by the General Conference 
from the exercise of the rights and privileges of membership. 
30. Israel had violated the principle of sovereign equality by arrogating to 
itself the right to judge unilaterally the nuclear intentions and actions of 
other States and by taking the law into its own hands, even while exempting 
its own clandestine nuclear activities from international inspection and safeguards. 
31. If condemnation of that criminal act was not followed by sanctions such as 
expulsion, if Israel was allowed to continue to enjoy the privileges and rights 
of membership in the Agency, if the Israeli act of aggression went unpunished then 
a very serious blow would have been dealt to the IAEA and NPT. All who 
defended the continued membership of Israel in the Agency would be implicitly 
condoning the Israeli attack and would be violating their non-proliferation 
obligations, particularly with regard to co-operation in the development of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
32. It was the solemn duty of the General Conference to act powerfully in 
defence of NPT, the Agency and the safeguards system, and in defence of the 
inalienable right of all States to develop research in the nuclear energy 
field, and the production and use of nuclear energy, for peaceful purposes. 
It was absolutely essential to expel Israel from the Agency. Failure to take 
steps in that direction would have profound consequences for the future of the 
Agency. 

GC(XXV)/0R.229 
page 12 


33. Mr. MANLEY (United Kingdom) noted with satisfaction that the General 
Conference had approved Zimbabwe's application for membership of the Agency and 
welcomed the accession of another Member State of the Commonwealth. 
34. Describing the progress of nuclear energy and the substantial increase in 
the use of radioactive isotopes in medicine, industry, food and agriculture in 
the last 20 years, he pointed out that those accomplishments were largely due 
to the efforts of the Agency and particularly to the Director General, whom he 
thanked on behalf of the United Kingdom. 
35. Energy needs in the year 2000 could only be met if there were a very sizable 
increase in the role played by nuclear power. Unfortunately, the new opportunities 
coincided with a wavering of public confidence. In those circumstances, 
the Agency must continue to fulfil the dual role which it had been assigned when 
it was established by promoting the civil applications of nuclear energy while 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The adoption of nuclear power 
policies which would be accepted by the public was the responsibility of 
Governments. The Agency should continue to draw up standards and recommendations 
on the basis of which Governments would be able to demonstrate that nuclear 
power could, with confidence, be regarded as a key element in national energy 
policies. It was of great importance that the Agency maintain the proper 
emphasis on its two objectives. Whatever their state of development, all 
Member States had an interest in each of those objectives since they were both 
vital to mutual confidence in nuclear power in the world as a whole. 
36. It was important to countries to have the assurance that trade in nuclear 
materials was not a threat to security and peace. In that respect, his 
Government welcomed the progress made by the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
and would contribute to the development of mechanisms which would permit nuclear 
trade to flow more freely under reliable and equitable non-proliferation arrangements. 
37. If nuclear energy were to play its full part, two basic conditions had to 
be satisfied. First, arrangements for international nuclear trade must be 
secure, transparent and predictable so that the development of nuclear energy 
would not be jeopardized by delays or interruptions in the supply of nuclear 
GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 13 


equipment and materials. In that context, his delegation welcomed the policies 
of some of the major uranium suppliers, particularly the declaration by the 
United States of America that it would once again become a reliable supplier. 
The second condition was that the suppliers and the international community 
generally must have adequate assurances that freer international trade in 
nuclear materials would not increase the danger of nuclear weapons proliferation. 
Progress towards an improved and universal non-proliferation regime, including 
the safeguards system, would facilitate trade in nuclear material and equipment. 
At the same time, if the supplier countries introduced more reliable supply 
arrangements the customer countries would have less incentive to set up 
independent fuel cycles. 


38. The United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation 
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy to be held in Geneva in 1983 would help 
establish better international understanding of the problems of public acceptance, 
non-proliferation, supply arrangements and economic restraints. 
39. Speaking on behalf of the Member States of the European Community, he 
recalled that those States had already strongly condemned the Israeli 
action and remained deeply concerned at its consequences. Iraq was a party 
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and all of its nuclear activities were therefore 
under Agency safeguards. Those safeguards were being applied to the facilities 
in a normal and satisfactory way: inspections had taken place as planned. He 
noted that the Agency intended to carry out further inspections when conditions 
at the site permitted, and reaffirmed the strong support of the Member States 
of the European Community for the Agency's safeguards system and their full 
confidence in its efficacy. 


40. The United Kingdom had, in its own right, already condemned the Israeli 
attack particularly because it called into question the Agency's safeguards 
system. The concept of international safeguards applied by the Agency was 
essential to the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and to 
the prevention of proliferation. He therefore appealed to States which had 
not yet done so to accept Agency safeguards on all their peaceful nuclear 
activities. 

GC(XXV)OR.229 
page 14 


41. It would be desirable to consider whether future steps could be taken to 
enhance the non-proliferation regime without impeding nuclear trade by introducing 
additional controls. One possibility would be to consider reducing 
significantly the response times of Member States and institutions to a signal 
from the Department of Safeguards that diversion might have occurred and the 
practical form that the response might take. 
42. Member States must continue to verify the effectiveness of the Agency's 
safeguards system, especially in view of the increasing number of facilities 
and the problems that entailed for the Agency and its resources. Member States 
should support the Agency's efforts to rectify shortages if the credibility 
of the system were to be maintained. To that end, the United Kingdom had 
offered the Agency a support programme for safeguards amounting to £600 000 for 
each of the three years from 1981 to 1983. 
43. The Agency's activities regarding the safety of nuclear facilities and 
their effect on the health of workers and the general public should be 
increased. His delegation considered the Agency's guides and recommendations 
to be particularly useful, and welcomed in particular the revision of the 
Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection. 
44. His Government recognized the value of the technical assistance programme 
for the world's less developed areas and noted with satisfaction that the 
resources available to the Agency for technical assistance in 1980 had increased 
by 27% by comparison with 1979. For its part, despite budgetary restraint, 
it could support the substantial increase in the target for voluntary contributions 
to the Technical Assistance Fund, which was fixed at US $16 million for 
1982, as well as the indicative planning figure of US $19 million for 1983. 
In addition, the United Kingdom Government would contribute US $1 million in 
the coming years for assistance to developing countries which were either parties 
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty or had accepted similar obligations. 

45. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) said that he wished to 
begin by welcoming the delegation of Zimbabwe. Recent events had reemphasized 
the importance of sufficient and secure energy supplies for the 
economic and political stability of all nations. In June 1981 the economic 
summit at Ottawa had stressed the need for countries to conserve fossil fuels 
and to be less dependent on oil in order to achieve greater energy security. 
GC(XXV)OR..229 
page 15 


He referred to a resolution adopted at that summit encouraging greater public 
acceptance of nuclear energy. The United Nations Conference on New and 
Renewable Sources of Energy, held at Nairobi in August 1981, had underlined the 
possibilities for using alternative energy sources and had called for further 
action within the framework of the United Nations. Energy would certainly be 
one of the key topics for future global negotiations. The peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, with its vast and proven potential both for the industrialized 
and for the developing countries, should therefore be promoted, and the Agency 
should continue to play a central role in encouraging the development of that 
indispensable energy source. 


46. With regard to the energy situation in the Federal Republic of Germany, his 
Government's measures aimed at reducing the consumption of energy, and particularly 
of oil, had begun to yield results. During the first six months of 
1981, primary energy consumption had been reduced by 5.8% compared to the same 
period in 1980, and oil consumption had dropped by approximately 13%. The 
share of oil in overall energy consumption in 1981 was estimated at less than 
47%, the lowest figure for 15 years. However, the level of oil imports 
remained high enough to place a heavy burden on the balance of payments. The 
policy of saving and substituting for oil was, therefore, being vigorously 
pursued. Nuclear energy accounted for approximately 18% of electricity generated, 
and that percentage would be increased in the future. His Government was taking 
measures to simplify and expedite licensing procedures. 
47. Further progress had been achieved in the establishment of a commercial 
fuel cycle through, for instance, the expansion of the URENC0 centrifuge 
capacities and the construction of the first production plant on a German site. 
Licensing procedures had begun for two interim storage facilities and for a 
reprocessing plant to be built in the State of Hesse. Deep drillings had been 
successfully concluded at Gorleben on the site of a potential radioactive waste 
repository. 
48. In all fields relating to nuclear power production, including the fuel 
cycle, his Government's aim was that industry and especially the utilities 
should take over increased responsibility for the financing of commercial or 
demonstration projects such as the prototype high temperature and fast breeder 
reactors currently under construction and scheduled for commissioning in 1983 
and 1985. 

GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 16 


49. With regard to the controversy in his country surrounding nuclear energy, 
the discussion was turning more and more towards the risks and benefits of 
modern technologies as such and was becoming more rational and less violent. 
In that connection, the very satisfactory performance of commercial nuclear 
power plants and of the KNK II experimental fast breeder reactor at Karlsruhe 
should be stressed. Significant progress had also been made in designing 
research reactors using a recently developed low-enriched fuel; a first reactor 
of that type would be built in co-operation with Indonesia. 
50. The interest shown by the Federal Republic of Germany in international co-operation 
in safety was demonstrated by the efforts being made by his Government, in collaboration 
with the United States of America and Japan, concerning an emergency 
core cooling project and by the construction of a facility for the vitrification 
of high-level nuclear waste in the EUROCHEMIC reprocessing plant at Mol, Belgium. 
51. An effective policy of non-proliferation was essential in order to preserve 
regional and global stability and security. The Agency occupied a central 
position in that regard, and the implementation of its safeguards system played 
a leading role in all international non-proliferation undertakings. Every 
effort should therefore be made to enlarge the scope of application of 
political agreements - particularly NPT, which formed the basis for safeguards. 
His country welcomed the decision by the Government of Egypt to ratify NPT. 
52. On 7 June 1981 a serious attack on a nuclear facility had taken place, and 
his Government shared the concern already expressed by the United Kingdom 
delegation on behalf of the European Communities. He remained convinced that 
only a policy based on the principle of renunciation of violence could lead 
to a permanent solution in the Middle East. After that attack, political 
attention throughout the world had been focused on the Agency's safeguards 
system and at times the reliability and efficiency of that system had been 
questioned. 'Nevertheless, the detailed report submitted by the Director 
General to the Board of Governors and to the United Nations Security Council had 
demonstrated that the Agency's safeguards had been applied satisfactorily. He 
was pleased to learn from the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1980 that, 
as in the past, the Agency had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the 


GC(XXV)/OR.229 
page 17 


diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material. As 
representative of a country with long and comprehensive experience of safeguards, 
he wished to reiterate his country's support for the safeguards system in general 
and to recall the active part his country played in safeguards activities, both in 
the working groups on safeguards for reprocessing and enrichment plants and through 
its support programme aimed at increasing the reliability of safeguards, improving 
the cost-benefit ratio and minimizing the burden on operators, the Agency and 
Member States. 


53. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had made a promising start. The 
50 or so participating States represented a wide range of levels of development 
of the nuclear industry, and it was quite clear that at the present stage of the 
discussions in CAS different approaches existed. Nevertheless, the first year 
of CAS had shown a considerable amount of common ground on key issues both of 
substance and of procedure. Practicable and reliable supply conditions were now 
generally recognized to be of paramount importance for stable international 
relations in the nuclear field. Furthermore, assurances of supply and safeguards 
against non-proliferation were clearly complementary. His country was aware of 
the confidence that CAS could generate and would therefore continue to contribute 
actively to its work. 
54. The international storage of plutonium could lead to an improvement of the 
non-proliferation system. He was convinced that acceptable results could be 
achieved through patient negotiations, even if it was not easy to reach compromises 
on a number of key issues. His country, together with France and the 
United Kingdom, had therefore submitted a comprehensive proposal to the Expert 
Group on International Plutonium Storage which seemed to have been well 
received. 
55. The technical assistance programme was regarded as one of the main tasks 
of the Agency. The United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources 
of Energy at Nairobi had stressed the need to strengthen multilateral cooperation 
in order to enable all States to reduce their dependence on oil and 
to diversify their energy sources. The Agency had already shown how technology 
transfer in a particular field could be organized very effectively on the basis 
of carefully prepared programmes for specific projects. His Government firmly 



GC(XXV)/0R.229 
page 18 


supported the technical assistance programme not only by pledging its share of 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund but also by providing 
additional contributions for fellowships, experts and equipment, training 
courses and co-ordinated research programmes of special interest to the 
developing countries. Subject to parliamentary approval, his country would 
pay a total voluntary contribution of $2.5 million in 1982. His country was 
following with great interest the Agency's study on how to provide effective 
practical training in nuclear technology. 


56. The Federal Republic of Germany was pleased to know that nuclear safety 
had been accepted as one of the priority programmes. It would continue to 
co-operate actively with the Agency by providing experts and hosting expert 
meetings. The Nuclear Safety Standards programme was one of the most successful 
elements of the Agency's activities, and the Stockholm Conference held in 
October 1980 had been extremely useful. It had helped to clarify a number of 
safety issues of real importance and had also highlighted the need for increased 
co-operation in that field beyond national borders. Missions to promote the 
adoption and implementation of the Agency's Codes of Practice and Safety Guides 
were certainly valuable, especially for countries starting a nuclear programme. 
57. The events of the past year had provided ample proof that the peaceful 
use of the atom and an effective non-proliferation policy remained topics of 
great priority and of great interest for all countries. The mandate and 
activities of the Agency were at the heart of those matters. 
58. Lastly, he wished to refer to the work accomplished by the IAEA under the 
direction of Dr. Eklund, who had rendered invaluable service to the Agency and 
whose personality had been essential in inspiring the Agency's talented and 
dedicated staff with a great sense for the common cause. 
The meeting rose at 5 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.230 
April 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1981, at 10.50 a.m. 


President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda*" 


5 Arrangements for the Conference 1 -4 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and 
allocation of items for 
initial discussion 1 -2 
(b) 
Closing date of the session 
and opening date of the next 
session 3 -4 
7 General debate and annual report 
for 1980 (resumed) 5 - 116 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Argentina 5-2 7 
German Democratic Republic 28 - 44 
Pakistan 45 - 54 
Holy See 55 - 74 
Tunisia 75 - 91 
Sudan 92 - 100 
Australia 101 - 123 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 25 September 1981, 
**/ GC(XXV)/640. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


81-6530 



GC(XXV)/OR.230 


page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXV)/640) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee, at 
its meeting the previous day, had authorized him to report on the results of 
its consideration of the agenda and the allocation of items for initial discussion. 
The General Committee recommended that the agenda should consist of 
all the items contained in the provisional agenda, as set out in document 
GC(XXV)/640, and that the items should be allocated for initial discussion as 
indicated in that document, except that item 8, "Military attack on Iraqi 
nuclear research centre and its implications for the Agency", should be discussed 
in Plenary and not in the Committee of the Whole. 
2. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
3. The PRESIDENT further informed the Conference that the General 
Committee had authorized him to report that it recommended tentatively fixing 
Friday, 25 September 1981, as the closing date of the twenty-fifth regular 
session and Monday, 20 September 1982, as the opening date of the twenty-sixth 
regular session of the General Conference. 
4. 
The recommendations of the General Committee were accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1980 (GC(XXV)/642, 642/Corr.1, 642/Corr.2) 
(resumed) 


5. Mr. PULIT (Argentina) welcomed Zimbabwe as the youngest Member of the 
Agency. 


6. Describing the progress Argentina had made in its nuclear programme since 
the preceding session of the General Conference, he pointed out that the 
Atucha I power plant had operated satisfactorily, generating 1 783 402 MWh in 
the first eight months of 1981, i.e. at a load factor of 88%. A new facility 
for storage of spent fuel up to 1990 had been completed. 
7. The Embalse nuclear power plant had reached the stage between the final 
assembly and commissioning and it was expected to go critical and be connected 
to the grid in late 1982. The containment building had been pressure-tested. 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 3 


8. As regards Atucha II, the civil engineering works had started and orders 
had been placed for major equipment. The steam generators, the pressurizer and 
exchangers for the moderator were being built by an Argentine firm. The 
industrial architect of the project was ENACE S.A., set up jointly by the 
Argentine Nuclear Energy Commission (CNEA) and Kraftwerk Union (KWU). 
9. The final siting and design studies for a fourth nuclear power plant were 
under way. 
10. A heavy-water plant was under construction at Arroyito, which was expected 
to produce 250 tons per annum from 1984. It was worth mentioning that the 
Board had approved a safeguards agreement for the first time for a plant of its 
kind, and he wished to express his appreciation for the goodwill and cooperation 
of the parties involved in the agreement. 
11. Besides, a heavy-water pilot plant based entirely on indigenous technology 
was at an advanced stage of construction, and would serve as the basis for future 
plants. 
12. As regards the fuel cycle, the uranium concentrate needed for the nuclear 
programme was being provided. The facilities for the production of sintered 
UO, and of Zircaloy tubes and for fuel element fabrication were making marked 
progress, and the first batch of 200 fuel elements made entirely in the country 
for the Atucha I power plant had been delivered. They would ensure that 50% 
of the core was made indigenously. 
13. As regards the back-end of the fuel cycle, the construction of a reprocessing 
plant, with a view to the re-use of plutonium in the recycle mode and in 
possible future fast reactors, was proceeding normally; it was hoped that the 
plant would start "cold" operation the following year. 
14. Thus, his country was optimistic about reaching its objective of being 
independent in the fuel cycle from 1982. Such progress could not have been 
made without a corresponding effort in developing technology. 
15. The CNEA was also very active in the field of research. The installation 
of a 20-MV tandem accelerator would ensure continuity of work in nuclear physics 
and make a major contribution to research in the Latin American region. 

GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 4 


16. In the area of radioisotopes and their application, mention must be made 
of the installation of a new industrial radiosterilization plant, the completion 
of the infrastructure for low-, medium- and high-activity cells (where all kinds 
of radioisotopes and sealed sources would be produced) and the co-ordination of 
medical applications in the whole of Argentina by joint efforts of the CNEA and 
the Ministry of Public Health. 
17. In connection with radiation protection and nuclear safety, Argentina was 
implementing the recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological 
Protection (ICRP) and had made progress in the matter of nuclear safety standards, 
especially those relating to design requirements. 
18. As for training, which was of vital importance for the success of the 
nuclear programme, post-graduate courses in nuclear engineering and in radiation 
protection and nuclear safety had been added to the numerous courses held 
normally at the CNEA. The first batch of 15 nuclear engineers had graduated 
from the Balseiro Institute at Bariloche which, with the Agency's assistance, 
would produce a similar number every year to meet the demands of the CNEA and 
the private firms participating in the nuclear plan. 
19. The year 1981 had been a busy one for Argentina as regards international 
co-operation, both multilateral and bilateral, in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Aware of the inconvenience to developing countries caused by the lack 
of funds for approved projects, his Government had offered to execute a project 
for Mexico and one for Peru. 
20. Argentina was in a position, as in the previous years, to pledge a voluntary 
contribution to the Technical Assistance Fund in an amount corresponding to its 
base rate of assessment, apart from offering the same number of fellowships. 
21. At the multilateral level, within the framework of the Organization of 
American States, his Government had repeated its offer to the Pan-American 
Nuclear Energy Commission to provide technical assistance to a number of States 
Members of that organization. 
22. In the area of bilateral co-operation, several agreements to which his 
country was a party had yielded fruitful results, as was shown by the uninterrupted 
progress in the construction of the Huarangal Nuclear Research 
Centre in Peru and the considerable exchange of goods and services with Brazil. 
Mention should also be made of the loan of uranium and the contract for the 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 5 


supply of Zircaloy tubes for Brazilian reactors by Argentina and the fabrication 


of the lower part of the pressure vessel for the third Argentine nuclear power 


plant by a Brazilian firm. 


23. Those activities demonstrated a mutual confidence in technical development 
and in the ability of countries linked by common objectives in the nuclear 
sphere to carry it out. Co-operation agreements had also been signed with 
other countries, especially Latin American countries, and had opened up new 
and potentially fruitful avenues for co-operation activities already taking 
place. Argentina was prepared to co-operate with any country in the world on 
a basis of equality and mutual respect, since the benefits of the peaceful uses 
of nuclear power should be made available to all peoples. The peace-loving 
nature of Argentina's policies had been demonstrated once again by the signing 
of a safeguards agreement with the Agency for the Atucha II nuclear power station 
and by the Board's approval of the agreement for the Arroyito heavy-water 
production plant. Negotiations with the Secretariat had also been under way 
with a view to drawing up a safeguards agreement under Article 13 of the Treaty 
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the Tlatelolco Treaty). 


24. Turning to the Agency's activities in the previous year, he congratulated 
the Secretariat on its considerable achievements in the sphere of technical 
assistance, and in particular on the increased use of non-convertxble currencies. 
However, certain countries were still providing technical assistance through the 
Agency on a discriminatory basis in that adherence to a given treaty was used 
as a criterion, which was expressly prohibited by the Agency's Statute. He 
welcomed the increase in the funds available for technical assistance, but considered 
that a real measure of the increase would be provided by a comparison 
not with the figures of previous years but with the requirements of Member 
States. The latter comparison showed that the increase in the funds for 
technical assistance was still insufficient. On the other hand, if the target 
fixed for voluntary contributions for the Technical Assistance Fund had actually 
been met, all technically feasible requests could easily have been granted. 


25. It was gratifying that once again none of the materials under Agency safeguards 
had been diverted. However, the Agency's safeguards system would make 
better progress if, instead of having larger sums allotted to it at the expense 
of the Agency's main functions, the funds available for safeguards were used 
rationally by the emphasis being placed on special fissionable materials with 

GC(XXV)/OR.230 


page 6 


which nuclear weapons could be made. In the Regular Budget approved by the Board 


for 1982, funds for technical assistance represented less than 16% of those for 


safeguards. It should be borne in mind that the cost of applying safeguards 


to civilian nuclear facilities in nuclear-weapon States amounted to some 50% of 


the cost of implementing the technical assistance projects which could not be 


implemented owing to a lack of funds. Although the cost of safeguarding 


installations which were obviously non-military represented only 3% of the total 
cost of safeguards, it nevertheless amounted to at least one fifth of the total 
available for technical assistance. In any case, there was no advantage to be 
gained from applying safeguards in nuclear-weapon States, since, when the time 
came for provision to be made for the transfer to the Agency's jurisdiction of 
special fissionable materials produced from irradiated fuel, Article XII.A.5 
became unenforceable. 


26. Turning to the Agency's technical activities, he said that its work on 
nuclear power and the nuclear fuel cycle had ensured a satisfactory exchange of 
information between Member States. It was important that the Agency should continue 
its work on nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes. The Agency's work 
on physics, life sciences and agriculture had been, as in the past, of great 
value, as had been the activities of the Trieste Centre. Of particular significance 
were the Agency's achievements in radiation protection and nuclear safety, 
including the preparation of revised Basic Safety Standards and the continuing 
satisfactory pursuance of the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme. Its 
efforts in relation to the handling and disposal of radioactive wastes had the 
dual advantage of furthering nuclear power and of protecting humanity from its 
possible deleterious effects. The safety criteria applied in the nuclear 
industry were much stricter than in any other industry. 
27. Finally, he regretted the fact that the Board of Governors had not yet been 
able to select a candidate for the post of Director General and stressed that 
efforts should be redoubled to ensure that a solution be found in the near 
future; otherwise the Agency would suffer from a dangerous lack of continuity. 
28. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) wished first to express his 
highest appreciation and warmest thanks to the Director General, Dr. Sigvard 
Eklund, who had guided the Agency's affairs through two decades in an excellent 
and outstanding manner. 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 7 


29. His delegation deeply regretted that the twenty-fifth regular session of 
the General Conference was overshadowed by an event that had given rise to grave 
concern throughout the world: the air strike against the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre had been a flagrant violation of international law and the act of 
aggression also called into question both NPT and the Agency's safeguards system. 
His Government shared the view that that completely indefensible aggression 
could not possibly have been carried out without backing by the most reactionary 
circles of imperialism. The attack resulted from a general effort by those 
forces to aggravate international tensions and to escalate the arms race. 
30. The German Democratic Republic therefore deemed it necessary to press all 
the more insistently for the cessation of the arms race and the strengthening 
of the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In particular, that 
included the demand that IAEA safeguards be applied to all the nuclear 
activities of non-nuclear-weapon States, above all those of Israel and South 
Africa, and that all co-operation with those States in the nuclear field cease. 
31. In view of the serious and complicated international situation it was 
encouraging to note that the International Atomic Energy Agency had made great 
and successful efforts towards solving the tasks before it. That had been 
clearly demonstrated by the Director General in his report and could be inferred 
from the well drafted documents presented to the General Conference. He wished 
to comment on a few selected items from the programme. 
32. Regarding nuclear power and nuclear safety, his Government continued to 
take the view that nuclear power was indispensable in meeting future energy needs 
and that it would play an ever-increasing role in electricity and heat production. 
Precisely because progress in nuclear energy utilization had recently slowed 
down throughout the world, he considered the International Conference on Nuclear 
Power Experience scheduled for 1982 to be a necessary and an important step in 
the interest of accelerating the universal use of nuclear power. It was to be 
expected that that conference would provide useful input for the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses 
of Nuclear Energy planned for 1983, in the preparation and conduct of which 
the Agency, as the competent international organization in the nuclear field, 
should play a leading role. 

GC(XXV)/0R.230 
page 8 


33. His Government had repeatedly expressed the view that the solution of all 
relevant nuclear safety problems was a prerequisite for promoting nuclear energy 
utilization. After the International "Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant 
Safety Issues convened by the Agency in Stockholm in 1980, it could be stated 
with satisfaction that there were no safety-related factors limiting the use 
and development of nuclear power. However, the Agency was, quite rightly, not 
guilty of complacency. That was clearly shown, inter alia, by the progress 
made under the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme, by the efforts to 
promote the acceptance and use of NUSS principles in Member States, by emergency 
assistance activities, and by the intention to become more active in promoting 
international co-operation in safety research. 
34. Turning to the development of the Agency's safeguards programme, he felt 
it could be stated with truth that the course pursued and the measures initiated 
had proved successful. It was particularly gratifying to learn from the latest 
Safeguards Implementation Report that again in 1980 all nuclear material under 
Agency safeguards could be adequately accounted for. 
35. He welcomed the recently introduced safeguards support activities, particularly 
the establishment of the Safeguards Training Unit, since the availability 
of well-trained inspectors played a key role in the safeguards system. 
That was why his country had made available a number of nuclear facilities 
for the basic training of newly recruited inspectors. It was ready to continue 
that assistance in the future. 
36. Despite the generally positive development of events in the safeguards 
sphere, there were a number of persistent shortcomings. Besides the existence 
of non-safeguarded nuclear activities in some non-nuclear-weapon States, they 
included problems relating to the designation of inspectors and to the uniformity 
and timeliness of reports. In the interests of strengthening the 
Agency's safeguards effort, he was in favour of the measures which were proposed 
in that connection in the Safeguards Implementation Report, and which 
deserved and needed the support of all Member States. 
37. On the matter of technical assistance, the report before the General 
Conference on the technical assistance provided by the Agency in i960 revealed 
an impressive programme of activities that were of specific benefit to the 
developing countries. Not only had those activities made significant 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 9 


contributions in the fields of agriculture, medicine and training, but they 
had also contributed to the overall technological development that was a prerequisite 
for a country's embarking on the course of nuclear power. The German 
Democratic Republic therefore considered the technical assistance programme to 
be one of the most essential activities of the Agency and welcomed the progress 
made under it. 


38. In support of the Agency's various technical assistance activities his 
country duly contributed its share to the target for voluntary contributions 
and was seeking a sound balance between the supply of materials and equipment 
and the provision of training facilities. Accordingly, since the last session 
of the General Conference it had taken part in the organization of two study 
tours and had conducted one training course- Another five-week training course 
had started early in September 1981. 
39. His Government had repeatedly expressed reservations regarding the provision 
of technical assistance to certain countries. In the light of recent 
developments he wished strongly to reaffirm those reservations. 
40. Apart from technical assistance, the Agency had to its credit outstanding 
achievements in other promotional areas such as nuclear power, nuclear safety 
and the life sciences. Another of those achievements was the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS), which represented a prime example of successful 
international co-operation in the sharing of scientific and technical 
information among nations. Through INIS it had become possible for all Member 
States to keep abreast of the many advances made in the nuclear field. 
41. All endeavours to expand the use of nuclear energy, however, made sense 
only if the politically vital task of securing peace was fully met, and 
specifically if the threat of nuclear weapons was checked. His Government 
therefore strongly supported the far-reaching proposals put forward by one of 
the world's leading statesmen, Leonid Brezhnev, in February 1981 with the aim 
o£ ending the arms race, particularly in the field of nuclear weapons and other 
weapons of mass destruction. 
42. If awareness that nuclear weapons could not solve the world's problems took 
root in the minds of all men, then the forces capable of calling a halt to the 
nuclear danger would grow. Everyone knew about the power of the atom - the 
constructive, life-giving one as well as the destructive one. From that 

GC(XXV)/0R.230 
page 10 


followed the particular significance for the Agency of the Soviet proposal to 
establish an authoritative international committee which would inform the 
peoples of the world about the devastating consequences of nuclear war. 


43. According to its Statute, the Members of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency were obliged to support the enlargement and acceleration of the contribution 
of nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. 
Peace was the main problem facing mankind. In the atomic age, success or 
failure in securing peace meant "to be or not to be", life or death. The Agency 
should have an important voice in that all-decisive matter. 
44. The German Democratic Republic was fully aware that in the long run the arms 
race could not result in consolidating peace. Political wisdom now consisted 
not in gambling on force or in struggling for confrontation, but in a willingness 
to negotiate and in the desire to secure peace by limiting the arms race and 
striving for the ultimate goal of eliminating all weapons from the earth. The 
abolition of nuclear weapons would be a decisive milestone on that road. If 
the world wished to survive it had to replace nuclear deterrent with world-wide 
confidence. It was his hope that the nuclear community would closely cooperate 
in that spirit. In any event his country would continue to participate 
in such co-operation to the best of its abilities. 
45. Mr• KHAN (Pakistan) said that the present Conference session marked 
the Agency's 25th anniversary. The Agency had come a long way over a relatively 
short period and had made major contributions to the promotion of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. But although it had started with a sense of mission and 
with great expectations, in the passage of time the original optimism had been 
tempered with harsh realities. Nuclear energy could no longer be regarded as 
a panacea. In fact, its very viability was being seriously contested m 
several countries. It was ironic that the promise of nuclear energy had been 
replaced by fear and that its promotion was being hampered by preventive 
measures. The over-riding concern seemed to be to control, not to share, to 
deny, not to transfer, and to withhold, not to provide, peaceful nuclear technology 
to those who needed it most. Whether or not that stemmed from a genuine 
concern about proliferation, from the fears expressed by the environmentalists 
or from the attitude of the advanced countries towards the developing countries, 
he believed that nuclear energy had a most vital role to play in meeting world 
energy needs. 


GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 11 


46. In spite of all the difficulties involved, there was no other choice but 
to rely increasingly on nuclear power, as it offered the only viable alternative 
for meeting the world's power requirements for decades to come. The available 
soft technologies or renewable resources were not adequate or near-term options 
for the world, as had been concluded after a five-year study by the International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). 
47. Turning to the developing countries, it was clear that their energy problems 
had become very serious. The import bill for the oil-importing developing 
countries, which was US $74 billion in 1980, would in constant dollars double 
by 1990. Those countries would need a staggering amount of money -
US $450 billion - in the present decade for their energy development programmes. 
Little doubt remained that the developing countries needed to introduce nuclear 
power on a substantial scale and on an immediate basis. In so doing they 
would have to overcome insurmountable problems. Foremost among them was the 
attitude of the advanced countries who had equated the spread of nuclear power 
with nuclear proliferation and prescribed a restrictive regime based on denial 
of nuclear technology. Such policies were already retarding the growth of 
nuclear power domestically and were becoming counterproductive internationally. 
They had created a deep sense of insecurity among the "have-nots", who were 
being compelled to develop the necessary basic technologies and know-how 
independently for peaceful purposes. The time had come to reappraise those 
policies, and, instead of seeking confrontation between North and South, to 
develop a parntership for common survival. 

48. For those reasons, among others, the holding of the United Nationssponsored 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy at Geneva in 1983 was to be welcomed. Pakistan 
was actively participating in the work of the Preparatory Committee for the 
Conference, which, it was convinced, could make a major contribution to 
recreating a climate of trust and co-operation. 
49. The 25th session of the General Conference was a time for charting a new 
course to meet the challenges ahead. The Agency was entering a new era, and 
the increasing presence of and the genuine aspirations of the developing 
countries, who desired to play their legitimate role in the organization, 
could no longer be ignored. The developing countries, which constituted the 
overwhelming majority of the Agency's membership, were grossly under-represented 

GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 12 


at the various policy-making and management levels. The overall representation 
of the developing countries in the Professional staff was only 14%. Their share 
of the senior posts was also very small. That was one reason why the Agency 
was not able to communicate effectively with the developing Member States. 


50. There was a growing feeling that technical assistance was being relegated 
to the background and attention focused primarily on regulatory activities. 
Pakistan fully supported the safeguards functions of the Agency, but at the same 
time felt that equal importance should be attributed to its technical assistance 
programme. Those two functions constituted the two pillars of the organization 
and had to have parity in terms of the total resources and budgetary allocations. 
That could be done only if funds for technical assistance were provided through 
predictable and reliable sources, in the same way as for the safeguards 
activities. 
51. For the last four years the General Conference had studied the problem of 
amending Article VI.A.2 of the Statute so as to ensure better representation 
for the areas of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia (MESA), which 
accounted for nearly 40% of the Agency's membership but had little over 20% of 
the seats on the Board. To begin redressing that injustice Pakistan had 
advocated a modest increase of one seat each for Africa and the MESA; that 
had met with the support of the majority of Member States at the 22nd session 
of the General Conference. That compromise formula still deserved to be 
approved. If there was further delay, it would mean facing the inevitable 
prospect of a much larger increase in the membership of the Board, for which 
the pressures were already building up. 
52. In 1980 the Board of Governors had taken the important decision to 
establish the Committee on Assurances of Supply, which offered a forum for a 
constructive dialogue between the supplier and recipient States. The formation 
of the Committee was tacit acknowledgement of the failure of the policies of 
unilateralism pursued by certain suppliers, who sought to impose their own set 
of rules on the conduct of nuclear trade in the world. The Committee could 
help to establish acceptable norms, arrived at through negotiation, for the 
promotion and regulation of world nuclear trade. Monopoly in nuclear know-how, 
materials and services was fast eroding and there now had to be evolved a 
system based on co-operation and interdependence. Irrevocable safeguards had 
to be linked with equally irrevocable supply agreements and contracts. As 
GC(XXV)/0R.230 
page 13 


was known, some of the more powerful supplier States were putting increasing 
pressures on the Agency to follow their own example of taking arbitrary 
decisions and action which were not consistent with the provisions and obligations 
provided for in the safeguards agreements approved by the Board. The 
Agency should be extremely careful to resist such pressures and to preserve 
its image of complete impartiality and objectivity. 


53. His country viewed with the utmost gravity and concern the unwarranted, 
premeditated and unjustified military attack on the Iraqi Nuclear Centre by 
Israel in June. One could not overestimate the far-reaching and serious 
consequences of the attack for the Agency, the development of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes, and the security of the region. The Director General 
and the Board were quite right in seeing it as an attack on the Agency's safeguards 
system. Pakistan had complete confidence in that system and did not 
want such an act of aggression to be exploited so as to cast doubts on or 
create complications for either the Agency's own safeguards system or the 
system linked with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 
The attack not only constituted a serious set-back for the development of 
nuclear energy throughout the world, but it would also be used by uninformed 
politicians, legislators and environmentalists as an excuse to oppose or block 
the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. That precedent was most 
dangerous, since it would undermine the security of the region. Pakistan would 
therefore join others in supporting any resolution for the expulsion of Israel 
from the Agency. 
54. His country continued to make progress in the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy for the growing needs of its economic development. In spite of an 
arbitrary cut-off of supplies, fuel and services, Pakistan's nuclear power plant 
had continued to operate through indigenous efforts. A feasibility report on 
the economics of nuclear power had indicated that, within the Pakistani context, 
the cost of power from a nuclear plant was about one third of that from 
an equivalent oil-fired station at the prevailing international oil prices. 
The economic advantage of nuclear power was thus overwhelming and the necessary 
infrastructure in terms of trained manpower, equipment, materials and services 
to support its nuclear power programme was now being established. 


55. Mr. PERESSIN (Holy See) observed that the Conference was being held 
at a time when humanity was asking ever more searching questions about the 

GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 14 


value, significance and use of atomic energy, and its consequences, not only for 
the present time but also for the generations to come. Thanks to the discovery 
of atomic energy, twentieth-century man now had in his hands the great but 


frightening power of either improving the world he lived in or of destroying the 
whole of humanity. 


56. The Agency's annual report for 1980 indicated that the total installed 
nuclear capacity in the world had increased by about 11%. That development had 
been greeted by some as a great step forward, but was looked at askance by 
others. The uncertainties, doubts and even open hostility manifested in 
certain quarters had forced some Governments to cut down, to suspend or at least 
to retard the expansion of nuclear power. 
57. The use of nuclear energy, even for peaceful purposes alone, was not proof 
against certain doubts stemming from its very nature. In addition, the debate 
was rendered even more complex by elements of interpretation that differed 
strongly. Some people, on the basis especially of ecological considerations, 
wished to bring nuclear technology into the general stream of modern science 
and technology. Others wondered whether it was really a good thing that man 
should use all the possibilities that science revealed to him. 
58. The nuclear energy debate perhaps showed more widely than any other the 
uncertainty and in some cases the bewilderment of a society that was scientifically 
and technologically advanced, but which was not sure what criteria to 
adopt and what use to make of its knowledge, discoveries and power. 
59. The questions at issue being so complex, the present debate demanded to be 
tackled on a world-wide scale, on the basis of rigorous scientific research, with 
alert awareness of the human values involved, and with responsible political 
orientation. 
60. The debate likewise called for an attitude inspired by complete truthfulness. 
While it had to go beyond mere emotionalism and preconceived ideas, it 
also had to avoid one-sided or partial information and also the possibility 
of its being manipulated for the advantage of particular interests, whether 
economic or political. It had to be realized that, without truthfulness and 
objectivity, ordinary people could not be expected to give their consent, and 
still less to offer the solidarity needed for the carrying out of options as 
important and full of consequences as the development of nuclear energy. 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 15 


61. The more one reflected on the information that the Agency had provided, the 
more convincing was the argument that the search had to continue and that 
scientific exchanges had to go on. The commitment to continued scientific and 
technological research was obviously not isolated from the practical realities 
of political options and economic considerations. But it was important to 
stress that one of the great aims of the Agency was to foster that research and 
to encourage the commitment of talents which would not only open up new capabilities, 
but which would also promote greater safety and sounder understanding 
of the enormous power represented by nuclear energy. 
62. Of particular interest and importance among the many scientific meetings 
sponsored by the Agency would be the International Conference on Nuclear Power 
Experience to be held in 1982. The delegation of the Holy See expressed the 
hope that the Conference would be carefully prepared, with the effective 
collaboration of scientists, technologists and experts, and also of the leaders 
of the international community. 
63. The Agency was called upon to play an important part in the present debate 
on nuclear energy. Through its many programmes, through the activities of its 
scientific experts, through its setting of safety standards and its enforcement 
of safeguards, it was contributing in so many ways to ensuring that nuclear 
energy was placed at the service of humanity and of the international community. 
64. Its contribution would be seen to be of capital and decisive importance 
for the good of humanity if the Agency could convince the international community 
and public opinion that it had the competence, capacity and means to engage in, 
develop and control the safe, beneficent and peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
65. Together with other institutions, the Agency was implementing in that field 
a programme aimed at ensuring that the exploitation and application of nuclear 
energy did not involve unacceptable risks. In that regard, it had to be 
stressed that the notion of risk referred, first and foremost, to man and his 
environment. That principle, which was self-evident and concerning which there 
was an ever growing awareness, had constantly to be borne in mind in all nuclear 
options and activities, and had to prevail over all other considerations of a 
purely economic, industrial and political nature. 
66. The effectiveness of the Agency's system of safeguards deserved particular 
recognition. The present year had witnessed an attack by one country on the 

GC(XXV)/OR.230 


page 16 


nuclear power installations of another, on the grounds that the latter State 
was developing - in contravention of international obligations undertaken nuclear 
facilities for the building of an atomic bomb. Such an event could 
easily jeopardize the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency as the 
supervisory institution under the Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968. The Agency 
had responsibility for clearly establishing that nuclear power plants constructed 
in various countries for the peaceful use of atomic energy were and could be 
used only for such purposes. The least possibility that the safeguards system 
administered by the Agency might not be foolproof, and the slightest suspicion 
that a non-nuclear-weapon State could - contrary to the provisions of NPT acquire 
nuclear weapons, would be disastrous for the whole future o£ the system 
envisaged under the Treaty. 


67. Under those circumstances, the delegation of the Holy See could only appeal 
to all States to let their actions be governed by the dictates of reason and by 
the need for stable peace in the world, according to the norms established by 
the United Nations Charter. 
68. The delegation of the Holy See also wished to draw the Conference's 
attention to the crucial matter of nuclear weapons. 


69. In the first place it had to be noted that the present international 
climate differed from the cautiously optimistic one prevailing after the signing 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty (1967) and the Non-Proliferation Treaty (1968). 
70. A number of observers were now of the opinion that the existing international 
instruments were insufficient or inadequate for stopping the development 
of nuclear weapons, and no longer represented an effective stimulus for disarmament 
and peace. Dr. Eklund, the Director General of the Agency, in his 
statement at the twenty-fourth regular session of the General Conference in 1980, 
had made reference to the crisis in NPT and had expressed the hope that there 
would be "an early conclusion of a comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty" which on the 
one hand would be acceptable to those countries that now refused to accede to 
NPT and on the other hand would put a brake on vertical proliferation. Subsequently, 
the Secretary General of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL), in a statement presented at the meeting of 
OPANAL in Mexico City in April 1981, had observed that the failure of the 
Second NPT Review Conference demonstrated the existence of a possibly fatal 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 17 


crisis in the system established by NPT, and he had added that the present 
situation called for reconsideration of the whole question of nuclear disarmament 
at the world-wide level. 


71. The delegation of the Holy See was convinced of the need to overcome the 
present precarious situation in international relations, a situation based on 
the balance of terror and the system of deterrence. 
72. There was no other rational path than that of disarmament and the banning 
of nuclear weapons, by means of worldwide agreements supported by effective 
safeguards. It could of course be objected that the history, both ancient and 
more recent, of attempts at disarmament had proved to be a series of illusions 
and delusions. That demonstrated a fundamental truth: treaties were not 
effective unless they arose from and were sustained by a sincere and real desire 
for peace, because, in the final analysis, the danger and threat come not so 
much from the weapons as from him who had them in his hand: man. 
73. Therefore it was man, and groups and nations, that should abandon myths of 
power and supremacy and be converted to a new order of international relationships 
based upon mutual respect, trust and collaboration. As John Paul II had 
warned at Hiroshima: ".... the future of humanity depends, as never before, 
on our collective moral choices from now on, it is only through a 
conscious choice and through a deliberate policy that humanity can survive". 
74. In that spirit, the delegation of the Holy See called upon the Agency to 
commit itself resolutely and actively to sustaining and, when appropriate, 
promoting initiatives aimed at overcoming present tensions and at putting an end 
to the threat of nuclear weapons, from whatever source. 
75. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) said that, from the Agency's point of view, the 
year 1981 would unfortunately be remembered for the unjustifiable Israeli air 
attack on the Tamuz Nuclear Research Centre in Iraq, a country which was a 
Member of the Agency and a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and which had 
submitted all its facilities and equipment to Agency safeguards. 
76. That attack was a further illustration of the aggressive and expansionist 
policy of Israel, which, after depriving the Palestinian people of its homeland, 
occupying by force Arab territories which it wished to annex and visiting 
massive destruction and devastation on the Lebanon, was now setting itself up 
as the policeman of the Middle East. Further, while cynically trying to use 



GC(XXV)/OR.230 


page 18 


the attack to gain an electoral advantage, the Israeli Government had arrogated 
the right to forbid an independent State access to technology and science, 
threatened to repeat its offences against other Arab countries and shown no 
reluctance to jeopardize peace and safety in the region and throughout the world. 


77. No one was now fooled by claims that Israel was anxious for its safety and 
feared the possibility of a nuclear threat from Iraq. Surely the Palestinian, 
Lebanese and other Arab peoples had much greater reason to fear for their 
safety? Israel had shown no sign that it adhered to non-proliferation. What 
the Member States were now faced with was the ideology of a nation which 
believed that for it everything was permissible, including the denial of the 
rights of all other peoples. 
78. In judging the Israeli attack, the Director General had informed the Board 
of Governors on 12 June and the United Nations Security Council on 19 June that 
the Agency had inspected the Iraqi reactors and had found no evidence of any 
activity whatsoever which was not in conformity with the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. Despite that, he continued, a country which was not a party to NPT had 
clearly remained unconvinced by the Agency's conclusions and its ability to 
continue to carry out its safeguards responsibilities effectively and had felt 
itself justified, in the interests of national security, to undertake military 
action. The Director General had concluded that the attack had also struck the 
Agency's safeguards system. 
79. The Director General had pointed out earlier that the Agency had never been 
faced with a problem as serious as the consequences of that incident. He had 
also stressed that the Agency's safeguards system had never before been found 
wanting. 
80. The Tunisian delegation felt that in view of the seriousness of the attack, 
which had also dealt a blow to the credibility of the Agency and its safeguards 
system, and in view of the open display of contempt for the Agency and its 
basic activities and for the Charter of the United Nations, the General 
Conference should follow the recommendation made by the Board of Governors on 
12 June 1981 and take a decision to expel Israel from the Agency. Such a 
decision would be one simple method of defending the Agency and its objectives 
and was indeed necessitated by the urgent need to restore the Agency's credibility 
in the spheres he had just mentioned. 


GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 19 


81. In his statement to the General Conference, Dr. Eklund had outlined the 
problems which the international community continued to face in its bid to meet 
constantly growing energy needs. 
82. His delegation was grateful for the comprehensive and detailed picture he 
had given of the development of nuclear programmes throughout the world. That 
picture clearly indicated the full extent of the gap separating the industrialized 
and developing countries in the realm of the expertise and utilization 
of nuclear technology. 
83. It was becoming increasingly urgent and necessary to use nuclear technology 
and energy, first, because of the need to satisfy the requirements of 
economic and social development and, secondly, because of the progressive 
exhaustion of the sources currently in use and the uncertainty and limitations 
of the alternatives. 
84. In general, in attempting to establish and execute a nuclear power programme, 
a developing country found itself confronted not only with the difficulties 
associated with a conventional technology, which could be classified as 
those of a human or economic nature, those due to a lack of general scientific 
development and those stemming from inadequate knowledge of the technology in 
question, but also with the problems peculiar to the nuclear field, which had 
their roots in politics, ecology, safety and protection. 
85. The purpose of establishing the Committee on Assurances of Supply had been 
to overcome some of those difficulties and rectify the present state of the 
international market, which - it was clear - did not offer conditions of 
assured and adequate supply. At the Committee's meetings, almost all participants 
had stated their views on the Committee's objectives and the procedure 
to be adopted in pursuing them. 


86. The Tunisian delegation had also outlined certain guiding principles for 
the Committee's work and described the mechanisms to which that work should 
lead. It had stressed three points in particular. First, assured supplies of 
nuclear materials, equipment, services and technology must be guaranteed for 
all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. Tunisia's priorities concerned the 
fields and techniques involved in the front end of the fuel cycle, which 
included areas such as mineral exploration, the treatment and purification of 
materials, nuclear metallurgy and radiation protection. In addition, as a 

GC(XXV)/0R-230 
page 20 


country bordering on the Sahara, Tunisia set great store by the contribution of 
nuclear energy to solving the serious problem of desertification and any progress 
made in desalination technology involving nuclear energy. Secondly, 
priority must be given to training. His delegation had recalled its support 
and the support of many other countries for the creation, under the auspices 
of the Agency, of an international nuclear technology centre designed to respond 
to the pressing needs of the developing countries. Thirdly, it was necessary 
to establish a climate of mutual confidence and genuine co-operation to achieve 
the assurance of free access to the required technology, material, equipment 
and services on the one hand, and adherence to agreements on the other. 


87. The Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage and its working group 
on safeguards had held several meetings since the last session of the General 
Conference but, although some progress had been made, a large number of major 
questions were still outstanding. 
88. While giving full support to the Agency's safeguards system, Tunisia would 
continue to denounce the imbalance between the funds allocated in the 1982 
budget to the two principal activities of the Agency - an imbalance which was 
to the detriment of technical assistance. Rather than being subject to the 
uncertainties of voluntary contributions, technical assistance ought to be 
funded under the Regular Budget in the same way as safeguards. 
89. He welcomed the Zimbabwe delegation; Zimbabwe's admission to the Agency 
would increase the number of African Member States. However, Africa was still 
under-represented on the Board of Governors. Both the Board and the General 
Conference had been discussing the amendment of Article VI.A.2 since 1977 in an 
attempt to overcome the serious under-representation of the areas of Africa and 
the Middle East and South Asia. It was high time that the number of seats 
allocated to those two areas was increased so that they could participate fully 
in the Agency's activities. 
90. The Tunisian delegation supported the Syrian draft resolution on the 
amendment of Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference and 
hoped that it would be adopted unanimously. The General Conference should 
recognize, as the United Nations and other international organizations had 
already done, the rightful place of Arabic - the official language of 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 21 


22 countries (of which more than half were already Members of the Agency) and 
the cultural language of the entire Islamic world. 


91. In connection with the problems facing the Board of Governors and the 
General Conference, the Tunisian delegation jointed with other members of the 
Group of 77 in hoping that they would arrive at new solutions leading to fruitful 
collaboration in the interests of the Agency and all its Member States. 
In particular it was to be hoped that agreement would be reached on appointing 
someone from a developing country as new Director General, on amending 
Article VI.A.2 so as to increase the number of seats for Africa and the Middle 
East and South Asia, on financing technical assistance under the Regular Budget 
and on ensuring that a greater number of persons from developing countries were 
appointed as Secretariat staff members, especially at the higher levels. 


92. Mr. EL AGIB (Sudan) observed that the Agency had made considerable 
progress in its safeguards activities, although many important countries still 
remained outside the scope of NPT. 
93. An increase in technical assistance and in the transfer of technology and 
financial resources was necessary in order to meet the growing needs of the 
developing countries, to accelerate their development and to bridge the 
technological gap between them and the developed world. The efforts of the 
international community to establish a just international economic order would 
be further strengthened if the developed countries responded positively to the 
legitimate aspirations of the developing countries. 
94. The President of Sudan had recently declared the 1980s a decade for 
"Building the Modern Scientific State - a Model for Sudan". The President 
had called on Sudanese scientists and intellectuals to prepare a programme to 
meet Sudan's objectives and invited contributions from the international community. 
It was hoped that all international organizations would bring their 
extensive experience in planning and policy-making to bear on that programme. 
One major objective was to use modern scientific approaches and techniques to 
improve the country's infrastructure and services and to renovate its production 
plant. It was also intended to make extensive use of training in order to 
assimilate modern technologies and to modernize indigenous technologies through 
a determined drive in the field of research and development. The draft programme 
would be presented at a conference to be held in Khartoum from 19 to 

GC(XXV)/OR.230 


page 22 


24 October 1981, to which experts from the international organizations were 


invited. The Agency and donor countries were urged to provide the necessary 
support and assistance so that specific programmes and projects could be implemented. 
The programme was directed at the basic sectors of the national 
economy, i.e. agriculture and its associated industry, energy and communications. 
Great importance was also attached to the popularization of science. 


95. Sudan continued to use nuclear techniques in solving some of its wider 
development problems. From his country's own resources and through technical 
assistance provided by the Agency and from other sources, effective programmes 
had been developed to deal with agriculture, water resources, animal husbandry 
and medicine. Sudan was sharing its experience with neighbouring countries 
and had hosted Agency-sponsored trainees in nuclear medicine from those countries 
Sudan looked forward to additional assistance in order to promote such technical 
co-operation between developing countries. Although modest progress had been 
made, the full potential of nuclear techniques in his country had not been 
exhausted, and Sudan could absorb more assistance from the Agency and other 
sources. In conclusion, his country attached very great importance to the 
Agency's technical assistance programme, which should remain flexible in order 
to accommodate the needs of the developing countries. 
96. In supporting the Agency's budget for 1982, his delegation reiterated its 
firm view that technical assistance should be financed from the Regular Budget 
since that was the only way to provide regular and predictable support to the 
developing countries. For the same reason, the near-zero growth of the Regular 
Budget should not be achieved at the expense of technical assistance. 
97. Moreover, it was to be hoped that the needs of the least developed countries 
would be accorded special priority. His delegation welcomed the proposal made 
by the Director General to the Board at its June series of meetings regarding 
the inclusion of an item on the agenda of a future Board meeting concerning 
the representation of the developing countries in the Professional and higher 
categories. United Nations General Assembly resolutions 33/143 and 35/210 
had reaffirmed the need to increase the representation of the developing 
countries in the Professional category and especially in senior and policymaking 
posts. He hoped that the guidelines in question would help the Board 
to redress the balance in the Secretariat. In that context, and in accordance 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 23 


with the principles of rotation and equitable geographical distribution, it was 
also high time for the developing countries to assume their responsibility for 
the leadership of the Agency. 


98. The necessary amendment to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute was long overdue. 
If other agencies had already made the necessary amendments in their statutes, 
there was no reason why the Agency's Statute could not be amended to give 
developing countries and particularly Africa, which was the most underrepresented 
region, fair representation. It was to be hoped that the necessary 
resolution to amend the Statute would be adopted before the twenty-sixth 
session of the General Conference. 
99. Sudan condemned in the strongest possible terms the Israeli attack on the 
Iraqi nuclear reactor, and he wished to commend the Director General on his 
important statement to the Board concerning that matter. The Israeli attack 
had also been directed against the Agency's safeguards regime and against the 
efforts of the international community to curb the dangers of nuclear energy 
and to maintain peace and security. It was a flagrant violation of international 
law and of the Charter of the United Nations. It was also an expression 
of Israel's colonial, racist and expansionist policies in Palestine and 
the Arab countries. It was not surprising that Israel continued to refuse 
to accede to NPT and maintained close nuclear collaboration with South Africa, 
which had also made an unprovoked attack recently, against Angola. His 
country strongly supported the expulsion of Israel and South Africa from the 
Agency. Although his country believed in the universality of the membership 
of the Agency, that principle should apply only to those countries which 
valued the ideals of universality and respected the Statute of the Agency and 
the Charter of the United Nations. 


100. Sudan fully supported the adoption of Arabic as one of the official and 
working languages of the Agency. Arabic had contributed tremendously towards 
the advancement of science and was already an official and working language of 
the United Nations and many other agencies and organizations. The introduction 
of Arabic would help the Arab countries to enjoy a closer relationship with 
the Agency and thus contribute more effectively to the realization of the 
Agency's objectives. 

GC(XXV)/0R.230 
page 24 


101. Mr• GEORGE (Australia) said that the past year had been one of steady 
development in the Agency's responsibilities and one in which the Agency had 
increasingly been the subject of international attention. Despite the growing 
complexity of its tasks and the budgetary constraints within which it had had 
to operate, progress had been made in the handling of a range of difficult 
tasks, including the administration of a large and growing technical assistance 
programme. Australia appreciated the fact that technical assistance was to 
remain a growth area. 
102. The Agency's safeguards responsibilities were also increasing. Indeed, 
when technical assistance had its intended effect, and as nuclear power represented 
a growing proportion of world energy production, the extent and cost of 
the Agency's safeguards work would increase commensurately. 
103. During the past year, Egypt had ratified NPT and the relevant safeguards 
agreement had been drawn up. Australia warmly welcomed that action and hoped 
that it would encourage universal acceptance of NPT, which remained the most 
effective instrument available to the international community for reducing the 
risks of nuclear proliferation. At the same time, Australia welcomed further 
developments in the Agency's safeguards relationship with certain of the 
nuclear-weapon States, and had noted with appreciation that certain non-NPT 
countries in Latin America and Western Europe had accepted a broader range of 
safeguards obligations. There was room, however, for some rationalization of 
arrangements in order to facilitate safeguards procedures and enhance confidence 
in the system. 
104. Progress had been made in narrowing the gap between safeguards goals and 
safeguards application. Moreover, through the co-operation of Member States 
and regional organizations there had been progress in the development of safeguards 
for sensitive facilities. Australia acknowledged, however, that there 
were practical problems associated with the significant increase in the number 
of nuclear facilities requiring to be safeguarded and, consequently, in the 
magnitude of the Agency's task in the application of safeguards. Also, the 
reluctance of some Members to finance safeguards adequately, despite the benefits 
of the system which accrued to the international community as a whole, 
was a matter of concern. 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 25 


105. With regard to Australia's own nuclear activities, a number of developments 
had occurred. Australia's uranium mining industry continued to expand, 
with exports from new mines already making their contribution to world energy 
needs. Since the last session of the Conference, bilateral safeguards 
agreements with the United States of America, France, Sweden and Canada had 
entered into force and an agreement had been signed with EURAT0M. Australia 
had concluded a total of nine agreements covering a total of 16 countries. In 
many of those agreements Australia had pioneered an approach to the exercise 
of consent rights over sensitive processes and retransfers. That was known 
as the "programme approach" to reprocessing, whereby it was agreed that relevant 
consent rights were exercised in advance and on a generic basis. 
106. In addition, Australia was continuing its support for Agency safeguards 
through a bilateral programme involving the expenditure of US $620 000 over a 
period of three years. The programme was making good progress. His 
Government would continue to provide firm support for the Agency's safeguards 
activities, convinced as it was of the importance of those activities to the 
cause of non-proliferation. 
107. A number of unfavourable trends affecting the Agency's role had emerged, 
which his Government regretted. There had been a military attack by one 
Member State on the nuclear facilities of another Member State. That action 
had been promptly condemned by the Board of Governors. Furthermore, certain 
facilities which were sensitive from the proliferation point of view remained 
unsafeguarded, or inadequately safeguarded, thus denying the world community 
the full confidence which the Agency's safeguards role had been designed to 
give. The efficacy of the international safeguards system could be weakened 
by particular national attitudes and policies. In his view, all Member 
Governments had an interest in strengthening the safeguards system, and a 
responsibility to work to that end. 
108. The other main responsibility of the Agency was the promotion of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the benefit of mankind. Australia recognized 
that the provision of technical assistance that would enable developing 
countries to gain maximum advantage from nuclear energy was a high priority 
for the Agency, and it was aware that for the areas of the world which lacked 
sufficient energy the development and dissemination of energy technologies 

GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 26 


were of great urgency. His Government had always accepted and stressed the 
importance of the Agency's technical assistance functions. 


109. In 1981, Australia had discharged in full its obligation towards the 
Technical Assistance Fund by contributing in line with its base rate of assessment. 
Australia had also allocated US $114 000 for projects under the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear 
Science and Technology (RCA). Further assistance to the value of US $345 000 
had been made available to Malaysia under a bilateral programme for the training 
of 54 personnel at the Australian Atomic Energy Commission Research Establishment 
at Lucas Heights. 
110. The RCA Isotope Hydrology Project, in which Australia played a major role, 
had continued to record positive results throughout 1981. Australia's "in 
principle" commitment to participate in the RCA Regional Project on the 
Industrial Applications of Isotopes was a further indication of its continuing 
commitment to the provision of technical assistance to developing countries. 
Also, Australia would contribute US $296 000 - the full amount corresponding 
to its base rate of assessment - to the Technical Assistance Fund in 1982. 


111. The developing countries' desire for more predictability in the provision 
of technical assistance by the Agency and for increased levels of funding was 
legitimate. His country would be concerned, however, if debate on future 
methods of funding were to obscure the progress made in recent years, for 
instance by the setting of indicative planning figures, which provided for 
annual increases in the size of the Fund exceeding those in the Regular Budget 
allocations for safeguards. Australia would continue to give high priority 
to the provision of nuclear technical assistance in all its forms, but disbursements 
must continue to be determined voluntarily, in the context of 
domestic economic considerations, policy priorities, the performance of the 
Agency, and the demands of its Members. 
112. Optimum efficiency of the Agency's technical assistance programme should 
be achieved by setting objectives and targets realistically and in accordance 
with the needs of developing countries. Efficiency in the implementation of 
that programme would enhance the continuity of its funding. As the programme 
grew, there would be a corresponding need to improve the Agency's capacity to 
evaluate and review projects. 
GC(XXV)/0R.230 
page 27 


113. Australia was firmly committed to the strengthening of the non-proliferation 
regime. It had therefore been active in the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS) and the International Plutonium Storage (IPS) and International Spent 
Fuel Management efforts, which were aimed at strengthening international 
assurances of non-proliferation and nuclear supply. 
114. Australia acknowledged the importance of stable international nuclear trade 
to the development of the peaceful applications of nuclear technology. Modest 
progress had been made in the Committee on Assurances of Supply over the past 
year; the Committee was developing into a valuable forum for the discussion of 
nuclear supply and non-proliferation questions. Australia would help to 
develop common approaches to non-proliferation conditions of supply meeting the 
interests of both consumers and suppliers. The Committee also had a key contribution 
to make to the preparations for the 1983 United Nations Conference for 
the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy. 
115. The international community was as concerned as it had ever been about the 
threat of nuclear proliferation. The spread of nuclear weapons to additional 
countries would create a major setback to international trade and co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and would have serious consequences for 
peace and stability. International confidence that nuclear trade would not be 
disrupted on non-proliferation grounds increased in proportion to international 
confidence in measures against proliferation. Conversely, supply based on 
respect for non-proliferation objectives was jeopardized by actions which did 
not properly respect those objectives. 
116. Australia had hoped for greater progress in the IPS Expert Group over the 
past year beyond the substantial measure of agreement which already existed, 
and continued to accord priority to the Expert Group's work as an additional 
means of reducing proliferation risks. Prior assessment by the Agency of 
requests for the return of plutonium and effective verification of end-use 
were fundamental to an IPS scheme. Australia would continue to take part 
in the exploration of practical alternatives which might serve to resolve the 
issues remaining before the Expert Group. 


117. Australia had noted with pleasure the progress of the International Spent 
Fuel Management study. The examination of technical and institutional aspects 

GC(XXV)/0R.230 
page 28 


of the storage of spent fuel on both a national and an international basis 
would help to improve spent fuel management in the future. 


118. The budget for 1982 took into account the need for additional resources 
to ensure implementation of priority programmes while limiting real growth to a 
minimum, for which thanks were due to the Director General and the Secretariat. 
The need to effect economies would remain pressing, involving the Agency in a 
continuing process of review and reassessment. Particular attention should be 
given to minimizing growth in the costs of administration. His country would 
co-operate in every way in ensuring maximum programme implementation at a minimum 
of cost. 
119. As regards the Agency's other programmes, it was desirable that, as far 
as possible, Member States should adopt consistent standards applicable to nuclear 
safety and to health and environmental protection. The Agency had an important 
role to play in formulating such standards. Australia would continue to lend 
strong support to the work of the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme, and 
especially the efforts to ensure the effective implementation of the NUSS documents 
in Member States. It was also necessary for the Agency to be active in 
recommending international standards and guidelines relating to radioactive 
waste management and the transport of radioactive materials. In those areas, 
too, emphasis should be placed on measures to assist in the implementation of 
standards and guidelines. 
120. Another valuable Agency activity was the promotion of programmes aimed at 
increasing the use of radioisotopes and radiation techniques in developing 
countries. In South East Asia and the Pacific, that activity was being largely 
facilitated under the Regional Co-operative Agreement. 
121. Insofar as Australia's own research activities were concerned, promising 
progress was being made in developing the SYNROC process for the disposal of 
high-level radioactive waste. 
122. The Agency, through its safeguards system, provided the confidence which 
the international community sought about the peaceful use of nuclear energy and 
also the basic framework for international nuclear trade and technical cooperation. 
All Member States had a fundamental stake in the effective and 
stable operation of the Agency. In order to play its role, the Agency would 
continue to need the full support of all Member States. 
GC(XXV)/OR.230 
page 29 


123. Lastly, he commended the Agency's Secretariat for the manner in which it 
carried out its responsibility of implementing the Agency's programme despite 
various constraints; in particular he wished to pay a tribute to the Director 
General, Dr. Eklund, who had ably guided the Agency for the preceding twenty 
years. The present development of the Agency's programmes and activities was 
a fitting tribute to the efforts of the Director General. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.231 
May 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1981, at 3.40 p.m. 


President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 


7 General debate and annual report 
for 1980 (continued) 1-96 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Switzerland 1 -9 
Italy 10 - 16 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 17 - 31 
Belgium 32 - 42 
France 43 - 49 
Brazil 50 - 54 
Philippines 55 - 67 
Syrian Arab Republic 68 - 73 
Bulgaria 74 - 85 
Yugoslavia 86 - 96 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 8 October 1981. 


**/ GC(XXV)/652. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


82-261 



GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1980 (GC(XXV)/642, 642/Corr.1, 642/Corr.2) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) said that the events of the 1970s had clearly 
demonstrated the interdependences which existed at the international level and 
the national requirements which resulted from them. Only by seeking an international 
nuclear policy which integrated the various national policies would it 
be possible to remove the barriers raised by public opinion and to accord nuclear 
energy its proper role in the world energy scene. In the realization of that 
objective, the Agency and its Member States had complementary responsibilities. 
2. The Swiss delegation wished to underline the importance of the principle of 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons; it firmly believed that the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was the main instrument by which that 
principle would be upheld. The best method of achieving the universal 
acceptance of NPT was to make it more attractive by putting into effect all its 
provisions. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) study had 
shown that a nuclear power programme would not be the simplest or easiest way of 
obtaining weapons-grade explosive material. No combination of measures for 
preventing possible abuses in a civil programme could be considered an adequate 
alternative for political action aimed at eliminating possible incentives for the 
production of nuclear weapons and at promoting international co-operation for 
peaceful purposes. It was essential therefore to recognize that political 
efforts should henceforward have priority. In carrying out the tasks entrusted 
to it in connection with non-proliferation, the Agency, which depended on the 
co-operation of all its Member States, merited their implicit confidence. In 
that context, the Swiss delegation condemned the military attack carried out by 
one Member State against the nuclear facilities of another. It was from now on 
a question of supplementing the technical activities of the Agency by political 
measures or options on the part of Member States. 


3. With regard to technical co-operation, the Swiss delegation gave its full 
approval to the Director General's proposal to discontinue use of the term 
"technical assistance" and saw the change as confirmation of the importance and 
meaning of that essential activity. In that connection, it was encouraging to 
see that, whereas the real increase in the Regular Budget was temporarily close 
to zero, the voluntary contributions for technical co-operation were at present 
undergoing substantial real growth and a reliable and predictable system of 
GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 3 


financing should be found in order to permit multi-year planning. With regard 
to nuclear power plants in developing countries, he was aware that the voluntary 
budget for technical co-operation could do no more than help in the preparation 
of isolated projects in a limited number of Member States. To ensure complete 
financing, it was up to the Agency to request international financial institutions 
to give such projects the importance they deserved in their investment planning 
programmes. 


4. As far as the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was concerned, his 
delegation attached great importance to its work, the results of which should 
help to strike a dynamic balance between guarantees of non-proliferation and 
assurances of supply. 
5. His delegation noted with satisfaction that the Agency was approaching the 
completion of its work on the standardization of safety measures at nuclear 
power stations with the implementation of the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) 
programme and that it was now actively involved in helping Member States to 
apply the relevant codes and guides. Also, it supported the studies undertaken 
on emergency measures at nuclear power stations and hoped that the results would 
soon appear in the form of mutual assistance procedures for Member States. 
Furthermore, it was looking forward to the completion of comparative studies 
by UNEP, the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, UNSCEAR and WHO on 
the environmental and health aspects of different energy sources; the results 
might appreciably broaden the basis for judgement and decision available to 
the Governments of Member States and also the framework for public debate on 
global policy in the field of energy. 
6. In the field of waste management, the Swiss delegation noted that it was 
now a matter of urgency to complete the safety evaluation and develop international 
regulations for the disposal of radioactive waste since public concern 
in regard to nuclear energy would only be significantly reduced when the 
feasibility of all the operations involved in the conditioning and disposal of 
high-level waste had been demonstrated (perhaps by means of a specific geological 
disposal project) and it had been proved that the risk involved was 
negligible. The first Member State to achieve that goal would have rendered 
a significant service to the international community. 



GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 4 


7. The Swiss Federal Government: had recognized the need to build a new nuclear 
power station (1000 MW), which would be an addition to the five already existing 
and would go into service during the 1990s. The choice of a site for the new 
power station would have to be made soon. 
8. The Swiss delegation had noted with great interest the remark by the 
Director General to the effect that, given equal professional qualifications and 
experience, preference was given in the recruitment of staff for the 
Secretariat to nationals from developing countries. 
9. He wished to stress once again that the establishment of a universally 
accepted non-proliferation regime would require a continuous dialogue between 
both North and South and East and West and that such a dialogue was only possible 
on the basis of mutual concessions. 
10. Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) noted the conclusion of the Nairobi Conference on 
New and Renewable Sources of Energy that nuclear energy was the main source which 
could be relied on to fill the gap between demand and supply under stable and 
safe economic and political conditions. INFCE had stressed that it was 
necessary to develop international co-operation and to facilitate the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy without underrating the importance of guarantees against 
the risk of proliferation. In that connection, Italy had frequently emphasized 
its uncondititonal support for the total enforcement of NPT; its fundamental 
aim was to promote international co-operation and the economic growth of all 
countries in order to ensure world-wide participation in the Treaty. The 
Italian delegation noted with satisfaction that the international community 
seemed to have acquired a better understanding of the necessity for full 
application of the Treaty and that the United States Government had recognized 
that an increase in bilateral and multilateral exchanges between developed and 
developing countries in connection with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was 
of vital importance. In that spirit, Italy would progressively strengthen its 
co-operation with developing countries which had acceded to NPT or otherwise 
accepted Agency safeguards. 
11. Italy had always regarded safeguards activities with great interest and 
considered it important to make sustained efforts to improve them. It agreed 
in principle on the necessity for universal application on a non-discriminatory 
basis of full-scope safeguards for all importers of nuclear materials and technology. 
It wished to reaffirm its reservation regarding the principle of 
GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 5 


"prior consent", since it could have results quite the opposite of those 
intended. The fact that no diversion of nuclear material had occurred in 1980 
had proved once again the effectiveness of the safeguards system and the 
validity of the Agency's role in that very sensitive area. 


12. Italy had been deeply concerned at the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear research centre and reiterated the strong condemnation already expressed 
by the Italian Government in various fora and particularly the Security Council. 
The co-operation between Italy and Iraq in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
was perfectly legitimate and was being carried out with full respect for NPT, 
especially Article IV. Italy confirmed its intention of continuing its peaceful 
nuclear co-operation with Iraq. The Israeli attack clearly demonstrated 
disbelief in the Agency's ability to carry out its responsibilities effectively 
and represented an attack against safeguards. In order to restore the Agency's 
fundamental role to its full credibility, the international community, and the 
States parties to NPT in particular, should take initiatives to promote universal 
acceptance of the Agency's safeguards system and should firmly resist any attempt 
to the contrary. 
13. Italy had a particularly strong interest in the Agency's activities, 
especially in the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and the 
Expert Groups on International Plutonium Storage and Spent Fuel Management. 
It continued to give full support to the Trieste International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics, which it considered one of the Agency's most significant 
achievements. In that connection, the Italian delegation was pleased to 
announce that the difficulties over the payment of the Italian contribution had 
been resolved. The Italian Department for Development Co-operation had decided 
to finance in 1981 five important Agency projects for developing countries essentially 
of a regional nature - and to partly finance four courses at the 
Trieste Centre. There would also be a significant increase in its voluntary 
contribution for 1982. 
14. In 1980, the economic situation in Italy had seen the demand for electricity 
rise by 3.4% over the 1979 figure, representing a consumption of 41.6 million 
tonnes of oil equivalent. Out of the total amount, 29.2% had been accounted for 
by fossil fuels and 12.4% by hydroelectric, geothermal and nuclear energy. In 
view of the oil crisis, it was important for Italy to become less dependent on 
that source for its electricity production and to speed up the construction of 

GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 6 


coal-fired and nuclear power stations. For that purpose, a national energy 
plan had been adopted and 15 regions had signed agreements with the National 
Electricity Company and the Atomic Energy Commission. 


15. Italy was pleased with the progress achieved in its international cooperation 
in research and development relating to the application of nuclear 
power and was earnestly implementing the co-operation agreements that it had 
concluded with Brazil, China and Indonesia - agreements whose objective was 
fully consistent with the peaceful nuclear programmes of those countries. 
16. In conclusion, he wished to pay tribute to Dr. Eklund, whose intelligence, 
managerial ability and diplomatic skill had earned him the admiration of Member 
States during his years of office. 
17. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
Twenty-Sixth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which had taken 
place in 1981, had confirmed that the guiding principle in the foreign policy 
of the Communist Party and the Soviet Government had been and would remain the 
struggle to reduce the threat of war and restrain the arms race. Speaking at 
the Congress, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, had said: "The situation in the 
world today requires new and additional efforts to eliminate the threat of war 
and strengthen international security ..;. To maintain peace is now the most 
important task at the international level for our Party, our nation and indeed 
for all nations on this planet". In order to encourage the efforts being made 
in the name of peace and international security, the Supreme Soviet of the 
Soviet Union, in its appeal "to the parliaments and peoples of the world", had 
solemnly declared: "The Soviet Union threatens nobody and does not seek confrontation 
with any State in the West or the East. It has not achieved 
military superiority. It has not and will not initiate new turns in the arms 
race spiral. There is no form of weapon which it would not agree to limit or 
prohibit by mutual accord with other States." The Soviet Union was ready to 
undertake immediate talks on all outstanding international questions. That was 
of particular relevance at a time when certain militaristic circles were going 
to unprecedented lengths to pursue the arms race. They were refusing to undertake 
talks on controlling armaments, on eliminating centres of conflict and on 
finding solutions to difficult international problems. They were shamelessly 


GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 7 


engaging in acts of open aggression and international gangsterism. The atmossphere 
of tension in the world was becoming more and more dangerous. 


18. One of the manifestations of that attitude was the military attack by Israel 
against the Iraqi nuclear research centre on 7 June 1981. That attack by a 
State not party to NPT against a State which was party to the Treaty represented 
a crude attempt to destroy trust in the international non-proliferation regime, 
including the Agency's safeguards system. The actions of the aggressor had 
been condemned in resolutions adopted by the Agency's Board of Governors and 
the Security Council of the United Nations and also by the whole world 
community. The Soviet Union actively supported those resolutions and was in 
favour of their strict and immediate implementation. 


19. It was a matter of the utmost importance in the international sphere to halt 
the nuclear arms race, relinquish the production of neutron bombs and erect a 
solid barrier against the spread of nuclear weapons. Huge stocks of those 
weapons with an immense destructive power had been built up in the world, and 
the nuclear arms race was creating a threat to the very existence of mankind. 
Guarantees of non-proliferation therefore constituted an important component in 
a system of measures for preventing nuclear war. The Soviet Union, for its 
part, had striven and would strive resolutely to end the nuclear arms race and 
to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. That intention had been officially 
re-emphasized during the Twenty-Sixth Congress of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union. The main basis for the non-proliferation regime was the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) - a Treaty which for more than 
10 years had formed a reliable barrier against the spread of nuclear weapons and 
a firm basis for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. The task now was to seek in all possible ways to strengthen the nonproliferation 
regime. That end would be furthered by extending the number of 
countries party to the Treaty, mainly through the addition of States possessing 
the material and technological basis for manufacturing their own nuclear 
weapons and nuclear explosive devices. There were still a number of States 
possessing a considerable nuclear potential which were not parties to the 
Treaty. By persistently refusing to accede to the Treaty and to accept the 
Agency's international safeguards on all their nuclear activities, those 
countries were causing justifiable concern to the world community. 



GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 8 


20. The strengthening of the non-proliferation regime had also been promoted 
by the strict manner in which countries placing their nuclear facilities under 
international safeguards had observed their obligations and by the greater 
effectiveness of Agency controls. On the basis of experience already gained, 
it was quite clear that the Treaty, and the Agency's international safeguards 
system devolving from it, effectively served the interests of all countries 
of the world - both developed and developing, both nuclear and non-nuclear. 
The Agency was devoting considerable effort to increasing the effectiveness of 
international safeguards, constantly expanding and improving its activities 
in that sphere. However, it should be borne in mind that as the number of 
complex facilities under Agency safeguards increased - and that included 
facilities for which the Agency had not yet acquired sufficient experience in 
the application of safeguards - the matter of improving the effectiveness of 
safeguards assumed increasing importance and would become one of the Agency's 
top priorities. Particularly significant aspects of that were the early 
completion of the development of a whole range of safeguards methods and 
procedures for all types of nuclear facility, especially those at the "sensitive" 
stages of the nuclear fuel cycle, and further improvement in the basic equipment 
and techniques used in safeguards. 


21. For its part, the Soviet Union was carrying out wide-scale research aimed 
at enhancing the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system. His 
country's technical support programme for the Agency had already been drawn up 
and was being put into effect by the leading scientific research organizations 
in the Soviet Union. His Government had earmarked more than one million roubles 
in national currency for the programme's implementation up to the end of 1982. 
His country was continuing to assist the Agency with the training of inspectors 
by organizing study tours, special courses and seminars for their benefit. One 
part of those activities in recent years had been the practice of training 
inspections at the Novovoronezh nuclear power plant. In the previous year, a 
"school" had been arranged which had enabled a group of newly recruited 
inspectors to familiarize themselves with inspection methods at nuclear power 
plants using WWER-type reactors. 
22. The Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials, which had 
been drawn up under the Agency's auspices, was an important contribution to 
averting the potential risk of the illegal seizure and use of nuclear material. 
GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 9 


Rapid entry into force of the Convention with the participation of a large number 
of countries would help to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. 


23. An ever-growing number of countries were beginning to develop their own 
nuclear energy programmes. The Soviet delegation noted the significant contribution 
made by the Agency both to the development of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes in general and to the provision of technical assistance to developing 
countries in line with their national interests and needs. Each year, the 
voluntary contributions of Agency Member States to the Technical Assistance Fund 
were increasing. In accordance with the principles which it applied to technical 
assistance for developing Agency Member States, the Soviet Government had 
decided to raise its voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance Fund to 
1 400 000 roubles in national currency, an amount which exceeded the indicative 
figure calculated by the Secretariat. Those resources could be used by the 
Agency for the purchase in the USSR of equipment, instruments and facilities, 
including the reloading of radiation sources, for the acquisition in the USSR 
of small quantities of nuclear material for research purposes, fuel elements 
containing low-enriched uranium-235 for research reactors and, finally, for the 
organization of Agency training courses in the Soviet Union for the benefit of 
specialists from the developing countries. In addition to the sum already mentioned, 
the Soviet Union was allocating further resources for the organization 
of technical activities in connection with the training of nationals from the 
developing countries in the USSR. The Soviet Union was in favour of fixing 
the target for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund for 1982 
at $16 million. In giving its approval to that target its understanding was, 
of course, that the principle of a voluntary Technical Assistance Fund, using the 
national currencies of Member States, would remain unchanged. That principle 
had become well established through practice and had stood the test of time. 


24. In the 27 years elapsed since the world's first nuclear power plant had 
come into operation, in the Soviet city of Obninsk, nuclear power had been 
transformed from an unconventional power source into an integral part of the 
world's energy balance with a total of more than 2000 years of reactor operating 
experience accumulated at the end of 1980. Great credit was undoubtedly due 
to the Agency in that regard. One of the Agency's major achievements was the 
successful operation for more than ten years of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS), through which an effective international exchange of 



GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 10 


scientific and technical information on all aspects of the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy was carried out and all the scientific and technical data 
gathered in the main by the developed countries were put at the disposal of the 
developing countries virtually free of charge. He also wished to draw attention 
to the substantial work the Agency was doing in the dissemination of information 
and exchange of experience on the reliability of nuclear power plant operation, 
on improvements in nuclear safety, and environmental protection. That useful 
work was being performed by the Department of Technical Operations within the 
framework of international working groups on basic aspects of nuclear power plant 
operation. 


25. He was confident that the Agency would organize and conduct the International 
Conference on Nuclear Power Experience in 1982 in an efficient manner and that it 
would participate actively in preparing and conducting the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Use 
of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Development in 1983. That conference 
should play an important role in promoting such co-operation; it would succeed 
in doing so if the imperatives of strengthening the non-proliferation regime were 
consistently borne in mind when questions relating to the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy were examined. 
26. Increasing attention was being devoted to nuclear power as one of the ways 
of meeting the increasing demand from energy consumers. At the beginning of 
1981, the installed nuclear power capacity of the USSR had exceeded 
13 million kW(e), and in 1980 Soviet power plants had generated 
73 000 million kWh. The V.I. Lenin nuclear power station in Leningrad was one 
of the largest operating in the world, consisting of four reactors, each of 
1000 MW(e). The total capacity of the Novovoronezh nuclear power station was 
2500 MW, and in the future the Soviet Union was intending to construct stations 
with a unit capacity of 4-8 million kW(e). It was planned to increase the 
installed nuclear power capacity to 24-25 million kW altogether, corresponding 
to an output of 220-225 000 million kWh in 1985. The Soviet Union was 
extensively engaged in the development of fast power reactors and was 
endeavouring to increase the rate at which plutonium was reprocessed and 
returned to the fuel cycle. The first full-scale nuclear plant for both 
electricity generation and the production of heat for industrial use and urban 
heating was operating successfully in the settlement of Bilibino in the 
GC(XXV)/0R.231 
page 11 


Chukotka region; further such plants would be constructed near Odessa, Khar'kov, 
Minsk, Volgograd and other towns. Large heat-producing power stations were 
being built in the towns of Gor'kij and Voronezh, and the first units were due to 
go into operation towards the end of the current five-year period. 


27. The spread of nuclear power across the globe, the pace and scale of its 
development, the growth in unit capacity and the siting of power plants in 
densely populated areas posed a number of major problems which had previously 
attracted less interest from experts. Those problems included the safe operation 
of the power plants and fuel cycle facilities, together with their impact 
on the environment, the underground disposal of high-level wastes, and the 
problems of operating nuclear power plants in existing energy supply systems. 
All those problems were receiving the closest attention in the Soviet Union. In 
deciding on an accelerated nuclear power plant programme his Government had taken 
into account a number of important factors, including the safe operation of 
nuclear power plants in the Soviet Union over a period of almost thirty years, 
extensive research at national level into the reliability and safety of nuclear 
facilities, and the exceptionally favourable results of radiation monitoring of 
the environment outside operating nuclear power plants as well as monitoring of 
conditions within them. 
28. In the context of power production great hopes were pinned on the quest for 
a solution to the problem of controlled nuclear fusion. The theoretical 
principles of the problem had been solved or were approaching a final solution 
and it had become possible to move on from pure scientific research to the 
practical design of thermonuclear reactors and to establish the foundations of 
fusion power. In 1978 the Soviet Union had put forward a proposal to design 
and build a demonstration Tokamak reactor on an international basis. That 
proposal had received the support of the International Fusion Research Council 
(IFRC), the Agency and its Director General. An international group of 
scientists and experts from the Soviet Union, the United States, Japan and 
Europe had drawn up a conceptual design for the International Tokamak Reactor 
(INT0R) in a short time, and in August 1981 that design had been approved by 
the IFRC and published. It was expected that by the beginning of 1983 recommentations 
would be ready for the transition to the technical and detailed 
design phases. In the opinion of the Soviet Government, the organizational 
and legal principles to govern the project should also have been worked out by 



GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 12 


that time. The Soviet Union was convinced, now as in the past, that through the 
co-operation of scientists from different countries under the INTOR project it 
would be possible, beyond any doubt, to accelerate the solution of the fusion 
problem - the problem of generating electric energy by means of controlled 
thermonuclear fusion - which would serve the interests of all countries. 


29. In developing nuclear power and performing related research, the Soviet Union 
was also engaging in broad international scientific and technological co-operation, 
both on the bilateral plane and within the international organizations, and was 
sharing its achievements generously with many countries, in particular the 
developing countries. A striking example of prolonged and effective collaboration 
was offered by the Soviet Union's scientific and technological co-operation 
with the countries beloning to the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). 
The member countries of CMEA had been co-operating for ten years in a complex 
programme of socialist economic integration. The programme covered more than 
200 topics relating to scientific, economic and technical co-operation, and it 
provided for the marked development of nuclear power in the CMEA member countries. 
The installed power in those countries currently exceeded 18 000 000 kWh: that 
figure was to double during 1981-1985 and reach a final target of more than 
100 000 000 kWh by the end of 1990. In order to carry through that programme, 
the member countries of CMEA were establishing a solid nuclear engineering 
infrastructure based on co-operation and specialization. The Soviet Union had 
full understanding for the desire which many countries felt to establish their 
own nuclear power industry. With its assistance a network of nuclear power 
stations had grown up rapidly in the socialist countries, and many countries were 
taking advantage of the uranium enrichment services offered by the Soviet Union. 


30. The Soviet delegation supported the work of the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply, believing as it did that the Committee's recommendations concerning the 
supply of nuclear materials, equipment, technology and fuel cycle services could 
provide important assistance to many countries, in particular the developing 
countries, when it came to realizing their national aims in the nuclear power 
field. Obviously, in following those recommendations it would be essential to 
take account of existing agreements governing the regulation of nuclear exports, 
and to ensure further strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
31. In conclusion the Soviet delegation wished to associate itself with other 
delegations in expressing approval of the Agency's annual report for 1980 as 
GC(XXV)/0R.231 
page 13 


presented to the Conference. The Soviet Union was confident that despite 
certain difficulties the Agency would continue to be a reliable instrument for 
the further development of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 


32. Mr. GILLON (Belgium) expressed his appreciation to the Director General 
and said it was essential that the person chosen as his successor should perceive 
his responsibility solely as that of serving the general good of the Agency, 
irrespective of his own nationality or his area of origin. A Director General 
could not accept any directive whatsoever from a group of countries, and competence 
should be the sole criterion taken into account by the Board in the 
selection process. 
33. Belgium did not possess large oil or coal resources and was obliged to use 
nuclear energy to cover part of its energy needs, particularly for the production 
of electricity. At present, 25% of that production was accounted for by nuclear 
plants and that proportion would increase to 50% within the next two or three 
years. Belgium was involved in many activities relating to the various stages 
of the fuel cycle: it participated in the EUR0DIF enrichment facility, a fuel 
fabrication facility for light-water reactors and a facility for fast breeder 
fuel as well as in the processing of medium-level wastes and a project for the 
establishment of a high-level waste processing facility. The Mol Nuclear 
Research Centre was carrying out an intensive research programme on waste management 
and final disposal in clay. By comparison with some other countries in 
western Europe, Belgium thus played a very active role in the use of nuclear 
power. 
34. The Agency had a triple function to fulfil: public information, studies 
on facility and transport safety and the provision of assistance to countries 
requiring it. The nuclear programmes of several countries had been slowed down 
by public opposition and the Agency would, it was hoped, increase its public 
information activities, as that was a role which it was often in a better 
position to fulfil than national institutions. In addition, he welcomed 
studies by the Agency on reactor and transport safety as well as the documentation 
which it put at the disposal of Member States. Thirdly, the assistance 
provided by the Agency to countries requesting its help could take the form of 
personnel training or of studies on the feasibility of establishing nuclear 
power plants. With regard to technical assistance, Belgium was co-operating 

GC(XXV)/0R.231 
page 14 


with the Agency, inter alia, on a project to study tsetse fly control in Central 


Africa and also helping with the operation of the Regional Nuclear Energy Centre 


in Zaire. 


35. The Agency had a fundamental and statutory role to play in the application 
of safeguards. Belgium, which was a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, 
believed that it was only through the wider application of full-scope safeguards 
that the world community would come to have complete confidence in the pursuit 
of peaceful nuclear activities. He hoped that countries which had not signed 
NPT would consider doing so, and that those with limited agreements with the 
Agency would extend them to cover all their nuclear facilities. The application 
of safeguards to facilities in nuclear-weapon States was essential if 
economic and commercial conditions which did not discriminate between those 
countries and non-nuclear-weapon States that had signed NPT were to be achieved. 
Also, it was an urgent matter for the Board of Governors to clearly define the 
conditions for the reimbursement of extraordinary costs entailed in inspections. 
Lastly, it should be stressed that the information obtained by Agency inspectors 
in the course of their duties was confidential. 
36. Belgium deplored the Israeli attack against the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre. That unjustifiable act cast unacceptable doubts on the Agency's safeguards 
system and the validity of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. His delegation 
wished to reiterate its full support for the Agency's safeguards system and its 
total confidence in its effectiveness. 
37. His country participated actively in the meetings of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply and, as a country which did not possess natural uranium 
resources, had a particular interest in the successful outcome of the 
Committee's work. However, assurances of supply had to be accompanied by adequate 
safeguards to prevent any type of proliferation. 
38. His delegation recognized the Agency's role in the training of qualified 
personnel, particularly in the less developed countries which were unable to 
establish proper training facilities of their own. 
39. With regard to the international plutonium storage (IPS) study, Belgium was 
taking an active part in the working groups and was striving to ensure that there 
was no discrimination between nuclear-weapon States and States which had voluntarily 
refrained from acquiring nuclear weapons. As a member of EURATOM, 
GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 15 


Belgium believed that all provisions concerning international plutonium storage 
centres should be compatible with treaties to which it had acceded. 


40. With regard to revision of the Statute, the existing balance between 
regional representation and representation of the technically most advanced 
countries should not be disturbed by an ill-considered increase in regional 
representation such as to radically alter that balance. 
41. He thanked the Director General for his efforts at severe limitation of the 
Agency's budgetary growth which, once the dwindling value of money and dollar 
fluctuations had been taken into account, had to be maintained strictly at zero. 
42. Finally, in view of the importance of present and future energy problems, 
decisions should be taken in a fresh spirit of co-operation between all 
interested parties. In that connection, the Agency had a vital role to play in 
restoring a climate of mutual confidence. He hoped that all Member States 
would contribute in every way to that international co-operation so that it 
might have a successful outcome. 
43. Mr. PECQUEUR (France), recalling the events that had taken place in 
the history of energy over the past ten years, pointed out that the successive 
energy crises, or rather the erratic increases in the price of oil per barrel, 
had played an important part in the current world-wide economic recession. 
The policies pursued to deal with the crises essentially called for rational 
use of energy and for the development of energy sources that could replace 
hydrocarbons. The efforts to save energy in the industrialized countries were 
beginning to take effect; however, owing to the urgent need to improve the 
standard of living in the least favoured countries and to the inexorable demographic 
trends on the planet, world energy consumption was hardly likely to fall 
below 12 000 million tonnes of oil equivalent (TOE) by the end of the century. 
Meeting such increased needs would require the mobilization of all available 
energy sources. Coal and nuclear power were the two main substitute sources 
for oil. Even though the spread of nuclear power had in recent years been slower 
than expected, that new source of energy already occupied an important place in 
the world energy balance: in 1980 it had accounted for 87. of the world's 
electricity, or 10 million tonnes of oil equivalent. 
44. In France the contribution of nuclear power to national electricity 
production had increased from 16% in 1979 to 247. in 1980, and to 377= for the 

GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 16 


first seven months of 1981; that major increase was due both to the excellent 
availability factor of the equipment in operation and to the start-up of new 
PWR units. At the same time, the development of the fast breeder was being 
vigorously pursued. Significant progress had also been made with the fuel 
cycle. The EURODIF enrichment plant at Tricastin would reach its full capacity 
of 10.8 million separative work units (SWU) in October 1981. During the last 
reprocessing campaigns the La Hague plant had operated at close to its rated 
capacity - about 400 tonnes per year. High-level waste conditioning in the 
Marcoule vitrification plant was also progressing satisfactorily. 


45. The French Government, aware of the problems presented by the implementation 
of an energy independence plan, had decided to launch a vast democratic parliamentary 
debate, which would be held in October, in order to fix the principal 
energy options. The debate would be followed by discussions at the level of 
regional authorities dealing with regional energy plans. Pending receipt of 
the results of that vast national consultation, the operation of existing nuclear 
power plants and fuel cycle facilities would continue normally, as would the 
operation of the COGEMA facilities at La Hague, and commercial obligations of 
France to other countries would be honoured. In practice, the debate in 
autumn would affect only plans to which there was as yet no commitment. 
46. In the international sphere, France remained greatly in favour of the 
development of the world's nuclear programmes. It would thus continue to 
support the Agency's activities by paying a voluntary contribution in accordance 
with the Secretariat's proposals. It was desirable that some priority 
be given to long-term projects, which had the advantage of permitting plans 
embracing a whole sector of activities, in which various experts from a single 
country would participate. In 1981 France had provided expert services for 
technical assistance missions, equipment for the Seibersdorf and Monaco 
laboratories, as well as for Malaysia, and had organized three training courses 
at the Saclay and Cadarache Centres. 
47. However, France made its co-operation subject to undertakings in respect of 
peaceful uses verified by the Agency, and was concerned to strengthen the 
effectiveness and credibility of the Agency's safeguards system constantly. For 
that reason it had strongly condemned the military attack by Israel against 
nuclear facilities subject to Agency safeguards on the territory of another 
Member State. 
GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 17 


48. In the opinion of the French delegation there was no alternative to the 
Agency's safeguards system, which had to be constantly improved. In that spirit 
and in order to encourage the acceptance of safeguards by an ever increasing 
number of States, the French Parliament had last July authorized the approval 
of the agreement between the Agency, EURATOM and France on the application of 
Agency safeguards on French territory. Agency safeguards provided the only 
instance of on-site inspection by international inspectors which was more or 
less universally accepted by sovereign States. Its effectiveness and acceptability 
should thus both be strengthened. Even those criticizing the system 
had not claimed that it had ever failed in its task of detecting attempts to 
divert nuclear materials for explosives. That fact was due not only to the 
high quality and conscientiousness of the responsible inspectors, but also to 
the role played for over twenty years by the Director General, in which he had 
shown prudence and perspicacity. 
49. With regard' to the problem posed by the appointment of a new Director 
General, he said that at a time when the world was being shaken by an energy 
crisis the Agency had an essential role to play in the promotion of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes. In those circumstances the appointment of a 
Director General able to forge the destiny of the Agency was without doubt in 
the interests of all Member States. He therefore appealed to the sense of 
responsibility of all concerned in expressing the hope that the Board of 
Governors would find a solution to that important problem in the very near 
future. 
50. Mr. do NASCIMENTO e SILVA (Brazil) said that nuclear energy would play 
a crucial role during the coming decade and provided a solution to the energy 
problems of many countries. Rises in the price of oil since 1973 had been an 
incentive for the development of other energy sources, and such questions had 
been discussed at the recent United Nations Conference on New and Renewable 
Sources of Energy. 
51. Brazil accorded the highest priority to increasing the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. For that reason its programme included, in addition to 
projects developed independently in Brazil, activities in conjunction with the 
Agency and with other Latin American countries, which would certainly be 
implemented satisfactorily thanks to the good will and mutual confidence 
existing among those countries. Brazil intended to attain self-sufficiency and 

GC(XXV)/OE.231 
page 18 


independence in all peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Describing the energy 


situation in his country, he said that Brazil's hydroelectric potential 


exceeded 200 000 MW and represented 90% of the electricity produced. However, 


the estimated increase in demand for energy indicated that by the year 2000 its 


hydroelectric potential would no longer be sufficient. For that reason nuclear 


power was a logical option for the country. Uranium prospecting had been going 


on intensively in Brazil for ten years, and 1981 would stand out in history as 


the year in which Brazil's first nuclear power station (Angra I) was started up. 


Routine operation would begin in 1982. The foundations of Angra II had been 


completed and construction of the reactor buildings was to start soon. The 


geological studies for Angra III had been terminated and civil engineering work 


should begin early in the following year. 


52. In the nuclear field international co-operation should be developed on a 
broad scale and without discrimination. Safeguards were necessary in order to 
ensure that nuclear energy was not used for other than strictly peaceful 
purposes. The effectiveness of safeguards, however, would be seriously limited 
if they could not be applied universally. Unfortunately, safeguards were not 
applicable in checking the arms race, and it was through the very fact of its 
peaceful tradition that Brazil could not accept the idea of such a situation 
continuing indefinitely. What should be recognized, first and foremost, was 
the inalienable right of every country to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and to exercise that right without hindrance whenever its energy needs 
justified it. Brazil had consistently followed a policy of firmly supporting 
the principles of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In particular, it had 
signed and ratified the Tlatelolco Treaty, to which it strictly adhered. As 
regards, bilateral co-operation, it had accepted stringent safeguards which went 
far beyond the non-proliferation provisions of the Agency's Statute. 
53. Among the international organizations, the IAEA was one of the most 
effective, and any action which was incompatible with its objectives had to be 
avoided. In that connection, he wished to point out that, the day before', in 
the United Nations General Assembly the Brazilian delegation had strongly 
condemned the attack by Israel on the nuclear facilities in Iraq. 
54. He recalled that amendment of Article VI of the Statute was once again on 
the agenda. While he agreed that the Board's membership should not be increased 
to the extent where it would make that body ineffective, it must nevertheless 
GC(XXV)/0R.231 
page 19 


be recognized that three regions were under-represented on the Board. His 
delegation considered that it was time to re-examine Article VI and wished to 
emphasize that, if the membership of the Board was enlarged, the representation 
of the Latin-American region would have to be given consideration. 


55. Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) observed that the twenty-fifth session of the 
general conference of an organization was usually an occasion for reviewing the 
past and previewing the future. The Agency was no exception. On the contrary, 
the increasing number of intractable issues on the General Conference's agenda 
called for a thorough and realistic review of the Agency's activities since its 
establishment. 
56. The success of the Agency in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
was not being called into question. The weakness of the Agency and some of its 
Member States lay in their failure to recognize the changing political realities. 
For example, between the late 1950s and the early 1980s a number of colonial 
territories had become independent States and were firmly resolved to exercise 
their national sovereignty; for them nuclear energy, which had been considered 
in the early days by most developing countries to be a useful instrument for 
military purposes only, was now an essential part of economic progress. The 
failure to make a correct assessment of the political aspirations of the 
developing countries had led to international agreements which had clearly 
provided for unequal treatment of the developed and developing countries. For 
example, the implementation of Article IV of NPT had been modified substantially 
by the London Suppliers' Guidelines to the detriment of developing countries. 
Another example was the rather non-committal reactions of many industrialized 
countries in the case of the pilot enrichment plant in South Africa, which had 
been put into operation without Agency safeguards, as compared to the drastic 
measures, both economic and military, imposed on one developing country which 
was reportedly building the same type of facility. 


57. In the Agency's Board of Governors, where the developing countries had for 
some time been seeking equitable representation, certain dubious practices had 
been encouraged. The Director General had been requested to apply retroactively 
the new guidelines for technical assistance in spite of strong protests from 
developing Member States and despite the well-known legal position in many 
countries that ex post facto laws were unconstitutional. Moreover, the 

GC(XXV)/OR.231 


page 20 


Director General was being advised in some quarters to improve the Agency's 


safeguards procedures contained in document INFCIRC/66/Rev.2. 


58. The most flagrant inequality was reflected in the staffing pattern of the 
Agency, where 73 developing countries constituting 66% of the membership 
accounted for only 157. of the Professional staff. It must be added that since 
its establishment the Agency had never had a Director General from the Third 
World. In the past, developing countries had of course received tokens of 
sympathy, but the fundamental problems had not been solved and had become serious 
enough to have delayed the appointment of a Director General by the Board. 
59. The present session of the General Conference should afford an opportunity 
for both developed and developing countries to co-operate in the future. In 
that connection he quoted the recent statement by President Reagan, according to 
which the United States of America would become a reliable partner for peaceful 
nuclear co-operation under adequate safeguards. In particular, the United 
States had decided to eliminate the motivation for acquiring nuclear explosives 
by working to improve regional and global stability and by promoting understanding 
of the legitimate concerns of other States for their security. It was 
the first time that an important link between proliferation and security had 
been publicly recognized. That recognition would provide a basis for limiting 
nuclear proliferation by means of measures which were wider in scope than those 
which had been considered within the context of existing international agreements 
and national legislation. 
60. Furthermore, it should be pointed out that security should not be misinterpreted, 
since it did not relate solely to military aspects. In most 
developing countries there could not be political stability without stable 
economic growth, and without political stability there could be no security. 
Hence it was not possible to pursue a successful non-proliferation policy without 
granting the economic assistance required for ensuring economic progress in 
developing countries. 
61. The request by the developing countries for parity between the Agency's 
technical assistance programme and its safeguards activities was based on 
Article II of the Statute. The developed countries should be able to accept 
that parity because of their support for a strong non-proliferation policy. 
All Member States should endeavour to finance the technical assistance programme 
and safeguards in the same manner. The Board of Governors could then fix the 


GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 21 


indicative figures for technical assistance on a five-year basis, which would 
enable developing countries to plan their technical assistance projects better. 


62. With regard to national policies, States should include in their nonproliferation 
policies measures to ensure that adequate economic assistance was 
available to developing countries. In that connection he appealed to the 
United States to allocate funds for the implementation of Title V of the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Act of 1978, which called on the United States to assist 
developing countries, particularly those parties to NPT, in identifying and 
utilizing energy sources such as solar energy and other renewable forms of 
energy. 
63. His Government strongly supported the Agency's safeguards system and NPT, 
and he shared the view expressed by the Director General and contained in 
resolution 485(1981) of the United Nations Security Council that the Israeli 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre constituted a serious threat to the 
IAEA safeguards system, which was the very foundation of the Son-Proliferation 
Treaty. The Agency's safeguards system must also take into account technical 
progress made in the field of safeguards. However, if changes were to be made 
in the safeguards provided for in document INFCIRC/66/Rev.2, they should first 
be approved by the Board of Governors as part of a document INFCIRC/66/Rev.3, and 
then accepted by States which had concluded safeguards agreements with the 
Agency in accordance with INFCIRC/66/Rev.2. 
64. Another important point which had not been raised during the session was 
the adoption of a zero-real-growth budget for 1982. In 1982, Member States' 
contributions would be lower than in 1981. At the same time, the Agency's 
cash surplus for 1979 and 1980 was US $17 million, and for 1981 it would be 
about $14 million, which made a total cash surplus of about $31 million for the 
last three years. 
65. At the present time, the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system 
was being questioned by certain developed countries, while the stagnation of 
its promotional activities was criticized by the developing countries. There 
was also considerable concern about nuclear safety. It would therefore not be 
reasonable to maintain zero growth in the programme and budget for 1982 and 
1983. The Agency was a purveyor of services and its effectiveness had to be 

GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 22 


measured in terms of the services it could provide in a given year rather than 
in terms of the level of its budgetary surplus. 


66. At the time of the twenty-fourth session, his delegation had proposed the 
conclusion, within the framework of the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA), 
of an agreement for emergency assistance in Asia, and he hoped that the proposal 
would be considered by the General Conference. Certain countries in the region 
intended to dump radioactive waste into the sea. Although that method had been 
used in the past in the Atlantic, such dumping had been observed internationally 
by the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) and other observers from different countries. 
Until an organization similar to NEA was established in Asia, it would be difficult 
for the Philippines and other countries in the region to accept the dumping 
of radioactive waste into the Pacific Ocean. The Regional Co-operative Agreement 
might serve as the forerunner of a nuclear energy agency for Asia and the 
Pacific. The Philippine Government was aware of the growing volume of radioactive 
materials being shipped to Asia and therefore regarded the transport of 
radioactive materials as an important component of nuclear safety. His Government 
supported the Agency's programme in that domain and the proposed revision 
in 1983 of the Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive 
Materials. 


67. Finally, he informed the General Conference that the Philippine Government 
had ratified the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material on 
3 September 1981. 
68. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that his country's interest in 
the Agency's role in the international community prompted him to raise certain 
issues which it was hoped would help to consolidate that role. 
69. A comparison of the funds allocated to technical assistance and to other 
Agency activities showed that the former represented only 16.26% of the budget 
for 1982. Moreover, 96% of the technical assistance funds came from voluntary 
contributions, which marked that assistance as a non-essential activity and 
denied it any continuity. The real growth in technical assistance between 1974 
and 1982 in terms of purchasing power would certainly be close to zero. With 
regard to the regional distribution of assistance, the figure for the Middle 
East had dropped from 4% during the 1970s to 2% in 1980. Adequate methods 
should therefore be sought to have technical assistance financed from the 
GC(XXV)/0R.231 
page 23 


Regular Budget, and the amount involved should not be smaller than that for 


administration or safeguards. Voluntary contributions would then serve to 


finance research contracts, and technical adjustments could be made to ensure a 


better distribution of assistance. 


70. The composition of the Board of Governors should be changed to take into 
account the present composition of the Agency. The areas of Africa and the 
Middle East and South Asia should occupy on average five seats according to the 
rule of proportional representation, and not 3.33 as was the existing situation. 
71. Turning to the subject of the Arabic language and its position in history, 
he remarked that for six hundred years, from the seventh century, Arabic had 
occupied an important place in science, commerce and philosophy. Its importance 
had been considerable up to the Renaissance, and even in the eighteenth century 
Arabic had been in use at the universities of Tubingen and Montpellier. The 
Arab world had undergone a scientific renaissance in the present century, and 
science was now being taught in Arabic at most Arab universities. The United 
Nations, ICAO, FAO and ILO had already adopted Arabic as an official language 
and, in terms of the number of Member States using it, it would now take second 
place behind Spanish in the Agency. It was therefore high time for the Agency 
to adopt it as an official language. Such a move would have the advantage of 
standardizing the terminology in the documents translated into Arabic and would 
help to increase the awareness of nuclear science and technology in the Arab 
world. 
72. Resolution 487 of the Security Council had strongly condemned the Israeli 
military attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre and labelled it a serious 
threat to the Agency's safeguards system. The Syrian delegation also supported 
the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors on 12 June 1981, recommending 
the General Conference to expel Israel. The nuclear history of that country had 
in fact always been of a military and aggressive nature. Israel had refused to 
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and since 
1970 had even been avoiding the inspections which American experts were' supposed 
to carry out in its installations under a technical assistance agreement with 
the United States. Violating the sovereignty of its neighbours and usurping 
the responsibilities of the Agency, the Security Council and the great Powers, 
Israel was playing the role of nuclear gendarme in the Middle East and was 
arrogating to itself the right to destroy all the nuclear installations of the 

GC(XXV)/OR.231 


page 24 


countries in the region - in other words, of the Arab and Moslem world. In 


that connection he was surprised at the statement made by the delegate of the 


United States at the previous meeting: from that statement he had gained the 


impression that the delegate of the United States, who had refrained from con


demning Israel, was not very concerned about the legitimate fears the raid had 


caused and considered the act of aggression itself less dangerous than the 


protests it had raised. Israel had in fact deliberately cut itself off from 


the community of peaceful users of atomic energy, and by expelling it the Agency 
would do no more than recognize an existing situation. 


73. His delegation wished to reiterate its support for the Agency in its efforts 
to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy. All the proposals it had made 
were aimed in the final analysis at consolidating the Agency's role so that it 
could contribute effectively to progress in the least advanced countries of the 
world. 
74. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) said that the political context of the present 
session was marked by a resurgence of international tension and of the armaments 
race and by a very worrying situation in the Middle East. The Israeli air 
raid on the Iraqi nuclear research centre - a facility belonging to a country 
party to NPT which had placed all its nuclear activities under Agency safeguards 
- was beyond any doubt fraught with serious consequences, not only for 
the Middle East but for the whole world. Israel, in violation of all the rules 
of international law, had committed an act whose purpose was to aggravate the 
international situation and to discredit the Agency and its safeguards activites. 
That being so, he invited all Member States to give strong reaffirmation of 
their confidence in the Agency. 
75. The nuclear power industry, which had already demonstrated its efficiency, 
could provide a solution to the energy crisis the world was passing through. 
The Agency had, ever since its creation, contributed to the development of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy while applying effective non-proliferation safeguards. 
Strengthening of NPT and the Agency's safeguards activities should be 
adequate guarantees for the invulnerability of peaceful nuclear activities. 
76. The Bulgarian Government attributed great importance to the development of 
nuclear power, and accordingly supported the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
for Economic and Social Development, to be held in 1983, as well as the 
GC(XXV)/OR,231 
page 25 


International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience scheduled for 1982. 
Moreover, the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply should give fresh 
impetus to the development of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, and 
the Bulgarian delegation wished to stress that assurances of supply were closely 
bound up with non-proliferation guarantees. 


77. Nuclear safety was also a matter of the utmost importance, as had been convincingly 
pointed out at the Stockholm Conference, and contributed to strengthening 
public confidence in nuclear power. His delegation felt that the Agency's 
role in that area should be further strengthened. Bulgaria had signed the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, had an important role 
to play in matters of security, and hoped that countries which had not yet done 
so would follow its example. 
78. His delegation approved the budget for 1982 as presented by the Secretariat 
but asked that further efforts be made to reduce unproductive expenditures and 
administrative costs. 
79. Recognizing as it did the importance of technical assistance for the 
development of national programmes for the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, 
his delegation thanked the Secretariat for the assistance it was giving Bulgaria. 
Recalling that Bulgaria regularly made its contribution to the Technical 
Assistance Fund and would do so again in 1982, he reiterated his Government's 
conviction that contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund should be voluntary 
and should be payable in national currency. 
80. On the question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, he felt 
that an increase in the membership of the Board would not improve the efficiency 
of that body's work, which was quite satisfactory at present. 
81. Bulgaria had just adopted a programme of economic, social and cultural 
development for the 1980s which placed considerable emphasis on the use of 
nuclear energy. The entry into service in the near future of a fourth unit 
would bring the aggregate installed capacity of the Kozloduy nuclear power station 
up to 1760 MW(e). The operation of that station had been giving complete 
satisfaction for seven years already. At the same time, the construction of 
new power stations equipped with water-cooled and water-moderated reactors 
was going ahead. In 1985 the first unit with a rating of 1000 MW(e) was to go 

GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 26 


into service, at which time nuclear power would account for 26% of the country's 
total electricity generation; that figure would rise to 40% in 1980 after the 
start-up of two further 1000-MW units. 


82. In constructing and operating its nuclear power stations Bulgaria was making 
good use of Agency documents concerning nuclear and radiological safety and had 
profited from the experience of the Soviet enterprises that were largely responsible 
for the design of the Bulgarian facilities. 
83. The increasingly numerous applications of nuclear techniques in various 
sectors of the Bulgarian economy, the manufacture of nuclear instruments for 
control and automation of industrial processes, the irradiation of seeds and of 
foodstuffs, work on the automation of nuclear power plants - all those activites 
also merited mention. 
84. The nuclear research institute of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences was 
completing a centre for isotope applications in 1981, and the success of that 
enterprise was due in part to effective action taken by the Agency. But 
Bulgaria also owed a great deal, in connection with its nuclear programme, to 
collaboration between the socialist countries within the Council for *Ijtual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA). For the period 1981-1985 Bulgaria had worked out 
a national scientific research programme in the nuclear energy field which was 
closely bound up with co-operative activities of CMEA Member States and which 
involved lOOO-MW(e) reactors as well as large fast reactors. 
85. Bulgaria was trying as far as possible to contribute to the development of 
scientific and technical co-operation under the auspices of the Agency, in 
fields as various as the International Nuclear Information System (IMS), the 
network of secondary standards dosimetry laboratories, the Agency's research 
programme and its schedule of scientific meetings, and in the endeavour to 
bring yet further refinements to the safeguards system. It would continue to 
give full support to the activities of the Agency, on which, in the opinion of 
the Bulgarian delegation, the development of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy depended. 
86. Mr. LALOVIC (Yugoslavia) said that the growing gap between nuclear 
development as practised m the developing countries and the system applied 
among the great nuclear Powers and other countries possessing nuclear weapons 
had given rise to monopolistic tendencies in the latter, to the point where 
GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 27 


they had succeeded in maintaining a form of international co-operation which left 
them absolute control over the development of nuclear energy in the non-nuclearweapon 
States. The nuclear Powers justified that policy by invoking the dangers 
of proliferation, but the peaceful uses of nuclear energy must not be regarded a 
priori as constituting a proliferation danger, even if such a danger did exist 
and even if the problem was an important one. 


87. The President of the United States of America had declared on 16 July 1981 
that his Government would no longer oppose reprocessing for civilian purposes, 
nor the development of breeder reactors, in countries which had established 
advanced nuclear power programmes and where those activities presented no risk 
of proliferation. Thus, where the transfer of nuclear technology was concerned 
there were two types of countries: on the one hand, a group of developed 
countries not in possession of nuclear weapons which, even though they could 
manufacture such weapons, would never compromise the non-proliferation regime; 
and, on the other hand, a large group of countries, particularly developing 
countries, many of which were party to NPT, that did not enjoy the same confidence. 
That distinction meant that a selective policy was being applied in 
matters of non-proliferation, when in fact the danger itself was indivisible; 
non-proliferation was the responsibility of the whole international community, 
and the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes was compatible with 
the principles of liberty, sovereignty and equality among nations. 
88. His delegation was convinced that the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
for Economic and Social Development would give serious attention to most of 
those problems. Within the framework of its programme for 1982 and 1983 the 
Agency would have an extremely active role to play, both in the preparatory 
phase and at the conference itself. 
89. It was evident that the Agency's safeguards system was an indispensable 
element in non-proliferation, though non-proliferation concerns must not be taken 
as a pretext to prevent countries from exercising their right to acquire and 
develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Unfortunately, one could 
not but interpret the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi nuclear reactor as 
being directed among other things against the Agency's safeguards system - in 

GC(XXV)/OR.231 
page 28 


other words, against international agreements and the confidence they inspired. 
Sanctions should be applied to Israel immediately; the General Conference should 
call upon Israel to accede to NPT and accept Agency safeguards. 


90. That incident showed quite clearly that a nuclear war could easily be 
triggered by the use of conventional arms. The problem had been dealt with 
only partially in the 1977 Additional Protocol to the Geneva Convention of 1949; 
the Protocol prohibited military attacks against nuclear power plants, but it 
did not cover other nuclear installations. 
91. His delegation felt that it was time to take steps on the international 
plane with a view to drafting a convention prohibiting the bombardment and 
destruction of all nuclear installations, whatever their purpose, and providing 
for general international sanctions against offenders. A convention of that 
kind should make it possible to prevent such attacks and would likewise contribute 
to a softening of anti-nuclear attitudes in countries where there was 
strong public opposition to broader application of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy because the public feared the possible destruction of nuclear installations. 
92. The problem of technical assistance was still a burning issue and in fact 
constituted one of the most important questions for the developing countries, 
which regularly criticized the imbalance between promotional and regulatory 
activities in the Agency's programme. His delegation believed that the 
realistic proposals put forward by the developing countries - to raise the target 
for technical assistance, to include technical assistance in the Regular Budget 
and to increase the funds allocated to that activity - should at last be accepted. 
93. Yugoslavia wished to reiterate its support for the work of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply and hoped that the Committee's deliberations would soon 
lead to tangible results, in view of their exceptionally great importance for 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
94. Recalling the views expressed in the course of the past year by some Member 
States, including Yugoslavia, on the International Plutonium Storage (IPS) study, 
he said it was a matter for regret that the work of the IPS Expert Group had 
never been examined by the Board and that the Group had failed to present a 
single report to the Board during the last four years. Consequently, his 
delegation wished to reiterate the reservation it had previously stated concerning 
the financing of the IPS study from the Regular Budget in the absence of a Board 
GC(XXV)/0R.231 
page 29 


decision on the subject; in that connection, his delegation's understanding 
was that financing of the IPS study from the Regular Budget had been proposed 
only for 1982. Subject to the reservation already mentioned, his delegation 
endorsed the draft budget for 1982. 


95. The Yugoslav delegation fully endorsed the proposal aimed at remedying the 
present imbalance in the regional distribution of seats on the Board of 
Governors and appealed to the General Conference to adopt a resolution on the 
subject which would satisfy the aspirations of Member States. 
96. In conclusion, he said that his delegation was pleased with the co-operation 
existing between the Agency and Yugoslavia; in particular, the extremely useful 
technical assistance which the Agency had granted Yugoslavia during the last 
phase of construction of the Krsko nuclear power station gave every reason for 
satisfaction. 
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.232 
May 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1981, at 10.5 a.m. 


President: Mr. XUTO (thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 


7 General debate and annual report for 1980 
(continued) 1 - 137 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Czechoslovakia 1 - 13 
Japan 14 - 34 
Netherlands 35 - 44 
Indonesia 45 - 55 
Romania 56 - 66 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 67 - 77 
India 78 - 88 
Republic of Korea 89 - 95 
Hungary 96 - 102 
Ecuador 103 - 108 
Nigeria 109 - 115 
Canada 116 - 137 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 29 September 1981, 
** GC(XXV)/640. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(XXV)/INF/20l/Rev.2. 


82-109 



GC(XXV)/OR.232 


page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1980 (GC(XXV)/642, 642/Corr.1, 642/Corr.2) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) said that 25 years had passed since the 
basic principles underlying the activity of the Agency, one of the most 
important specialized agencies of the United Nations, had originally been 
established, and that his country was proud to have been among the first to 
join it. Since that time the Agency had evolved rapidly from the standpoint 
of the scope' of the problems it tackled in connection with the peaceful 
application of nuclear energy, as well as in terms of its importance for the 
preservation of peace and security. Credit for the fact that it had 
discharged its functions so effectively was due to the Director General, 
who had so skilfully combined the features of a leading scientist with the 
ability of an efficient administrator. 


2. Czechoslovakia was systematically devoting considerable attention to the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy, first and foremost in the area of nuclear 
power production. That development, however, would not have been possible 
without the help of the Soviet Union and the co-operation of the Member 
States of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA), which over the 
past ten years had put into effect an ambitious programme for the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy, more" especially nuclear power. By 1990 the countries 
of the socialist community would be producing more than 100 million kW of 
electricity at their own nuclear power stations. A further important fact 
in that connection was the serial manufacture of WWER-1000 reactors, in which 
Czechoslovakia was also taking part. Major problems in the area of the fuel 
cycle were-also being dealt with, and specialization in the production of 
radionuclides was being extended at the same time. 


3. Czechoslovakia attributed great importance to the physical protection of 
nuclear materials. That approach was evidenced by the fact that it had 
been one of the countries to sign the relevant convention and had likewise 
adopted a series of measures within the country aimed at putting the 
convention into effect. 


4. A broad /programme for the peaceful use of atomic energy, especially 
electricity generation, had been initiated, with a view to more than three 
quarters of the planned increase in electricity between 1981 and 1990 being 
accounted for by the nuclear power stations to be constructed. 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 3 


5. As part of the scientific-technical co-operation with the Soviet Union and 
other countries of the Socialist community, the leading Czechoslovak metallurgical 
and machine-building plants had begun production of equipment for WWER-440 
power plants and were completing preparations for the manufacture of a similar 
type of equipment for WWER-1000 power plants. The first part of the reactor 
vessel for a power station in Hungary had already been delivered, and in 
October 1981 the vessel and steam generator components for the W-2 power station 
at Jaslovske Bohunice would reach the site; in addition, various types of 
specialized equipment were being produced for light-water and other types of 
nuclear power stations. 
6. The nuclear power station at Jaslovske Bohunice, containing two WWER-440 
reactors, was operating satisfactorily and had already generated more than 10 TWh 
of electricity. The next two WWER-440 units were now being constructed there, 
the first of which was at the stage of installation of the specialized equipment. 
Construction work on the four WWER-440 units at the Dukovana power station was 
in full swing. At Mochovec in Slovakia excavation work'had begun in order to 
prepare a site where it was planned to set up four WWER-440 units and which would 
later be expanded to accommodate further units with -a total capacity of ~2000 MW. 


7. As a country that was actively developing nuclear power, Czechoslovakia was 
fully aware that the main condition for development in. that- area and for the preservation 
of world peace was prevention of the diversion of nuclear energy for 
military purposes. It was for that reason that Czechoslovakia was systematically 
following the Agency's activities involved in the implementation of the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the imple'mentation of safeguards 
agreements arising out of NPT, and all that it was doing to effectively 
strengthen the non-proliferation regime and ensure the universal nature of NPT. 
The urgency of that problem had become all the clearer with the aggressive 
attack by Israel on a nuclear facility in Iraq that was under Agency safeguards. 
Czechoslovakia resolutely condemned Israel's aggression, which had been perpetrated 
not only against a country that had friendly relations with his own 
country but also against the entire safeguards system'and the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. His country supported all action that would help to put a stop to such 
acts of international terrorism and intended to take up the matter again at a 
later stage. 



GC(XXV)/OE.232 
page 4 


8. The fact remained that since the Board's meeting in June, when it discussed 
the attack by Israel on nuclear facilities in Iraq, a number of other acts had 
been committed which did not assist the preservation of peace. Czechoslovakia 
and other Socialist countries were making all possible efforts in the interests 
of the consistent and peaceful resolution of international conflicts and tension 
and had proposed specific measures at the congresses of their Communist and 
Workers' parties over the previous year. Particular mention should be made in 
that connection of the peace initiative of the Soviet Union announced at the 
twenty-sixth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which was 
entirely supported by the other Socialist countries. Czechoslovakia fully 
supported the Soviet Union's proposal for an international conference on the 
Middle East, its initiative in relation to disarmament in outer space and other 
Soviet proposals designed to maintain peace throughout the world, 
9. In addition to safeguards, Czechoslovakia traditionally paid great attention 
to the Agency's other technical activities. In his opinion the present organization 
of the Department of Technical Operations would assist the efficient 
functioning of the Agency's work on nuclear power and nuclear safety. In 
addition, Czechoslovakia fully supported the further development of the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS). It was in those spheres that the 
Agency could, however, make more use of its international reputation by influencing 
the public in countries in which there were still certain fears about the 
development of nuclear power because elements of the public were insufficiently 
and inaccurately informed and unqualified persons were making anti-nuclear 
propaganda. The Agency should not merely continue with existing activities 
such as the holding of meetings on specific topics relating to nuclear power 
and its fuel cycle, since such meetings were attended only by informed members 
of the public who were in any case in favour of nuclear power. The Agency's work 
on nuclear safety was of equal importance. However, despite the Agency's efforts 
in that sphere over many years (for example, in the development of nuclear safety 
standards), there was still considerable scope for expanding its activities. In 
his view no technical meeting organized by the Agency should be permitted to 
become a forum for the pronouncement of views against the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 


GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 5 


10. It was desirable that the proposed improvements in quality and reorganization 
of the work of the Agency's laboratories should be carried out; the 
laboratories met the requirements of the Agency and of Member States more fully 
than they had a few years earlier. 
11. The proposed budget for 1982 was another important matter. Despite the 
economies that had been made, it amounted to some $99 million, i.e. it was 
$11 million higher than the budget for 1981. Only a small part of the increase 
represented an expansion of programmes; the main part was due to inflation. 
The Czechoslovak delegation considered that budgetary increases should be 
accompanied by an expansion of the Agency's work and of the meetings held by it 
for Member States in such a way that all resources were used in the most economical 
and effective way. He supported as a whole those parts of the budget 
which related to safeguards, nuclear power, nuclear safety, the further development 
of the INIS system and technical assistance. 
12. Czechoslovakia paid considerable attention to technical assistance and 
endeavoured to utilize as far as possible its own resources for providing such 
assistance, especially where the training of professionals from developing 
countries was concerned. With regard to the proposed target for voluntary 
contributions for technical assistance in 1982, Czechoslovakia was increasing 
its contribution in national currency by a factor of nearly five. In that 
connection it would actively co-operate with the Secretariat with a view to 
using those funds for the maximum benefit of recipient countries. Czechoslovakia 
wished to repeat its view that funds for technical assistance should be used, 
first of all, for the economically least developed countries and, secondly, for 
those developing countries which had signed NPT. In addition to those funds 
his Government was providing fellowships at various Czechoslovak institutions 
and would host various technical Agency meetings in 1982. The Czechoslovak 
delegation continued to favour the principle that contributions to the Technical 
Assistance Fund should be voluntary. In recent years considerable successes had 
been achieved in the use of contributions, including those made in nonconvertible 
currencies. He was convinced that with maximum co-operation between 
Member States and the Secretariat it would be possible to achieve entirely 
satisfactory results in that connection. 



GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 6 


13. The Committee of the Whole was again to examine a proposal by developing 
countries of Africa and the Middle.East and South Asia in connection with the 
amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. The view of his Government had not 
changed: it opposed any amendment, in order to preserve the effectiveness of 
the Board and not to upset the existing balance in the representation of. 
various geographical areas and States where nuclear programmes were at different 
levels of development. 
14. Mr. YAMATO (Japan), expressing pleasure at Zimbabwe's admission to 
the Agency, said that his Government was willing to co-operate with that 
country in the nuclear as well as in other fields. 
15. Stable energy supplies in the long term and at appropriate prices were 
essential for economic growth. In that connection, the rise in the price of 
oil by 24% in 1980 and by 180% during the preceding five years made it increasingly 
important to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as the most 
promising alternative source. 
16. Not being endowed with indigenous energy resources, Japan was making continuous 
efforts to develop.nuclear power. It had currently in operation 
22 nuclear power reactors with a total generating capacity of approximately 
15.5 million kW(e), accounting for about 12% of its total generating capacity. 
Furthermore, 11 power reactors with a total capacity of some 10 million kW(e) 
were under construction and five reactors with a total capacity of 5.3 million 
kW(e) were being planned. It was envisaged that nuclear power capacity would 
rise to 53 million kW(e) by 1990. 
17. In order to maximize the utilization of the potential energy from uranium, 
Japan had from the outset been making efforts to develop the advanced thermal 
reactor and the fast breeder reactor. In that connection, the establishment of 
a nuclear fuel cycle was of importance: the Tokai-mura spent fuel reprocessing 
plant started full, operation in January 1981, and a new reprocessing plant with 
a capacity large enough to meet his country's future needs was being promoted 
in the private sector. As far as enriched uranium was concerned, it was being 
produced in small quantities by the pilot plant at Nin-gyo-toge, and the technical 
prospects for commercial-scale production were bright. 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 7 


18. In promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, it was important to 
ensure, through various international co-operation efforts, that those uses 
were compatible with the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In that context, 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) provided the legal 
framework. Welcoming the accession to NPT of Barbados, Turkey and Egypt, and 
the conclusion by Spain and the Agency of an agreement under which all nuclear 
facilities in Spain were placed under Agency safeguards, he appealed to all 
countries which had not yet acceded to NPT to do so immediately. However, for 
NPT to be truly effective, the inequalities in the Treaty must be rectified. 
In that regard, he was encouraged by the entry into force of the Voluntary 
Submission Agreements concluded by the United States and France, following that 
concluded by the United Kingdom. He strongly urged other nuclear-weapon States 
to take similar steps. 
19. The Agency's safeguards system played a key role in ensuring nuclear nonproliferation 
and, at the same time, in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Japan had been among the first countries to accept Agency safeguards 
and was also among the countries which had taken the initiative in creating the 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI). 
20. Since 1978 Japan had been involved - with the United States, France and 
the Agency - in the project on the technical amelioration of safeguards for 
reprocessing plants; the report of that project, entitled "Tokai Advanced 
Safeguards Technology Exercise" (TASTEX), had been finalized in May 1981. 
Desirous of making Agency safeguards more effective, Japan was co-operating 
with the Agency in promoting research and development in that field, and in 
particular on the application of safeguards to sensitive facilities like reprocessing 
and enrichment plants. Japan-aimed at the further improving of Agency 
safeguards through its support programme for Agency safeguards, which would take 
into consideration the results of TASTEX. Furthermore, in order to facilitate 
safeguards activities, it had agreed to inspectors staying for longer periods 
in Japan; currently there were three inspectors on long-term assignments in 
his country. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 8 


21. In connection with safeguards, he deeply regretted the air raid carried 
out by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear research centre. Immediately after the raid, 
the Japanese Foreign Minister had strongly condemned it. Japan had supported 
the relevant resolution adopted by the Board of Governors in June and that 
adopted subsequently by the United Nations Security Council, for Japan considered 
the attack to be a serious challenge to the Agency's safeguards system 
and hence to NPT. 
22. While it was essential to ensure nuclear non-proliferation for the promotion 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, he wished to emphasize that 
unnecessarily strict non-proliferation measures should not hamper the development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that context, he welcomed the 
policy of the new United States Administration calling for the promotion of 
international co-operation in peaceful nuclear activities that had no nuclear 
proliferation impact; he hoped that the policy would be reflected in concrete 
measures. Also, he supported the recent movement, in line with the conclusions 
of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), to make the exercise 
of the "prior consent right" more predictable and comprehensive, as that would 
lend greater stability to international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear power. 
23. In the matter of making the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy compatible 
with nuclear non-proliferation objectives, the Committee on Assurances 
of Supply (CAS) had an important part to play. When CAS met in November - to 
discuss the principles of international co-operation in the field of nuclear 
energy in accordance with its mandate, and emergency and back-up mechanisms it 
should hold discussions in a careful and measured manner and avoid undue 
haste. 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 9 


24. Japan was participating in the studies, undertaken within the framework of 
the Agency, on the concepts of International Plutonium Storage (IPS) and International 
Spent Fuel Management (ISFM). Although the establishment of an IPS 
system would contribute to nuclear non-proliferation, it must be borne in mind 
that the IPS study should not only lead to ensuring non-proliferation but also 
help in facilitating the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. As for ISFM, constructive 
results were expected from the work being done by various experts. 
25. Recalling that the resolution on the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
to be held in 1983, of which Japan had been a co-sponsor, had stressed that 
progress in the work of CAS would greatly contribute to the success of the 
Conference and had invited the Agency to fulfil its appropriate role within the 
scope of its responsibilities at all stages of preparation of the Conference, 
he-called for careful discussions bearing in mind that the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and nuclear non-proliferation were two sides of the same coin and 
recognizing the complexity of the problem. 
26. The physical protection of nuclear material was also important for preventing 
the dangers which might result from the misuse of such material. The 
physical protection standards drafted in Japan satisfied the requirements contained 
in the Agency's recommendations (INFCIRC/225/Rev.1). As for the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPNM), his Government 
would accede to it as soon as it had completed the necessary internal legal 
measures. 
27. Nuclear safety was another major problem Involved in, and a basic prerequisite 
for promoting, the development of nuclear energy, and Japan had 
always attached great importance to it. There had been an accident at the 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 10 


Tsuruga Nuclear Power Plant earlier in the year. However, it had had no effect 
on human beings; in fact, it had provided an opportunity to improve the safety 
of nuclear power plants and to strengthen systems for operational control and 
supervision, measures by which his Government was endeavouring to win greater 
popular confidence in the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


28. He commended the Agency's important role in establishing safety standards 
for such things as radiation protection, the operation of nuclear facilities, 
and the treatment and disposal of radioactive wastes. 
29. The international Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues, 
held in Stockholm in October 1980, which had stressed the importance of 
training operators and of improving control equipment, had come to the general 
conclusion that there was no factor relevant to safety which limited the use 
and development of nuclear power. 
30. He considered that the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
should be available to all peoples. The technical assistance provided by the 
Agency to developing countries in that field was of vital importance and should 
be strengthened. Japan was assisting by - among other things - providing 
experts and granting fellowships. It had in the past contributed 100% of its 
share of voluntary contributions, or sometimes even more, to finance the 
Agency's technical assistance programmes, and would endeavour to continue 
making such contributions in the future. As for its voluntary contribution 
for 1982, the necessary procedures were under way in Japan. 
GC(XXV)/0R.232 
page 11 


31. His country had become a party in 1978 to the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology (RCA), the programmes under which were being implemented with 
enthusiasm by the participating countries. His Government laid emphasis on 
assistance to the participating countries in the solution of their most urgent 
problems in the fields of food, industry and medicine, and was making positive 
contributions to projects concerning isotope technology and its applications 
in industry and the radiation preservation of food; a report on the progress of 
the last-mentioned project would be presented at a research co-ordination 
meeting to be held in Tokyo in November. Considerable progress had been made 
under the sub-project on radiation processing, part of the UNDP-financed RCA 
project on industrial applications. Meetings of the Working Group on Non-
Destructive Testing Practice and of the UNDP Workshop on Maintenance of Nuclear 
Instruments for Industrial Applications were to be held in Tokyo. It was 
desirable to establish such groups in other regions for the benefit of economic 
and social development in developing countries in those regions. 


32. At no time in its history had the International Atomic Energy Agency 
faced so many diverse problems as it did today in carrying out its work, nor 
had the nations of the world ever expected as much from the activities of the 
Agency as they did now. There had never been a confrontation even when there 
had been differences, or conflicts of interests, among the Members of the 
Agency, and solutions had been explored in a spirit of co-operation. He was 
confident that that valuable tradition would be maintained in the future. 

GC(XXV)/0R.232 
page 12 


33. The current economic situation in the world imposed limits on the manpower 
and financial resources available to the Agency, so that the Secretariat should 
redouble its efforts to achieve a balanced allocation and the maximum effective 
use of the budget. Although, in budget allocation, emphasis should be placed on 
the three main activities (namely, technical assistance, safeguards and safety), 
the strengthening of research activities was also important. 
34. Lastly, he wished to pay a tribute to the Director General, Dr. Eklund, for 
his outstanding leadership of the Agency over a period of 20 years. 
35. Mr. VAN BARNEVELD K00Y (Netherlands) said that the Agency had always 
constituted an example of successful international co-operation in the field 
of nuclear energy, and much of the credit for that had been due to the Secretariat 
in general and to the Director General in particular during his long and outstanding 
career. The latter was to be congratulated on his 20 years' devoted 
service to the cause of international understanding. 


36. The Agency had now unfortunately been confronted with problems of a political 
nature, which tended to overshadow its proper activities on behalf of the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy and in the related field of non-proliferation. 
The Netherlands was concerned about the consequences of the attack by Israel on 
the peaceful nuclear facilities of another Member State. The Israeli action had 
sapped the very basis of the Agency's safeguards system, and implicitly suggested a 
lack of confidence in that system. Should there have been any doubts as to the 
effectiveness of the safeguards system - doubts which his delegation did not 
share - they should have been raised in the forum responsible for that system, 
i.e. the Agency itself. It was quite inadmissible, on the other hand, for a 
Member State of the Agency to take the law into its own hands and to resort to 
military action. 
GC (XXV)/OR. 232 
page 13 


37. He now wished to offer some remarks about what in his opinion should remain 
the substance of the Agency's work, namely the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
on the one hand and the closely related non-proliferation effort on the other. 
38. As has been pointed out in the past by the Netherlands delegates to the 
General Conference, the use on a large scale of nuclear energy in a number of 
countries, especially industrialized ones, had already been the subject of controversy 
for years past. As the Director General had observed in his statement, 
public acceptance played an important role in the decision-making process in most 
of the countries involved. The general public was very much concerned - rightly 
or wrongly - about the safety and waste aspects of nuclear power. The Agency 
could and should contribute to the discussions by continuing its valuable work 
in the sphere of nuclear safety, radioactive waste management and related problems. 


39. Among the activities of the Agency which his Government considered to be of 
prime importance, he wished first to mention the preparation of a number of codes 
and guides governing such matters as the safety aspects of nuclear installations, 
the transport of nuclear materials, and radiation protection. Secondly, the 
Netherlands was looking forward to the implementation by the Agency of the Austrian 
initiative concerning nuclear installations in border regions. The Director General 
in his statement had suggested that that matter should be dealt with in the 
United Nations proper. His Government, however, still believed that the Agency 
would be the appropriate body to handle the question. He also wished to express 
support for an enhanced role of the Agency in the field of international nuclear 
safety. 

GC(XXV)/OE.232 
page 14 


40- Regarding the activities of the Agency in the field of technical assistance, 
it appeared that the new system of indicative planning figures represented a distinct 
improvement over the earlier procedure. Furthermore, his delegation had 
noted with satisfaction that it had been possible to meet a substantial percentage 
of all requests (in fact more than 85%). He sincerely hoped that that development 
would continue in the years to come. 


41. Turning to the non-proliferation part of the Agency's work, he observed that, 
over the years, the Netherlands had been an advocate of an effective, universally 
applied non-proliferation system. Such a system had necessarily to rely to a 
large extent on technical measures developed and applied by the Agency. Recent 
events, however, had clearly shown that the political will to maintain and 
strengthen such a system was equally indispensable. Consequently, solutions for 
existing problems and differences of opinion would have to be found through 
negotiations in which the aims and the needs of all parties were taken into 
account. 
42. In his view, it was the task of CAS to fabricate the building blocks for a 
new international nuclear consensus, whereas the 1983 United Nations Conference 
for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy (PUNE Conference) would have to clarify the framework for such an international 
consensus. The Netherlands, as member of the Bureau of the PUNE 
Conference, would continue to play an active part in that process. 
43. His Government held the view that the development of a new consensus would 
be greatly facilitated by the early establishment of an Agency plutonium storage 
scheme. Although the negotiations in the Expert Group dealing with that matter 
were proving to be complicated, his Government still hoped and expected that it 
would be possible to establish a satisfactory and generally agreed system within 
a reasonable time. 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 15. 


44. In conclusion, he wished to reiterate that the Netherlands continued to 
attach the greatest importance to the work of the Agency a^d would support its 
activities to the utmost. It sincerely hoped that, in spite of recent regrettable 
events and developments, it would be possible to pursue that work in an 
objective and responsible manner. 
45. Mr. NIMPUNO (Indonesia), congratulating Zimbabwe on its acceptance 
for membership of the Agency, expressed the belief that the Government of 
Zimbabwe would make valuable contributions in pursuit of the Agency's goals. 
46. During the twenty-four years since its establishment the Agency had been, 
confronted with numerous problems and challenges. The swift progress of technology 
in the developing countries was causing some concern in certain quarters 
at the implications of the rapid changes for the relationship of developed to. 
developing countries. However, the transfer of technology to developing 
countries must not become an empty phrase. The role of the Agency in that 
respect was encouraging, particularly now that the donor-recipient relationship 
implied by the term "technical assistance" had been replaced by "technical 
co-operation", which showed that the Agency was able to understand the feelings 
of Member States. The Agency's contribution towards the transfer of nuclear 
technology should be increased during a period in which the world would witness 
the transition from world-wide dependence on one energy source to the use of 
alternative sources, including nuclear energy. In that respect the Agency and 
the industrialized countries would play a very important role. 
47. It was generally felt that assurances of supply of nuclear materials and 
technology were still far from satisfactory. The participants in CAS, 
especially those from the supplier countries, should consider the problem 
seriously and seek practical and workable solutions. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 16 


48. The Secretariat had concluded that public acceptance was an important 
factor in the development of nuclear power. The Agency could contribute much 
to the solution of the problems involved. For example, it was recognized that 
the human factor played an important role in nuclear safety, about which the 
public held a rather low opinion. The Agency's training programme in the field 
of safety and safety-related subjects should be expanded both qualitatively and 
quantitatively. During the meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the United 
Nations Conference on the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, recently held in Vienna, many delegations had 
suggested that public acceptance of nuclear power should be one of the topics 
to be dealt with by that conference in 1983. The Agency should contribute 
actively to the effort to allay the doubts and fears of the public. 
49. It was a cause for concern that there were still facilities in both 
nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States which were being operated outside 
the Agency's safeguards system. In the annual report, the Secretariat often 
used words like "of which the Agency was aware" in reporting on the number of 
safeguarded and unsafeguarded facilities. That constituted a tacit acknowledgement 
by the Agency that its awareness still required intensification and 
that safeguards coverage was inadequate. Although the number of members of the 
NPT club had increased, certain States had not placed their facilities under 
NPT safeguards. One of those States was Israel, and his delegation strongly 
supported United Nations Security Council Resolution 487 (1981) concerning the 
Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre, in which Israel was 
urgently requested to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
The Members of the Agency should reaffirm their confidence in the effectiveness 
of the Agency's safeguards system, in spite of the inadequacy of safeguards 
coverage. 


GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 17 


50. His delegation strongly condemned the military attack by Israel on the 
Iraqi nuclear research centre. That attack on a sovereign State violated the 
inalienable right of a Member State of the Agency to develop its peaceful 
nuclear energy programme; moreover, Iraq had fully subscribed to the Agency's 
safeguards system and was a party to NPT. The attack also showed blatant contempt 
for the Agency's safeguards system and for the Agency as an organization 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. His delegation therefore 
urged the General Conference to suspend Israel for the time being from the 
exercise of the privileges and rights of membership of the Agency. 
51. The annual report indicated the encouraging progress made by RCA through 
the assistance provided by the RCA donor countries, such as Australia and Japan, 
the efforts of the Secretariat and the active participation of Member States. 
The Japanese Government was providing financial support until 1983 for an RCA 
project on food preservation which was of great importance to the development 
of the participating States; in view of the amount of work still to be done 
before the benefits could be fully enjoyed by the States, the project should be 
continued even after 1983. The joint FAO/IAEA/WHO Committee on the Wholesomeness 
of Irradiated Food had concluded that foodstuffs treated by irradiation with up 
to 10 kilogray need no longer be tested for toxicity, a conclusion which should 
encourage work on the application of nuclear energy to food preservation. 
52. His delegation appreciated the Secretariat's efforts to implement the 
technical assistance programmes in such a way that no significant surplus would 
exist in non-convertible currency by the end of 1981. No doubt the various 
States concerned had also contributed to the encouraging results. The 
Secretariat's efforts to develop procedures for evaluating the implementation 
of technical assistance programmes were also commendable, as the evaluation of 
past activities was essential in planning for the future. Those efforts should 
not be confined to technical assistance programmes but applied to other Agency 
activities as well. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 18 


53. The Board of Governors had in 1981 exhaustively discussed the subjects 
referred to it by the General Conference at its twenty-fourth regular session, 
but it did not seem to have reached acceptable solutions to issues which had 
been dragging on for a long time and which were of great importance to the 
developing countries. Those issues were the financing of technical assistance 
by means other than voluntary contributions, how to achieve parity between the 
safeguards and technical assistance activities, and the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 with a view to improving geographical representation on the 
Board of Governors. Vested interests seemed to be preventing the Board from 
solving them satisfactorily. The General Conference should try to avoid 
referring them to the newly elected Board without concrete recommendations on 
how they should be solved. 
54. The Agency's achievements in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy were great, although there was still room for improvement. 
55. His country, which had confidence in the Agency's safeguards system, had 
placed all its nuclear facilities under that system by becoming a party to NPT. 
As NPT was intended to be a means of preventing nuclear weapons proliferation, 
and as most Members of the Agency were party to it, all States should be 
guided by it in their conduct and actions. 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 19 


56. Mr. MIHULECEA (Romania), noting that the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy was today one of the key features of the social and economic 
development programmes of all nations and that, in the context of the deepening 
world economic crisis, science was able to play an extremely important part in 
the discovery and exploitation of new sources of energy and raw materials for 
the benefit of the peoples, recalled that the President of the Socialist 
Republic of Romania, Mr. Ceausescu, in a message addressed to the participants 
of an international symposium on "Scientists and Peace" held in Bucharest, had 
stated: "The most noble mission of scientists and researchers in all fields 
throughout the world is to ensure that the full potential of modern science and 
technology are devoted to the progress, welfare, liberty and independence of 
peoples, and to guaranteeing the supreme right of mankind to life and peace". 
Under the direct influence of science, the conditions governing the production 
of goods were undergoing constant change, natural resources were being exploited 
in an ever more effective manner; the future of mankind was inconceivable 
without the great achievements of scientific thought. 
57. As the arms race had deeply harmful consequences for the economic and 
social progress of all countries, particularly developing ones, the Romanian 
delegation wished to insist on the urgent need to put an end to it and to start 
concrete negotiations on disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament 
including stopping production of the neutron bomb. 
58. Faithful to the principle of solving problems at issue between States 
exclusively by peaceful means, Romania had strongly condemned the Israeli air 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre. That inadmissible act of 
aggression on facilities placed under Agency safeguards represented a gross 
violation of the rules of international law. 
59. Romania shared the view that it was necessary to intensify efforts to 
strengthen the role of the United Nations specialized agencies in eliminating 
underdevelopment and establishing a new international economic order, involving 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. At the same time Romania was 
strongly in favour of the unhindered transfer of nuclear technology, equipment 
and materials to non-nuclear States, so that they would have broad access to 
all the advantages of atomic energy. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 20 


60. While his Government considered that Member States should make fresh 
efforts to strengthen the role of the Agency in promoting co-operation along the 
above lines, it looked askance at a process whereby control measures were 
being extended beyond the provisions of NPT, involving what his delegation 
considered to be unjustified attempts to establish a monopoly of nuclear 
technology on the pretext of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
61. The Romanian delegation took a positive view of the Agency's overall 
activities during the past year. Of particular note had been the results 
obtained under the programmes concerned with nuclear power, the provision 
of technical assistance (within the limits of available funds), personnel 
training, nuclear safety including the preparation of codes and guides, 
controlled thermonuclear fusion and the applications of isotopes and radiation 
in national economies. 
62. Regarding the Agency's Regular Budget for the coming year, the Romanian 
delegation was prepared to approve it and fully appreciated the efforts made 
by the Secretariat to reduce the expenses met from the assessed contributions of 
Member States. At the same time, his delegation stressed the need, during 
the years to come, to maintain the budget within limits as acceptable as 
possible for all Member States. 


63. Romania was pursuing its economic and social development by placing 
particular stress on a continuing increase in overall economic efficiency. 
In that context the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, particularly 
for purposes of power generation, would make an important contribution to 
meeting the increasing demands on the national economy, raising the material 
and moral level of the people, and introducing technical progress on a large 
scale. 
64. The Romanian national nuclear power programme was based on the need to 
ensure a supply of energy for the accelerated social and economic progress 
of the country and on the requirement that during the current decade Romania 
should become independent as regards fuel and energy. Thus, construction of 
the country's first nuclear power station had begun two years previously and 
the work was proceeding according to plan. Specific measures had been taken to 
enhance the contribution of research and development and to promote techniques 
for the expanded production of fuel, equipment and moderator material on a 
national basis. 
GC (XXV),'OR. 232 
page 21 


65. He wished to take the opportunity to refer to the valuable support extended 
to Romania by the Agency and UNDP under a technical assistance project for the 
development of nuclear technology in Romania. That project had enabled the 
country to acquire certain new fuel fabrication technologies and had furnished 
means of obtaining equipment and of training specialists. 
66. In conclusion, after welcoming Zimbabwe to membership of the Agency, he 
wished to state that Romania would continue to support the Agency in solving 
the tasks assigned to it by its Member States. 
67. Mr. BELODED (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
problems facing the world, particularly that of peace, were greater now than 
ever before. In view of the seriousness of the world situation, the Soviet 
Union had issued an appeal to the parliaments and peoples of the world, calling 
for negotiations which would lead to a ban on nuclear missiles. There was an 
even greater need today to stop the nuclear arms race and ensure the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. It was in precisely that area that the 
Agency should play a positive role. 
68. The world had recently witnessed yet another example of Israel's growing 
aggression in the form of the attack on the Nuclear Research Centre in Baghdad. 
That act was a blatant violation of international law and had been strongly 
condemned by the United Nations Security Council. It showed that the Israeli 
Government had raised international terrorism to the level of State policy. 
The use of American-produced aircraft in the attack demonstrated that the 
United States Government was the real inspiration behind that policy and 
practice of international terrorism. It was well known that the Iraqi nuclear 
facilities and fuel at the research centre were subject to Agency safeguards by 
virtue of a safeguards agreement between Iraq and the Agency in connection with 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty. In the latest inspection of the Iraqi nuclear 
centre,in January of the current year, all nuclear material including the fuel 
for the two Tamuz reactors had been accounted for by the Agency's inspectors. 
The attempts by Israel to present its unprovoked attack as a pre-emptive 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 


page 22 


strike were absurd. Such aggressive actions hampered the achievement of an 
equitable and stable peace in the Middle East. Furthermore, that act of 
terrorism constituted a threat to the Agency's safeguards system, and the 
United Nations Security Council had therefore been right to demand that safeguards 
be extended to cover all nuclear facilities in Israel. The Ukrainian 
delegation fully supported Iraq's position regarding the attack and its demand 
for sanctions to be applied to Israel under Chapter VII of the United Nations 
Charter. 


69. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic intended to raise its production 
of electrical power substantially under the current five-year plan, with 
nuclear power stations accounting for most of the increase. Their share of 
overall power production was to rise from 670 to 26%. It was planned to introduce 
in the near future additional capacity at the Chernobyl, South Ukraine and 
Rovno nuclear power stations and to construct the first units of the Khmel'nitsk, 
Zaporozh'e, and Crimean nuclear power stations and of the Odessa nuclear power 
and heat-generating station. 
70. The Khmel'nitsk and South Ukraine stations were being constructed in conjunction 
with the Council for Mutual Economic assistance. A 750 kW power 
transmission line stretching from the Khmel'nitsk station to the Polish town of 
Rzeszow would provide a reliable supply of electrical energy from the Soviet 
Union to Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia. Romania was participating in the 
construction of the South Ukraine station under a bilateral agreement. It was 
9 
planned to increase electricity production in the Ukraine to 280-290 10 kwh 


by 1985, with nuclear power stations accounting for most of the increase. 


71. There were altogether six large nuclear power stations in the Ukraine, 
one with RBMK (boiling-water) reactors and the other five with WWER reactors. 
In terms of their thermal and technical parameters and, more importantly, their 
reliability record, WWER reactors were on a par with world standards. 
72. The use of nuclear reactors to generate heat for urban heating and industrial 
applications as well as to generate electricity was another area in which 
work was being carried out in his country. When the Odessa nuclear power and 
heat-generating station came into operation, it would be possible to dispense 
with uneconomic individual generators using fossil fuels within towns. First 
estimates showed that the cost of electricity and heat generation would be lower 
at such nuclear stations than at even the most economical conventional dualpurpose 
stations. 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 23 


73. In addition, work was under way in the Ukraine on the planning and design of 
large-capacity reactors, on the construction of fast breeder reactors, on possibilities 
for the use of the thorium cycle and on high-temperature, gas-cooled 
reactors. The Ukrainian Academy of Sciences was performing important work on 
fundamental problems in nuclear physics, the behaviour of materials subjected 
to radiation and controlled nuclear fusion. 
74. Radioisotopes and ionizing radiation were being used in scientific 
research establishments and institutes of medicine in an ever-expanding number 
of fields. A radiological service had been set up which allowed all patients, 
regardless of their place of residence, to be given radiodiagnostic analyses 
or radiation therapy if required. In vitro radioisotope diagnostic techniques 
were being increasingly employed, particularly for children, in endocrinological, 
haematological and oncological institutions thus enabling the radiation exposure of 
patients to be eliminated and reliable information on the functional status of 
the body's organs and systems to be obtained. 


75. Great attention was being paid to training highly skilled experts, as was 
witnessed by the wide range of advanced nuclear courses available at various 
institutes. 
76. Co-operation between the Ukraine and the Agency was increasing, 
particularly in connection with the organization in the Ukraine of meetings 
of Agency experts and courses, particularly of the interregional type, for 
Agency-sponsored trainees. Such courses were beneficial and should continue 
to be held under the Agency's auspices. 
77. Turning to the annual report for 1980 and budget for 1982, he pointed 
out that the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic attached great importance to 
technical assistance for the developing countries. Its voluntary contribution 
had risen from 100 000 roubles in national currency in 1980 to 135 000 in 1981, 
and would rise in 1982 to 180 000 roubles. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 


page 24 


78. Mr. SETHNA (India) remarked that it was heartening to note that, with 
the admission of Zimbabwe, the membership of the Agency had now risen to 111 
and of those 111 States the majority were from the developing world. That further 
highlighted the need for a change in representation on the Board of Governors, 
which at present was not in conformity with the increasing proportion of the 
Agency's membership constituted by developing countries. India would, therefore, 
like to express its support for the proposal before the Conference for an amendment 
of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. 


79. His delegation also wished to express its appreciation of the exemplary 
manner in which the Director General, Dr. Sigvard Eklund, had conducted the 
Agency's affairs during the last year. He had brought to the Agency a farsightedness 
arid ail experience which stemmed from his long and dedicated service. India 
particularly welcomed his statement at the first meeting of the session regarding 
the proper representation of the developing countries on the staff of the Agency. 
80. The Agency was commencing the twenty-fifth year of its existence. He could 
think of no better or more appropriate way of commemorating the silver jubilee 
of the Agency than by recalling the objectives enshrined in the Statute objectives 
that had in recent years been threatened with erosion through totally 
extraneous issues, some of which were in clear violation of the provisions of 
the Statutev 
81. It was regrettable that the growth in the Agency's promotional activities 
had ndt matched the development of its regulatory functions. In fact, the 
proposed concept of "zero growth" would widen the gap further. Furthermore, the 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 25 


promotional activities had been and continued to be subject to extraneous and 
restrictive considerations, such as those reflected in the Revised Guiding 
Principles, so that the development of atomic energy on a universal basis was being 
hindered. For that reason India no longer accepted the Agency's technical assistance, 
while continuing to participate in the programme as a donor. The question of 
financing technical assistance was receiving continuing attention, but a permanent 
solution of the problem had not been found. In the meantime India supported the 
target of $16 million agreed upon for 1982; his country's voluntary contribution 
would amount to the equivalent of $97 600. In addition, India would continue 
to make available 12 fellowships for the benefit of developing countries. 


82. The Conference agenda contained an item relating to the highly reprehensible, 
unprovoked and unjustified military attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear 
research centre. His Government condemned that brutal aggression in the strongest 
terms. 


83. The basic point at issue was an act of aggression which had threatened the 
maintenance of international peace and security, in clear violation of the 
United Nations Charter. The incident also represented an act of aggression by 
one Member of the Agency against another, and therefore called for decisive action 
at the present session of the General Conference. 
84. Although during 1980 the need for nuclear power both in industrialized and 
developing countries had been amply reaffirmed, the opposition to nuclear power 
had increased through fear based on environmental and safety considerations. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 


page 26 


The fact that no death or serious injury due to radiation had occurred 
at any nuclear plant since the first power reactor went critical needed to be 
given widespread publicity in all countries in order to dispel the fears in the 
mind of the public. Nuclear power was the only viable alternative to conventional 


sources of energy available to a number of developing countries. For that reason 


India warmly welcomed the proposed International Conference on Nuclear Power 
Experience, scheduled for 1982. 


85. India continued actively to support the work being done under the Agency's 
Regional Co-operative Agreement in grain mutation, the sterilization of medical 
supplies, the maintenance of nuclear instruments and other fields. His Government 
had recently become a participant in the Regional Project on Food Irradiation 
and had extended its full support to the forthcoming Project on Industrial 
Applications of Isotopes. Perhaps the stage had now been reached when a fresh 
look needed to, be taken at how best to attain the objectives of regional 
co-operation, given the limited financial and manpower resources available. 
86. India continued to view with concern the increasing emphasis being given 
to the Agency's regulatory activities. The Agency was now even mobilizing itself 
to implement safeguards in certain nuclear-weapon States. He wished to reiterate 
his Government's firm belief that such limited safeguards applied to a few 
non-military nuclear facilities in nuclear-weapon States were pointless and in 
no way contributed to non-proliferation. The production, stockpiling and deployment 
of nuclear weapons in various geographic locations, including some in 


GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 27 


non-nuclear-weapon States, continued unabated. As the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations had mentioned in his message to the General Conference, any 
non-proliferation regime should involve a truly world-wide system which would be 
generally accepted and uniformly and fairly administered. It was also not proper 
for the Agency to introduce a distinction in its documents, such as the annual 


report and the Safeguards Implementation Report, when reporting on nuclear 
facilities in nuclear-weapon States and in non-nuclear-weapon States. 


87. India had been participating, with an open mind, in some of the discussions 
connected with the proposed scheme for international plutonium storage. His 
delegation believed that the present discussions were proceeding in a direction 
that might violate the sovereign rights of Member States as enshrined in 
Article XII.A.5 of the Statute. India's participation in the plutonium storage 
discussions was, therefore, without prejudice to its rights as a sovereign nation. 
88. A Committee on Assurances of Supply had been established so as to permit a 
multilateral dialogue between suppliers and consumers. Assurances of supply were 
a matter of some importance to India at the present time, and he looked forward 
to the emergence of positive suggestions from the deliberations of the Committee. 
It had to be emphasized that any multilateral solution for the problems of 
assurances of supply had to take into account existing bilateral rights and 
obligations. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 28 


89. Mr. SHIM (Republic of Korea) welcomed the approval of Zimbabwe for 
membership of the Agency. 
90. He said that the use of atomic energy was becoming more and more attractive, 
particularly in regions where fossil fuels were limited. For countries 
in which such limits were acutely felt, a stable supply of nuclear fuel had 
become imperative. The uneven distribution of resources around the globe and 
the uncertainty about obtaining them were for many countries a matter of 
increasing concern. Concerted efforts should be made through international 
co-operation in order- to provide a stable supply of nuclear fuel to those who 
needed it. With regard to the transfer of nuclear power generation technology 
to developing countries, his Government attached great importance to the 
necessity of transferring expertise in quality assurance. If accidents were to 
occur as a result of quality assurance having been neglected, the consequences 
in terms of safety and economics would be catastrophic not only for the 
developing, but also for the developed countries. That was an area in which 
Governments and international organizations could play complementary roles in 
planning and implementing nuclear power programmes. In that connection, the 
training of manpower for the proper management of and quality assurance for 
nuclear power plants in developing countries, which was beyond the capacities 
of developing countries, should receive the serious attention of developed 
countries well before actual needs arose. 
91. Turning to the peaceful uses of atomic energy in his country, he said that 
in July 1981 the nuclear power programme of the Republic of Korea had reached 
another milestone, ten billion kilowatt-hours having been generated without a 
single major accident since the first pressurized-water reactor (PWR) went into 
commercial operation in April 1978. That plant's capacity factor had been 
rising steadily, from 467. in 1978 to 67% in 1980, as his country's reactor 
operation and maintenance experience accumulated. Eight further nuclear power 
plants were under construction. One of them, a pressurized-heavy-water reactor 
(PHWR), would be completed by early 1983 and another, a PWR, would be in 
operation by late 1983. By 1991, his country expected to have a total of 
13 nuclear power plants, accounting for 36% of its total electrical generation 
capacity. By the turn of the century, it would have approximately 30 GW(e) of 


GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 29 


installed nuclear power generation capacity as a result of the construction of 
more than thirty nuclear power plants. In order to carry out that ambitious and 
essential programme successfully, his Government wished to develop an increasingly 
close relationship with the Agency and with many other countries. 


92. The Republic of Korea would willingly share its technological experience 
of nuclear power with any of the Agency's Member States in order to promote 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and to ensure nuclear safety. The fuel 
cycle services required to support his country's nuclear power programme represented 
a formidable task; in that connection, if access to essential technologies 
continued to be denied, workable measures could not be put into effect for the 
ultimate disposal of spent fuel, nor could any useful international consensus be 
reached on the effective management of the back-end of the fuel cycle. Complexity 
and uncertainty were characteristic features of the management of the back-end of 
the fuel cycle, but there could be no excuse for evading that important issue, 
which all countries generating nuclear power would inevitably face. His 
delegation believed that clear and positive management of the back-end of the 
fuel cycle had become essential in view of the need to improve environmental 
protection. Certainly, the importance of using effectively the limited nuclear 
fuel resources available could not be ignored. The assurance of uranium supplies 
was also very important to consumer countries. In the past decade, unilateral 
violations of existing fuel supply contracts had been perpetrated in the 
name of new non-proliferation policies. For that reason his Government 
attached great importance to the Committee on Assurances of Supply. It hoped 
that the Committee would be able to establish internationally acceptable norms 
with regard to nuclear trade and access to essential technologies with due 
regard to the findings of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation 


(INFCE), physical protection considerations and the Agency's safeguards system. 


93. Concerning the recent Israeli military attack on the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre, the Government of the Republic of Korea considered that the attack 
could not be justified by international law and represented a threat to 
the Agency's safeguards system. 
94. In connection with the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA), 
the Republic of Korea had participated in a number of projects, including the 
five-year United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Industrial Project, and 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 30 


looked forward to taking an active part in others when they were implemented, 


which would presumably be in 1982. 


95. With regard to the Agency's budget for 1982 and the target for voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund, his delegation believed that 
it would be very difficult to expand the Agency's activities; the only solution 
was to programme the Agency's activities on a very selective basis, with stringent 
post-programme evaluation. His delegation noted with satisfaction that 
the indicative planning figure of $16 million for contributions to the Technical 
Assistance Fund in 1982 was receiving broad support as a target, even 
though it fell far short of the requirements of the developing countries. The 
Agency should very seriously consider ways of incorporating the Technical Assistance 
Fund in the Regular Budget of the Agency. 
96. Mr. OSZTROVSZKY (Hungary) said that, despite the Agency's considerable 
successes, nuclear energy was by no means being used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. The international situation had worsened and aggressive elements in 
the capitalist world were attempting to find a solution to their problems by 
rearmament and measures aimed at achieving military supremacy. Especially 
dangerous were plans and decisions relating to the stationing of new American 
medium-range rockets in Europe and to the production of the neutron bomb, as 
was the concept of a so-called "limited" nuclear war. It was necessary to unite 
all forces in the interests of increasing co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and of reducing the threat of nuclear war. A policy of confrontation 
should be avoided, and peaceful methods such as talks should be used for 
the resolution of differences. That was all the more necessary as a policy of 
threats could lead all too easily to the actual use of force, as had been 
occurring in local conflicts, such as the invasion of Angola by South Africa 
and the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre. The latter event 
was of particular relevance to the Agency, since Israel had attempted to 
justify its attack by claiming that the safeguards system was ineffective. 
That claim represented a direct attack on the Agency and an indirect one on 
the whole non-proliferation regime. His Government fully supported the 
resolutions of the Board and the United Nations Security Council in that 


GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 31 


connection and was confident that the General Conference would also take 
appropriate measures. Hungary laid great emphasis on the importance of nonproliferation 
and of stengthening it, and it held the safeguards system of the 
Agency, which played an important part in the strengthening of NPT and nonproliferation 
as a whole, in high esteem. 


97. Turning to his country's nuclear power programme, he said that it was 
intended that the electrical generating capacity to be connected to the grid 
up to 1990 would be based exclusively on nuclear reactors. The first four 
reactor units of the Paks nuclear power station, with a total capacity of 
1760 MW, were being constructed and assembled at a rapid rate. Adjustment and 
start-up operations were to be carried out on the first unit in the very near 
future, and it was scheduled to go on line in 1982. Hungary's first nuclear 
power station was being constructed by virtue of extensive co-operation between 
member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) in accordance 
with the Agreement on Multilateral International Specialization and 
Co-operation for Production and Mutual Supply of Nuclear Power Station Components. 
In 1982 the Paks nuclear power station would account for 8% of 
Hungary's installed electrical generating capacity. In the installation of 
nuclear power stations considerable attention was paid at all stages - planning, 
siting, construction, manufacture and assembly of components, start-up and 
adjustment - to safety and quality assurance. A number of research institutions 
were participating in that programme, while certain problems were being treated 
at the international level as part of scientific and technical co-operation 
between the CMEA Member States. 
98. For ten years an international team of scientists from the CMEA Member 
States had been engaged in joint research on the physics of water-cooled 
water-moderated power reactors at the Central Physics Research Institute of 
the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. The group had started collaborating with 
the Finnish Technical Research Centre in 1980. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 32 


99. In recent years there had been considerable progress in Hungary with the 
application of radioisotopes. There had been a twofold increase in the 
quantity of radioitranunological preparations used for diagnosis of the condition 
of the liver, kidneys, bone marrow and tissue before operations, and wide use 
was being made of radioimmunoassay of the thyroid function of the newly born. 
In 1977 a facility for the radiation sterilization of medical supplies had been 
built with Agency/UNDP assistance. After four years of operation the conveyor 
system had been partly reconstructed and a new (100 000 Ci) source loaded in 
the current year. In 1980, 175 million injection needles and syringes and 
800 cubic metres of other supplies had been sterilized. 


100. Approving the Agency's annual report for 1980, he commended the Agency's 
fruitful work under the experienced direction of the Director General, 
Mr. Eklund. Hungary attached great importance to the efforts being made to 
improve the effectiveness of safeguards inspectors. 
101. Apart from the safeguards system, the technical assistance provided by the 
Agency was of great importance, and Hungary was actively participating in that 
programme. It had noted with pleasure that the voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance Fund in 1980 were being used effectively. 
102. Aware of the importance of the Agency's technical assistance programme, 
his Government wished to announce that in 1982 it would make a voluntary contribution 
of 2 million forints in national currency, which was in excess of 
its share of the proposed target. 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 33 


103. Mr. MALD0NAD0 Mlflo (Ecuador) stated that his Government had recognized 
the essential role that atomic energy had to play in the overall development of 
his country and, to that end, had strengthened the Ecuador Atomic Energy 
Commission five years previously. A development plan had been approved which 
his country intended to carry through, with the generous co-operation of the 
Agency and of Spain, Argentina and other countries. In addition to the Atomic 
Energy Commission, various other governmental and higher education institutes 
were engaged in projects closely related to the country's agricultural industry. 
Preparations were being made for various joint projects involving the Ministry 
of Agriculture and the Faculties of Veterinary Medicine and Agricultural Sciences 
of the Central University. With the co-operation of the Soviet Union, a highenergy 
electron generator was to be installed in one of the higher education 
institutes. The country's first secondary standards dosimetry laboratory was being 
opened in 1981. The activities in question testified to the effectiveness of the 
technical assistance provided through the Agency. It was to be hoped that assistance 
would not only continue but be extended. The secondary standards dosimetry 
laboratory would be used in some of the agricultural projects to which he had 
referred; also it formed an integral part of his country's radiological safety 
programme. The setting-up of the laboratory had made it possible to begin 
negotiations with the Ministry of Public Health and the Institute of Social 
Security with a view to finding appropriate solutions to the safety problems 
facing radiation workers in Ecuador. 


104. Exploration for radioactive minerals was another activity to benefit from 
the Agency's technical assistance, and it was possible that the United Nations 
Development Programme would give favourable consideration to a project for that 
purpose. The Ecuador Atomic Energy Commission was ready to begin the project 
as from 1 October 1981. 
105. In the context of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, access to high 
neutron fluxes was essential in order to acquire a better understanding of 
their dynamics, to manufacture short-lived radioisotopes and to make full use 
of neutron activation analysis techniques. With the kind co-operation of the 
Spanish Nuclear Energy Board, design work had begun on a 3-MW power reactor and 
the associated laboratories. It was intended to complete that work at the 
beginning of 1982 and then to commence the construction phase. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 34 


106. The Atomic Energy Commission had received considerable support for the 
training of the staff required for its various programmes; it was particularly 
indebted to Argentina, Brazil and Chile for their generous co-operation. 
107. A number of important meetings concerning the development of nuclear power 
in Latin America had taken place in 1981. The General Assembly of the Agency 
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL) had been held 
in Mexico City in April 1981 and had reaffirmed the desire of the Latin American 
community to keep the region free of nuclear weapons. His country held the view 
that all due consideration should be given to expanding the services rendered by 
OPANAL to the Latin American countries. Under the auspices of the Commission 
for the Development of the Nuclear Industry in Venezuela, representatives of the 
bodies responsible for implementing nuclear energy policy in the countries party 
to the Cartagena Agreement had met in Caracas in May 1981. Very important conclusions 
had been reached, and there was no doubt that nuclear power was destined 
to play a major role in the integration of the Andean sub-region. The twelfth 
meeting of the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission had been held in La Paz 
at the beginning of September 1981: important resolutions had been adopted and 
emphasis placed on regional programmes. 
108. Lastly, he wished to pay particular tribute to Dr. Sigvard Eklund who, for 
so many years, had worked steadfastly to ensure that the Agency fulfilled the 
objectives laid down in its Statute. The people of Ecuador would always 
remember Dr. Eklund's visit to their country, during which he had reaffirmed the 
Agency's decision to support Ecuador's plans in the field of atomic energy. 
109. Mr. AGIOBU-KEMMER (Nigeria) said he associated himself with the sentiments 
already expressed on the work done by Dr. Sigvard Eklund as Director 
General of the Agency over the past 20 years. The fact that Dr. Eklund had four 
times been re-appointed and was now completing his fifth term in office was 
itself eloquent testimony to his accomplishments both as a scientist and as an 
administrator. During the years which had elapsed since he was first appointed, 
he had stamped his personal image upon the Agency and earned for it, no less than 
for himself, a high reputation for efficiency and commitment to reliability and 
objective truth. He had recently been giving special attention to the needs of 
the developing countries and it was to be hoped that his successor would advance 
that positive trend. It would be important for the new Director General to 
study the Statute afresh, to interpret and implement it in the light of existing 
realities, and to ensure that the concerns and aspirations of all Member States 
were taken into account. 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 35 


110. The Nigerian delegation welcomed the inclusion on the agenda of the present 
session of the item relating to the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre. The Security Council and the Agency's Board of Governors had taken a 
clear and positive stand on the issue and it was to be hoped that the General 
Conference would now take such measures as would deter Israel and any other 
like-minded adventurers from repeating acts of a similar nature. 
111. The setting up by the Agency in June 1980 of the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply had been very laudable. However, it had been disturbing to find that the 
racist regime of South Africa, the credentials of whose representative had been 
rejected at the twenty-third session of the General Conference, in New Delhi, had 
been allowed to participate in the work of the Committee. Happily, the Board had 
since taken corrective action to bring itself into line with the decision of the 
General Conference and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly calling 
for an end to all forms of co-operation and collaboration with South Africa in 
the nuclear field. 
112. The Nigerian delegation believed that the promotional activities of the 
Agency were as important as its regulatory functions. In fact, for developing 
countries the former were the more important and the Agency should spare no 
effort in expanding them. Accordingly, Nigeria would continue to call for the 
resources for technical assistance to be allocated from the Regular Budget, as 
was the case with safeguards. Moreover, the level of funding for those two 
most important functions of the Agency should be comparable. His delegation 
also wanted to take the opportunity to draw attention to the wide disparity 
between the growing needs of the African countries and the amount and quality 
of technical assistance so far extended to that region. 
113. Nigeria wished to express its gratitude to those developed countries which 
had generously placed facilities at the disposal of the Agency for the training 
of high-level personnel from the developing countries. The Agency should give 
active consideration to the idea of establishing training centres in the latter 
countries. He was grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance it had 
given and also to Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, Sweden and the 
United Kingdom for their support to Agency projects in Nigeria. His delegation 
welcomed the proposal to replace the term "technical assistance" by "technical 
co-operation" and hoped that the change would be more than cosmetic. 

GG(XXV)/OR.232 
page 36 


114. It was sad to observe that no progress has yet been made on the question 
of amending Article VI.A.2; apparently words such as "equity" and "balance" 
conveyed different meanings to different groups. It did not appear that any 
positive result would emerge until the major powers, in particular, decided that 
they really wanted to live in a peaceful world, where "man shall not be a wolf 
to man". The Agency ought to keep abreast of the changing realities of 
the day and give expression to progressive forces by reflecting the diversity 
in culture, scientific attainments, economic needs and technological aspirations 
represented by its Member States. It was to be hoped that an increasing number 
of competent staff from the developing world, especially from Africa, would be 
recruited to the policy-making levels of the Agency's Secretariat. 


115. At the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, 
held in Nairobi, the views of the Nigerian Government on energy issues had been 
clearly stated. The world's petroleum reserves would not last for ever and 
steps would have to be taken to diversify the sources of energy without delay. 
For that purpose, research and development work on alternative and nuclear 
energy sources was being intensified. It was to be hoped that; with increasing 
technical assistance from the Agency and the generous co-operation of developed 
countries, the programme adopted in the Lagos Plan of Action during the Second 
Extraordinary Session of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Summit would be 
realized. 
116. Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada) said that the President of the General Conference, 
in his opening remarks, had given all delegates much to ponder in pointing up the 
need to chart a new path to meet new challenges. 
117. He wanted to use the occasion to pay special tribute to Dr. Eklund, who had 
headed the Agency with such distinction over the last 20 years. Few, if any, 
international organizations had enjoyed such dedicated leadership as that provided 
by Dr. Eklund over such a long period of time. 
118. Moreover, on behalf of the Canadian Government, he wished to welcome the 
approval of Zimbabwe for membership of the Agency. 
119. The Conference was meeting at a time when the international nuclear community 
was confronting major challenges. The prospects for growth in the use 
of nuclear power remained impressive, but programmes in many countries, including 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 37 


Canada, had not realized their potential. Industries which had expanded to 
meet earlier expectations were now facing a period of sharply reduced activity. 
The glow was off nuclear power, and, as Dr. Eklund had pointed out, one could 


ignore that situation only at one's peril. 


120. As part of its normal policies in the field of energy, Canada was committed 
to the nuclear option. It was confident that, both domestically and around the 
world, nuclear power would play an increasingly important role in meeting the 
growing needs of the world economy for safe and reliable sources of energy at 
an economic price. However, that confidence was inevitably tempered by concern 
over the risks posed by nuclear proliferation. Unless those risks were dealt 
with, existing threats to global and regional stability were likely to become 
worse. It was in that context of widespread international instability that the 
Israeli attack on the Iraqi reactor, an action immediately and strongly condemned 
by the international community, had to be judged. Legitimate public 
concern over the spread of nuclear weapons would cast a lengthening shadow over 
the prospects for expanding the peaceful use of nuclear energy, and resistance 
to nuclear power would only increase. Canada remained convinced that an 
effective, internationally agreed non-proliferation regime offered the best hope 
of containing those risks. 
121. Thus an effective and comprehensive non-proliferation policy was necessary 
to maintain domestic support for nuclear exports and confidence among 
customers abroad. Canada's role as a reliable supplier of nuclear items was 
inseparable from the existence of a sound and effective international safeguards 
regimes, and the existence of such a safeguards regime made Canadian nuclear 
exports possible. Thus Canada regarded the Agency's safeguards as a key element 
in its own nuclear trade and welcomed the conclusion of the Safeguards Implementation 
Report for 1980 that ".... nuclear material under Agency safeguards 
remained in peaceful nuclear activities or was otherwise adequately accounted for." 
122. However, if confidence was to be sustained in such conclusions, the Agency 
must continue to improve the effectiveness of its safeguards, keeping them abreast 
of developments in nuclear technology and advances in the fuel cycle. The Director 
General had expressed concern to the Board about difficulties the Agency was experiencing 
in safeguarding reactors, particularly where there was an unsafeguarded 
supply of fuel. Those were serious matters requiring urgent attention as well as 
the co-operation of all Member States, particularly those directly involved. 
Canada would continue to assist the Agency in every way possible to overcome those 
difficulties. 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 38 


123. Canada recognized that the procedures for implementing non-proliferation 
controls could be improved and made more efficient. Reprocessing offered a 
good example. Following the conclusion of INFCE in 1980, Canada had devised an 
approach to reprocessing material of Canadian origin under conditions acceptable 
to both supplier and purchaser. It believed that approach satisfied the concerns 
of its nuclear partners about long-term energy security, while ensuring 
that the reprocessing in question served only peaceful purposes. Reprocessing 
would be considered a generic activity. Mutual consent for a defined nuclear 
energy programme - of which reprocessing was an integral part - could be agreed 
to in advance. National reprocessing programmes would, under those conditions, 
be easier to plan on a long-term, predictable basis. Canada had discussed that 
approach with several of its nuclear partners and would be doing so with others 
in future. 
124. As a major nuclear supplier, Canada had a vital stake in promoting the 
development of an international environment where nuclear commerce could take 
place on a secure and predictable basis. Canada's nuclear co-oper'ation agreements, 
comprehensive in scope, were intended to facilitate as much as possible 
the transfer of nuclear material, equipment and technology - including fuel 
fabrication and heavy water production technology - to its nuclear partners. 
In the past year, Canada had concluded co-operation agreements with the 
Philippines and Australia, and a number of others were under negotiation. 
125. Canada was one of the world's largest exporters of uranium. In 1980, 
Canadian mines had produced more than 7000 tonnes of uranium. Exports had 
accounted for some 5400 tonnes, mostly under long-term contracts. In 1980 more 
than $125 million had been invested in Canadian uranium exploration and development. 
According to the most recent assessment, there had been a significant 
increase in Canada's known uranium resources since 1974, an increase equivalent 
to more than three times the amount of uranium approved for export during the 
period 1974-80. The country's resource base as a supplier was therefore secure. 
126. As for nuclear technology, the CANDU reactor continued to enhance its 
reputation. CANDU nuclear power stations had produced over 200 000 million 
kilowatt hours for Ontario Hydro, one of North America's largest utilities. 
The province of Ontario had some 5500 MW of CANDU capacity in operation. In 
addition, 14 reactors were under construction in Ontario, Quebec and New 
Brunswick which, when completed, would increase Canada's total nuclear capacity 
GC(XXV)/0R.232 
page 39 


to more than 15 000 MW. CANDU 600-MW reactors were also being constructed in 
Argentina, Romania and the Republic of Korea, and several other countries were 


seriously considering their purchase. The Canadian nuclear industry was now 
marketing a 950-MW CANDU which combined the best features of existing designs 
with additional improvements. At the other end of the scale, the CANDU family 
had long had available reactors in the range of particular interest to the 
developing world. 


127. The growing interest in CANDU resulted directly from the outstanding performance 
record of the reactors now operating in Canada. To the end of 1980, 
CANDUs had a lifetime average capacity factor of 777., the highest of any reactor 
type in the world. The Bruce 2 unit had led the world in 1980 with a capacity 
factor of nearly 95%. The four leading reactors rated above 500 MW in 1980 had 
all been CANDUs. If one looked at the lifetime performance of individual units, 
Bruce 3 led the field with a capacity factor of almost 83%. CANDUs held 6 of 
the top 10 places among the more than 100 reactors rated above 500 MW. Even 
allowing for the notorious difficulty of comparing international performance 
figures, the exceptional record of CANDU reactors could not be seriously 
challenged. 
128. Canada was participating in a number of multilateral bodies which could 
lead to improved mutual understanding and confidence in the area of nuclear 
trade. Canada hoped that the Agency's Committee on Assurances of Supply would 
justify the expectations created during INFCE and anticipated when the Board of 
Governors established the Committee. In the summer of 1980 Canada had participated 
in the first session of the Preparatory Committee for the 1983 United 
Nations Conference for International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of 
Nuclear Energy, a conference which was to provide a forum for the discussion of 
international nuclear issues. Canada was pleased to be among those assisting 
the Agency in planning the Conference on Nuclear Power Experience, scheduled 
for 1982. 
129. His country viewed the question of nuclear co-operation, in particular with 
the countries of the developing world, in a broad context. The Canadian 
Government and the Canadian Prime Minister personally had devoted a large share 
of their attention in the field of foreign policy to the North-South dialogue 
during the past year. That had been true both of bilateral relations and of 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 40 


the Government's contributions to the July economic summit of industrial 
nations held in Ottawa, to the Nairobi Conference on New and Renewable Resources 
of Energy and to current preparations for the forthcoming meeting of Commonwealth 
Heads of Government at Melbourne and the North-South summit at Cancun. 
Throughout the meetings held in 1981 food and energy had repeatedly been 
identified as sectors of primary concern for the developing nations, and in 
both sectors Canada was renewing and extending its long-term efforts to make a 
respectable contribution to the collective search for more rapid economic progress 
in the developing world. Canada's aim in the field of energy was to 
place developing countries in a better position, with Canadian help, to meet 
their energy needs. 


130. Nuclear energy fell squarely within that framework. Indeed, Canada's 
experience in transferring nuclear technology to energy-short developing 
countries had, as early as the 1950s, begun to foreshadow some of the problems 
faced today. One factor which had made the national experience of Canada relevant 
to the process of development was that the chosen fuel cycle had been 
developed to meet the needs of what Canada had then been - and in some cases 
still was - namely a developing country. 
131. Canada believed that nuclear power could make a significant contribution 
to the economic growth of developing countries and had been sharing its knowledge 
and expertise with them. The Director General had pointed out that 
nuclear power plants were operating in only four developing Member States -
India, Pakistan, Argentina and the Republic of Korea. Starting with India's 
RAPP I reactor in the early 1960s, Canada had supplied power reactors and 
transferred significant nuclear technology to all four of those countries. 
132. Canada was committed to assisting its nuclear partners in developing the 
infrastructure necessary to support their nuclear programmes. For example, 
the Canadian regulatory authority, the Atomic Energy Control Board, had set up 
a training and orientation unit to assist other nucelar regulatory agencies in 
developing the capability to ensure soundly based licensing decisions in connection 
with the design, construction, staffing, commissioning and operation of 
power reactors supplied by Canada. Canadian experts were continuing to work on 
Agency- projects in a number of countries, while trainees from around the world 
were using their Agency fellowships to study at Canadian universities and 
GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 41 


research centres.' He welcomed the decision to change the name of the relevant 
Department of the Agency to "Department of Technical Co-operation". 


133. Turning again to the question of public opposition to nuclear power development 
and the steps that were being taken to counter the inhibiting effects of 
that opposition, he said that Canada's experience confirmed the conclusion of 
the 1980 Stockholm Conference on Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues that nuclear 
power was safe. Canada had accumulated nearly 100 reactor years of power 
reactor experience without a single fatality and not one radiation-induced 
injury. No member of the public had been exposed to any significant radiation 
as a result of nuclear generating station operation; there had been no incidents 
causing a significant increase in the total risk to any member of the 
public as a result of nuclear generating station operation. 


134. While nuclear safety and environmental questions were primarily matters of 
national concern, Canada commended the Agency for expanding its efforts in 
those areas. Canada was taking part in a broad range of Agency activities 
intended to refine still further the advisory documents on the health, safety, 
security and environmental aspects of nuclear power. Also, Canadian experts 
had helped to revise the Agency's Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection, 
which had recently been approved by the Board of Governors. 
135. Managing high-level nuclear fuel wastes was a major concern to many 
countries, including Canada. The CANDU programme was designed to use safe, 
cheap and efficient storage at the reactor site, but a more permanent solution 
would eventually be necessary. Research and development work on deep disposal 
in the stable geologic formations of the Canadian shield was already well 
advanced. The wastes were to be sealed from the biosphere by a series of 
engineered and natural barriers. In the current year, the Canadian Government 
had approved a five-year, $100 million waste management programme directed 
towards successful demonstration by 1990. The programme would be of such a 
nature as to keep the reprocessing option open for Canada. 
136. A word of caution was due on the subject of the Agency's budget. In the 
best of all possible worlds it would not be necessary to choose among priority 
activities, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy clearly being one. That freedom 
was unfortunately not possible in the present world, nor was it likely to 
be in the foreseeable future. Safeguards, technical co-operation and nuclear 

GC(XXV)/OR.232 
page 42 


safety were the Agency's priority programmes. For other programmes, priorities 
must be selected, results evaluated in a realistic manner and budgetary 
decisions made accordingly. There should be no duplication with the programmes 
of other international organizations and agencies. The Agency's scientific 
work should have clearly defined objectives relevant to its technical assistance 
and other promotional activities. The Director General's remarks concerning 
examination of the extent to which the Seibersdorf and Monaco laboratories were 
responding to the needs of Member States had been noted. Canada urged the 
Agency to apply the highest degree of restraint possible, making zero real 
growth the rule for the budget as a whole. Canada was firmly committed to the 
Agency and its objectives, but those objectives must be defined in terms of 
what was possible in current circumstances. 


137. In conclusion, he wished to remind all of the common cause that had brought 
the delegations of Member States together. As the Agency entered its twentyfifth 
year, all Member States and the Board of Governors should seriously consider 
the future prospects of the Agency, particularly its role in meeting the 
aspirations of the developing world. The staffing of the Agency was only one 
area that should be examined in that context. The Agency's role of promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was nowhere more important than in the 
developing world. A strong Agency under imaginative leadership was a vital 
element in the development of the predictable, secure and progressive environment 
desired by all. 
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.233 
May 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 September 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1981, at 9 p.m. 


President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


7 General debate and annual report 
for 1980 (continued) 1 - 112 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Poland 1 -9 
Peru 10 - 19 
Morocco 20 - 36 
Byelorussian Soviet Socia list 


Republic 37 - 50 
Finland 51 - 66 
Liechtenstein 67 - 71 
Ireland 72 - 83 
Malaysia 84 - 97 
Mexico 98 - 112 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 29 September 1981. 


**/ GC(XXV)/652. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


82-113 



GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1980 (GC(XXV)/642, 642/Corr.1, 642/Corr.2) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. LUCZKIEWICZ (Poland) said that the Agency, which had been founded 
to promote the use of nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful purposes and which 
had the task of monitoring the implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), had functioned over the past year under 
highly unfavourable external conditions. The international situation over that 
period had evolved in a direction contrary to the statutory tasks of the Agency. 
Plans for modernization of medium-range nuclear missile weapons in Western 
Europe and the production and prospect of the deployment on the European continent 
of neutron weapons ran counter to the aims of the Agency. 
2. The world had also witnessed an act of terrorism unprecedented in time of 
peace in the form of an armed attack on the Iraqi atomic research centre. The 
Polish people and Government resolutely condemned that act of aggression, which 
had been committed in violation of all the norms of international law. In an 
official statement of 11 June 1981, the Polish Government had stated that the 
Israeli argument of an alleged threat to the security of Israel was unfounded 
and could not mislead anybody. The Iraqi nuclear research centre had not been 
designed to serve military purposes. That fact had been corroborated by the 
declarations of Agency experts who supervised the nuclear programme of Iraq, a 
State party to NPT. Israel, on the other hand, though operating nuclear 
reactors for many years, had not yet acceded to NPT. His delegation consequently 
supported the recommendation contained in the resolution set out in document 
GOV/2040 that the General Conference should examine all the implications of 
that attack, including the suspension of Israel from the exercise of its rights 
and privileges as a Member of the Agency. 


3. Against the background of those adverse developments, the role and activities 
of the Agency in terms of strict observance of NPT and its universalization 
were cast in sharp relief. The problem of further organizational and technical 
improvement of the Agency's safeguards system was becoming particularly important. 
Hence the further improvement of the safeguard system and its support by 
an ever increasing number of countries were basic requirements for further 
strengthening the supervisory role of the Agency as envisaged in NPT. 
GC(XXV)/GR.233 
page 3 


4. In an era fraught with a worsening energy crisis, broad international 
co-operation in the development of various sources of energy, mainly nuclear 
energy, was of paramount importance to all countries, particularly the 
developing ones, which were in need not only of a technological base but also 
of reliable sources of fissile materials enabling them to undertake long-term 
rational planning for the development of their nuclear programmes. One of 
the ways of meeting that challenge was the newly established Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS). As a member of that committee, Poland had actively 
joined in the efforts to develop a universal system of nuclear transfers in 
which assured supplies would be paralleled by non-proliferation obligations. 
Work in that respect should develop favourably, with advantage being taken of 
the vast experience of the Second NPT Review Conference, the "London Club" and 
the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE). 
5. An important event in 1983 would be the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of Peaceful Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, which 
would analyse the international co-operation in that, area and give guidance 
for general development in the coming years. The Agency should participate both 
substantively and organizationally in the preparations"for and work of the 
Conference. Also of great importance was the International Conference on Nuclear 
Power Experience which was being organized by the Agency in 1982 and which would 
permit an exchange of experience in the field of nuclear energy between countries 
with long-standing programmes and countries just beginning to introduce 
nuclear energy on a broader scale. The results of operation of nuclear power 
plants in the Soviet Union and other Socialist States would contribute considerably 
to the work of that conference. 
6. His delegation also appreciated the work which the Agency had undertaken 
with regard to new international machinery in the field of plutonium management. 
An equally high priority should be accorded to expanding the Agency's programme 
in the area of nuclear safety. It was of importance to draft an international 
agreement on nuclear safety co-operation and on mutual emergency assistance in 
connection with nuclear accidents. Such an instrument would be an important 
step towards increasing confidence in nuclear energy on.the part of the public 
at large. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 4 


7. Poland approved the Agency's report for 1980, in particular those parts 
of it concerning the implementation of the safeguards system, which confirmed 
the effectiveness of the key provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
8. There had been a significant increase in Agency outlay on technical assistance 
in 1981, and a further increase was planned for 1982. Commensurate with 
its possibilities, Poland was contributing to the Technical Assitance Fund. It 
shared the view of those delegations which supported the concept of voluntary 
contributions to the Fund and of payments in national currencies. His 
country's contribution to the Technical Assistance Fund for 1982 would not be 
smaller than that for the current year. 
9. It was gratifying to see that the draft budget for 1982 envisaged zero 
real growth, and it was hoped that a similar approach would be pursued in the 
future as well. The proposed budget and the Agency's programme for 1982 were 
fully supported by the Polish delegation. 
10. Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) said that in the course of the past year 
Peru had continued to implement its national nuclear energy plan, which was 
basically aimed at setting up the Nuclear Research Centre. Advances had been 
made in the construction of the relevant facilities in Peru itself, while the 
components and equipment were in process of manufacture in Argentina and the 
fuel elements were being fabricated in the Federal Republic of Germany. In 
addition, aerial survey of prospective uranium-bearing regions of the country 
had been continued and potential reserves of the order of 5000 tonnes were 
theoretically envisaged. 
11. Generally speaking, the development of nuclear energy for civilian purposes 
involved a symmetric relationship between two sharply defined groups of 
countries - first, those engaged in supplying or exporting nuclear materials, 
equipment and technology and, second, the recipient or importing countries. 
12. Neither group had the exclusive right to resolve the nuclear dilemma of 
peaceful co-operation and horizontal non-proliferation in its own favour, far 
less to determine or prejudice the interests of the other. The crisis that 
marked international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy in the 
present day and age was not so much a matter of supply or of inadequate resources, 
but rather a loss of confidence that had shaken the very foundations of such 
co-operation. The principle of reciprocity in the supplier-importer relationship 
had gradually been replaced by a less democratic and unethical system 
securing greater rights and fewer obligations for the more developed nuclear 
countries. 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 5 


13. Horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons could not be prevented by a 
reduction in the number of nuclear products on sale, nor by the imposition of 
additional obligations on importing countries, but rather by strengthening 
regional security and adopting consistent policies in the export of nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology. 
14. No policy of international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy could be based on extreme notions, as such would inevitably lead to a 
confrontation and to clandestine attempts to make the bomb. The international 
community would have to foster the creation of a stable and balanced international 
nuclear order that would make nuclear energy an instrument of peace in 
the service of humanity. 
15. As a full member of the Tlatelolco Treaty and the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and as a signatory of an Agency safeguards 
agreement applicable to all its nuclear materials and facilities, Peru 
was morally in a position to warn against the tendency to favour extreme 
positions, and urged the international community to help dispel the present 
climate of distrust by taking action to reduce uncertainties in supply and the 
risk of technological dependence. To avoid clandestine horizontal proliferation 
there had to be a renewal of trust and initiation of a downward trend in vertical 
proliferation, which was closely connected with it. 
16. Although it was largely up to the supplying and importing countries themselves 
to restore the lost confidence, a great deal of the multilateral effort 
could also be channelled through the Agency. In that connection it was 
essential for the Agency to seek to achieve a balance between technical 
assistance and safeguards and to place greater emphasis on the verification 
and control of supplies and on the adoption of additional measures in the area 
of physical protection. 
17. The Agency was not solely a policing organization, but one which promoted 
nuclear co-operation for peaceful purposes. The application of safeguards was 
admittedly one of its main tasks, but not one to be carried out at the expense 
of technical assistance. The more advanced nuclear countries, however, appeared 
not to wish to see the Agency play the part devolving upon it in peaceful 
nuclear co-operation. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 6 


18. The Agency's fundamental purpose was to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, without any resultant horizontal proliferation of nuclear 
weapons; hence his delegation viewed with great concern the military attack 
that had been made by Israel on Iraq's nuclear facilities. Apart from 
endangering peace and security in the Middle East, the unjustified attack had 
cast doubt on the effectiveness of the safeguards system. The passing on by a 
former safeguards inspector of information obtained in the course of his 
duties as an international civil servant was equally a cause for concern; it 
called into question the Agency's credibility and diverted attention to safeguards, 
which were already receiving excessive funds from the Regular Budget. 
Lastly, all attempts by supplier countries to impose restrictive conditions on 
nuclear commerce, together with a number of ambiguities in some of the 
importing countries, were prejudicial to the Agency and encouraged the notion 
of clandestine horizontal proliferation. 
19. A dialogue based on good will and a genuine desire for agreement would 
help to solve the problem of distrust which divided those interested in the 
development of nuclear energy. The present political and economic situation 
in the world made it advisable to establish, on an urgent basis, a new international 
order that included the field of peaceful nuclear co-operation. The 
task of building a just world, to which the developing countries were committed, 
was in no way alien to the Agency, which was called upon to become a tool for 
exchange aimed at achieving greater democracy, greater efficiency and greater 
solidarity. 
20. Mr. ALI SKALLI (Morocco) remarked that it was impossible for the 
consumption of energy to continue in such an exponential manner without 
seriously affecting world economic growth and without hindering, in particular, 
the efforts of the developing countries to raise the standard of living of 
their populations. 
21. In the statement which he had made at the recent energy conference in 
Nairobi, the Secretary-General of the United Nations had stressed the close 
relationship between energy and certain aspects of the present international 
crisis. The Secretary-General's statement faithfully reflected the feelings of 
anxiety manifested by the international community in the face of the world-wide 
exhaustion of fossil sources of energy. 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 7 


22. Another factor giving grounds for anxiety was the ever increasing poverty 
of numerous third-world countries. The scant results obtained from the numerous 
North-South meetings and from the extensive negotiations between rich and poor 
countries scarcely encouraged optimism. 
23. That being so, the utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes was 
acquiring quite particular importance. The Moroccan delegation was happy to 
note the importance of the Agency's work in furthering that utilization, particularly 
by the provision of technical assistance. The Agency also had a vital 
responsibility in the matter of strengthening the non-proliferation regime and 
guaranteeing the security of non-nuclear-weapon States. The utilization of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, the right to which was explicitly 
enshrined in Article IV of NPT, had become an urgent necessity for the developing 
countries, whose present consumption of energy was only one tenth of that of the 
advanced States in spite of their having a much larger total population. 
24. Since the developing countries did not dispose of adequate fossil energy 
resources, the adoption of nuclear power appeared the most appropriate solution 
for meeting the crisis with which they were faced. 
25. In that connection his delegation was pleased to note the increase in the 
funds made available for technical assistance activities in 1980 as compared 
with 1979, and he also wished to take the opportunity to thank UNDP for having 
substantially increased the funds which it allocated to the Agency for technical 
assistance activities and the organization of training courses. He hoped 
that Member States, particularly the industrialized countries, would continue 
to make the maximum possible contribution to voluntary technical assistance 
funds. That would be the best possible solution pending a decision, which his 
delegation believed was called for, to integrate technical assistance activities 
in the Agency's Regular Budget. 
26. Still within the context of assistance, the safeguards system set up to 
prevent nuclear energy from being diverted from peaceful to military uses 
should be strictly implemented. That system, under which non-nuclear-weapon 
States were called upon to conclude safeguards agreements with the Agency, 
should of course embrace all the nuclear activities of those States. His 
delegation was gratified that a large number of countries had already concluded 
such agreements with the Agency. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 8 


27. He now wished to turn to an event whose seriousness and outrageous 
character had already been universally condemned, namely the attack by Israeli 
aircraft on the Iraqi nuclear research centre. His Government again denounced 
that criminal assault, which reflected the efforts of Israel to prevent a State 
from exercising its sovereign right to acquire and develop nuclear technology 
for peaceful purposes. By acceding to NPT and accepting Agency safeguards, Iraq 
had given proof of its wish to use nuclear energy strictly for peaceful purposes 
and thus to obey the rules governing international co-operation in that sphere. 
His delegation was pleased to see that an item on the Conference agenda 
was devoted to the matter in question, a criminal act which should not go 
unpunished. 


28. As regards non-proliferation, his Government had already had occasion to 
signify its anxiety on the subject following the Second NPT Review Conference 
at Geneva. Its apprehensions had been enhanced by the absence of agreement, 
at the Review Conference, on the text of a final act. At all events 
Morocco believed that it was essential to bring about genuine non-proliferation 
founded on the following points: 


(1) 
Vertical non-proliferation of nuclear weapons; 
(2) 
The complete security of non-nuclear-weapon States party to NPT; and 
(3) 
Urgent, concrete and specific assistance to those States in their 
efforts for the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
It was sad to observe that eleven years after the entry into force of NPT nuclear 
tests were still going on and that the nuclear arms race continued unabated. 


29. It was vital for non-nuclear-weapon States to receive from the nuclear 
Powers the security guarantees necessary for the preservation of their 
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty. In that connection his 
delegation was pleased to learn of the establishment of a working group under 
the Committee on Disarmament for the purpose of making effective international 
arrangments to protect non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of 
use of nuclear weapons. His delegation likewise firmly upheld the principle 
of establishing denuclearized zones. The application of that principle would 
represent an important step on the road to disarmament, though the United 
Nations resolution on the denuclearization of Africa would be ineffective as 
long as the racist Government of South Africa refused to submit its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 9 


30. Morocco's rising energy requirements had induced its Government to adopt 
a policy for the rapid and intensive mobilization of the national energy 
potential. That policy embraced all forms of energy from fossil, through 
nuclear, to solar, biomass and wind power. 
31. At the present time the country's largest energy resouce lay in its oil 
shales. It had therefore been decided to launch an energy programme based 
on the burning of oil shales and involving the construction of a 100C—MW 
power station consisting of four 250-MW units. Construction of the first unit 
would be started at the end of 1981, and it was expected that it would be 
commissioned in 1985. 
32. Turning to uranium resources, Morocco was paying particular attention to 
prospecting for and mining uranium, and the field prospecting work which had 
so far been carried out had revealed promising areas in the region of 
Marrakesh and elsewhere. 
33. Regarding the extraction of uranium from phosphoric acid, a decision had 
been taken to construct a first extraction unit, which would go into operation 
in 1984 with a production of 280 tonnes of uranium oxide per year. The programme 
would be implemented in association with the construction of phosphoric 
acid production units. Towards the year 2000 uranium oxide production was 
expected to reach about 2000 tonnes per year. Morocco, whose phosphoric acid 
installations were among the largest in the world, would thus be among the 
world's major producers of uranium on the basis of phosphates. 
34. Morocco had also developed a nuclear power programme for meeting base-load 
demand. The first nuclear plant, of 600 MW, might become operational towards 1993, 
and by the year 2000 four units of 600 MW each might have come into service. 
To sum up, his country was aiming at using all new and renewable forms of energy, 
but it nevertheless appeared that at the present time nuclear power was the most 
suitable form of energy for meeting the country's long-term energy requirements. 


35. That being so his Government regarded the Agency's technical assistance as 
valuable and indeed indispensable. Provision of that assistance had already 
started, and he accordingly wished to express his satisfaction and gratitude to 
the Agency. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 10 


36. Finally, the Moroccan delegation hoped that the proposal to make Arabic 
an official and working language of the Conference would be favourably 
received. 
37. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
1970s had represented an important stage on the path of increasing co-operation 
between States with different social systems and a period of positive achievements 
in international relations and the strengthening of peace and security. 
Unfortunately, however, the world had recently seen a worsening of the international 
situation and serious obstacles had arisen in the path of detente. 
38. At the Twenty-sixth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, 
Mr. Brezhnev had suggested that scientists throughout the world should set up 
an international committee which would bear witness to the vital need for preventing 
a nuclear catastrophe. Everybody at the present session of the General 
Conference concerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy should join forces 
in an attempt to avoid the danger of nuclear war. 
39. 
An important factor in the preservation of peace was the strengthening of 
the non-proliferation regime. The Agency should act resolutely against any 
attempt to destroy that regime - and such attempts were being made by States 
such as the Republic of South Africa and Israel. By its attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear centre, intended for the peaceful use of atomic energy, Israel had shown 
its complete disregard both for the authority of the Agency and for its safeguards 
system. The Byelorussian delegation strongly condemned that act of 
premeditated and unjustified aggression against a sovereign State since it 
contravened all the norms of international law and the statutes of the United 
Nations and the Agency. 
40. The role of nuclear energy in economic and social development was 
increasing. Under those conditions, international scientific and technical 
co-operation was becoming more and more important, especially for the 
developing countries. Such co-operation depended to a large extent on the 
Agency and could not successfully be developed without the Agency's participation. 
Byelorussia therefore had supported and would continue to support the Agency's 
scientific and technical programme, which was directed towards the peaceful 
uses of the achievements of nuclear science and technology. 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 11 


41. The Byelorussian delegation highly appreciated the Agency's work on safeguards. 
The manpower situation had improved and new equipment and new methods 
were being introduced. Despite the increase in the number of facilities and the 
amount of fissile material subject to safeguards, the Agency was dealing 
efficiently with its task. It was important to ensure observance of the 
principle that safeguards should be applied to all nuclear activities in recipient 
countries. Also, physical protection measures should be an essential 
condition for the export of nuclear materials. 
42. The improvements made in the mechanisms for granting and implementing 
technical assistance and the increase achieved in effectiveness were to be welcomed. 
Over the past two years there had been a real tendency for the number 
of "old" projects to decrease. The introduction of forward planning and the 
idea of multi-year projects had made it possible to link a number of Agency 
scientific and technical programmes with large-scale UNDP activities and had 
facilitated the use of non-convertible currencies. The Secretariat's work on 
post-project evaluation should also bring positive results. 
43. The Byelorussian delegation attached great importance to Agency programmes 
for helping developing countries to build up their own nuclear infrastructure. 
It had been empowered by the Government of the Republic to announce an increase 
in its voluntary contribution from 40 000 roubles for 1981 to 50 000 roubles for 1982. 
44. Out of the overall 10.5% increase in the Agency's draft budget for 1982, it 
was to be noted that the actual programme increase was only 1.2%, the rest being 
the result of inflation. The Secretariat and the Board of Governors were to be 
commended on the work they had done in producing a balanced budget and finding 
ways of introducing savings. 
45. The Agency's programmes on nuclear power, nuclear safety and safeguards were 
the most important and ought to be accorded the highest priority. For the 
majority of Member States and for the world economy as a whole, it was very important 
to develop the nuclear power programme since in the future nuclear power 
would supply the basic needs for electricity and thermal energy. In that connection 
it was important to note that the Secretariat and the Director General 
had laid great emphasis on the economic and safety aspects of nuclear power. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 12 


46. The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, together with its socialist 
neighbours, attached particular importance to the development of fast reactors. 
It was continuing its research and design work on the 300-MW industrial prototype 
BRIG-300 power station - a single-loop plant with a gas-liquid cycle and a 
fast gas-cooled reactor using N,0, as the coolant and working medium. The 
simplicity of the design and the unique thermophysical properties of the coolant 
should ensure high efficiency. Operating tests had been carried out on almost all 
the technological features of the design. 


47. In Minsk, preparatory work was being done on the construction of a power 
station with two WWER-1000 reactors for the production of electricity and of heat 
for district heating. Such developments could be of value to many Member States. 
48. The Agency's programme on nuclear safety and protection of the environment 
was comprehensive and well planned. Support should also be given to Agency activities 
related to the International Nuclear Information System (INIS), in which 
Byelorussian institutes were taking an active part. Work in the Republic was 
being carried out on the production of evaluated nuclear data files and the 
development of new theoretical methods for evaluating nuclear constants. 
49. In addition to work on nuclear power, Byelorussian institutes were 
carrying out fundamental research, and wide practical use was being made of 
ionizing radiation in various branches of the national economy. Special emphasis 
was being given to radiation sterilization for the production of bacterial 
fertilizers, the use of radiation in the production of new structural and semiconductor 
materials and in industrial chemistry processes, the irradiation of 
agricultural products and the use of radiation techniques in medicine. Fundamental 
nuclear physics research was being carried out and studies being made of 
radiation effects on important materials used in the electronics and optics 
industries. Work was being done on the production and properties of mutants of 
agriculturally important plants and the effects of radiation on animals and man. 
50. The Agency's most important role remained that of seeking "to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world" and of making every possible effort to ensure that the 
practical development of atomic energy did not involve the spread of existing 
types.of nuclear weapon or the production of new, more barbaric types such as 
neutron devices. 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 13 


51. Mr. K0RH0NEN (Finland), recalling that the world's nuclear generating 
capacity was not increasing at the same pace as growing energy needs, said that 
that was due to a variety of uncertainties about safety, non-proliferation 
and public acceptance. A great deal of serious work was required in order to 
resolve those uncertainties. 
52. The Stockholm Conference on Current Nuclear Power Plant Safety Issues had 
furnished strong evidence that contemporary power reactor technology was well 
established and made it possible to construct nuclear power plants without 
unacceptable risks. As far as the nuclear fuel cycle as a whole was concerned, 
there were still problems to be solved, especially at the back-end of the cycle, 
but none of them were unsurmountable. 
53. Nuclear energy had accounted for 17.27. of Finland's electricity 
generation in 1980. He mentioned that because, for some reason, Finland's position 
as one of the leading nuclear power producers had not been recorded in paragraph 
69(a) of the annual report. At the end of 1980 two additional nuclear units 
had been commissioned, and it was expected that the share of nuclear energy 
generation in Finland would attain one third of the total during the current year. 
54. Finland welcomed the success of Agency safeguards activities during the 
past year. Several new States had acceded to NPT and several new safeguards 
agreements had been concluded. At the same time it was regrettable that the 
number of unsafeguarded facilities capable of producing weapon-grade nuclear 
material had not diminished and that the amount of unsafeguarded nuclear material 
was thus constantly increasing. 
55. It was essential in that context to draw attention to the serious implications 
of the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre. The attack 
represented a new form of international violence, having been perpetrated against 
a State party to NPT and a facility under Agency safeguards. In addition, it 
had been committed by a State which itself had not acceded to NPT and which 
possessed non-safeguarded nuclear facilities. 
56. His delegation supported the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors 
on 12 June 1981, strongly condemning the Israeli attack, and also the resolution 
in similar vein unanimously adopted by the United Nations Security Council on 
19 June. The spirit of mutual confidence on which the international nonproliferation 
regime had so far been based must be maintained. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 


page 14 


57. The incident constituted a reminder of the Agency's duty to strengthen and 
develop the present safeguards system and to extend its scope. In his 
Government's view all nuclear material associated with all pertinent nuclear 
activities should be submitted to Agency safeguards. The safeguards system 
should be adapted to cover all uses of nuclear material and should permit 
efficient implementation of safeguards in any type of facility. Finland was 
prepared to support substantial increases in the safeguards budget if that proved 
necessary. In that connection, his delegation noted with satisfaction that the 
negotiations for a joint study to develop new methods for routine inspection of 
spent fuel assemblies were proceeding well between the Secretariat of the Agency 
and the Finnish Institute of Radiation Protection. 
58. As had been often pointed out, the principal aspect of the non-proliferation 
problem was not technical but political. It was vital for the future of the 
international non-proliferation regime that those countries which accepted 
stringent non-proliferation conditions should in return get adequate supplies 


and services on a preferential basis and should not be put in a less advantageous 
position than countries which accepted no non-proliferation obligations or were 
even working on a nuclear explosive device. 


59. That was one reason why Finland considered the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply to be a most useful forum for discussions and negotiations. It was his 
delegation's hope that the pragmatic approach which had characterized the work 
of the Committee would prevail in future also. 
60. The Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage was doing valuable work, 
and it was expected that the establishment of an international storage system 
would make the rights of prior consent now required in bilateral agreements 
unnecessary in certain cases or would at least unify the practice of their application. 
61. Finland was gratified to see the rapid increase in the funds available for 
technical assistance, which was one of the three principal objectives of the 
Agency. The Government of Finland was also ready to accept a substantial 
increase in the target for voluntary contributions. Following its past practice 
the Government intended in 1982 to provide substantial funds over and above its 
share of the target for the purpose of financing certain Agency technical assistance 
projects. Finland was also offering to place the services of a highly 
qualified expert, the head of the country's nuclear safety authority, at the 
Agency's disposal for one year on a cost-free basis. As far as the general 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 15 


trend of technical assistance was concerned, he believed that the emphasis should 
be on safety, training and the development of infrastructure. 


62. He had already referred to some aspects of nuclear safety, which was the 
third principal objective of the Agency. The Mutual Emergency Assistance 
Agreement in connection with Radiation Accidents, concluded in the early 1960s 
between the Nordic countries and the Agency, was a precedent in its field and 
facilitated appropriate action in a situation which one hoped would never arise. 
The Common Nordic Guidelines, approved in 1976 and concerning the establishment 
of nuclear power plants in frontier areas, were worthy of note. 
63. Although the Agency had put growing emphasis on safety matters, Finland still 
felt that safety-oriented activities were suffering from some shortage of staff. 
That had led Co slow implementation of certain technical assistance projects in 
that field. 
64. Certain problems tended to concentrate at the back-end of the fuel cycle 
in connection with spent nuclear fuel and high-level wastes. The present 
situation was not satisfactory, and practically all countries, even with very 
small nuclear power programmes, had to rely on their own storage and disposal 
facilities. In that area the Agency should demonstrate the technical and 
economic benefits of centralized management of spent fuel. 
65. Finally, his delegation welcomed the proposal for an international convention 
on nuclear safety co-operation and mutual emergency assistance in connection with 
nuclear accidents. A convention in that field would represent a most helpful 
instrument, not least for solving public acceptance problems. 
66. The Conference was meeting at a time which was marked by growing international 
tension and increased mistrust between nations. The efforts to halt the arms 
race have proved unsuccessful, and stockpiling of weapons, especially nuclear 
weapons, was going on apace. He thought it appropriate on the present occasion 
to recall the basic objective of the Agency, which was to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world. The Agency had rendered great services to peace. Those services 
would be demanded in future also and might in future be even more vital for mankind 
than they were at present. It was therefore the duty of every Member State 
to do what it could to preserve and strengthen the credibility, working capacity 
and prestige of the Agency. 



GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 16 


67. Mr. AUWAERTER (Liechtenstein) said he believed that the standard of 
living and the economy of countries without sufficient energy sources were in 
danger and that only atomic energy - which was clean, economical and relatively 
safe - could help make up the deficit. A country like Liechtenstein was 
particularly well placed to appreciate that. Only co-operation with 
Switzerland and its far-sighted energy policy guaranteed the existence of the 
highly developed industry of Liechtenstein. 
68. As in other economic fields, only experts could judge the complexities of 
the relationship between technology and pure scientific knowledge. The great 
good fortune of the Agency had lain in Dr. Eklund's deep understanding of those 
complexities. Of particular importance had been the conclusion, under his 
leadership, of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which 
probably represented the only possibility of preventing the abuse of nuclear 
energy. 
69. The twelve months which had elapsed since the twenty-fourth session of the 
General Conference had seen an ever-increasing politicization of the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy. That meant that one of the Agency's most important 
tasks in the immediate future was to see that the public was better informed. 
For the lay person, a differentiation between the military and peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy was often difficult to make; one heard again and again 
from certain of the media that an expansion of the military use of nuclear energy 
would follow on the heels of the construction of a nuclear power plant. 
70. However, it would only be possible to clear up those misconceptions when 
the explanation was presented in a language that the hearer could understand. 
He thought that the Agency should form a committee capable of doing that. The 
languages of scientists and technologists were not those of the general public, 
and a "translation" that did not create even more distrust, such as might result 
from any incomprehensible statement, was urgently needed. 
71. Convinced that the Agency would be able to solve the problems and fulfil 
the diversity of tasks put before it in the new working year, his Government 
wished to extend its thanks to the Board of Governors and to the Secretariat 
for the work they had accomplished in the working year just drawing to a close. 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 17 


72. Mr. BRENNAN (Ireland) said that events over the past few years had 
not been auspicious either for the steady growth of nuclear power or for 
non-proliferation, the twin objectives of the Agency. In the first place, in 
the mid-seventies, nuclear power programmes in a number of nuclear-oriented 
countries had begun to falter on account of the recession, the high cost of 
capital, and public opposition. Sharp rises in oil prices have done little 
to reverse that trend. 
73. Secondly, in 1980 there had been a further setback with the failure of 
the Second NPT Review Conference to reach agreed conclusions. 
74. Since the previous session of the General Conference the widespread concern 
felt with regard to nuclear weaponry had been heightened by decisions to 
acquire new and horrifying weapons systems that threatened the world's 
collective future. The Agency had been playing its part in containing 
horizontal proliferation, but vertical proliferation had gone unchecked. 
Nuclear-weapon States had a heavy responsibility to take urgent steps to 
halt that process. 
75. A further cause for concern had been the bombing by Israel of Iraq's 
nuclear research facility. His delegation wished to reiterate its conviction, 
already expressed in the Security Council debate, that the Israeli attack 
had been misguided and would have far-reaching implications for the future 
conduct of other States. Apart from the loss of life and material damage 
caused by the raid, there was a possibility that it would deepen existing 
hostility; furthermore, the implications for world peace of a situation where 
one country felt itself free to attack another which it saw as a threat were 
clear. Such an approach would frustrate all the efforts made since the 
Second World War to base relations between States on universal principles and 
obligations and would lead to anarchy. There was a marked risk that the 
attack would weaken an international system designed to prevent the further 
spread of nuclear weapons. Israel's action represented a challenge of a 
fundamental kind to the safeguards system of the Agency, of which Israel 
was itself a Member, although it had refused to accept fully the Agency's 
system of safeguards. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 18 


76. His Government was gratified to note the Agency's progress in concluding 
safeguards agreements over the past year. In particular, there had been 
some movement towards bringing civil installations in certain nuclear-weapon 
States into the regime. That was to be welcomed as it would help to reduce 
long-existing inequalities. However, no safeguards regime could be absolutely 
foolproof when there were shortages of manpower and equipment. Among the 
practical expedients for improving Agency safeguards were provision of the 
most up-to-date containment and surveillance equipment, more frequent inspections 
and, if necessary, full-time on-site inspectors. But, ultimately, nonproliferation 
depended more on the reduction of international tensions and the 
creation of a peaceful international environment. 
77. The work of the recently formed Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) 
would be of great help in providing agreed conditions of supply and also in 
strengthening the effectiveness of the non-proliferation regime. The Irish 
Government had an interest in multilateral solutions to the problems of 
nuclear industry and was anxious that the deliberations of CAS should produce 
tangible results. 
78. Ireland had given considerable thought over the past few years to 
building a nuclear power station, but the international recession, resulting 
in a falling-off of demand growth, had led to a reduction in the country's 
energy estimates. The delay afforded by the recession could, however, be 
utilized to await the outcome of further developments in R&D programmes 
dealing, for example, with reactor safety, fuel reprocessing and waste 
disposal. 
79. It was encouraging to note that the Stockholm conference on nuclear power 
station safety held in 1980 had concluded that there were no technical difficulties 
in the operation of nuclear power plants that were beyond solution. 
The options were limited by the problem, highlighted in the Agency's report, 
that the majority of nuclear stations were designed for units of 1000 MW and 
above. Such large units could not be readily accommodated within the grids 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 19 


of smaller countries. The problem of scale modified the hopes held out in 
earlier years that nuclear facilities would provide abundant, cheap energy 
for the world's poorer countries. 


80. Apart from the high capital expenditure involved in the construction 
of the power station itself, there were the costs of enrichment, reprocessing, 
and waste management and disposal. If nuclear energy was to be made 
accessible to smaller or poorer countries, it would be necessary 
to lighten the burden by providing regional or multinational reprocessing 
and enrichment plants, in collaboration with the Agency. As part of its 
promotional and safeguards activities the Agency should be involved in 
developing regional fuel cycle centres and an international fuel bank. 
The report indicated progress in international plutonium storage and 
regional and multinational reprocessing, which was encouraging since they 
would have a considerable effect on the cost and attractiveness of nuclear 
power for a small country like Ireland. 


81. The Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials had 
been concluded to deal with the problems of sub-national diversion. 
Ireland hoped to be able to ratify or sign the Convention in the not too 
distant future. 
82. The question of the siting of nuclear facilities close to frontiers, 
which had been raised by the Government of Austria, was of real interest to 
Ireland, since the country lay in close proximity to nuclear States. Also, the 
question of the sea dumping of low-level radioactive waste was a matter of 
extensive public interest, and the Agency was to be commended for the guidelines 
used in the Nuclear Energy Agency surveillance system; they should be 
kept under constant review and strengthened where necessary. 
83. The provision of technical assistance was one of the two fundamental 
activities of the Agency, and he welcomed the steady growth of the 
Agency's technical assistance programme. He was also pleased to 
announce a pledge of $25 600 for the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
Despite all the difficulties experienced in the past year by 
the Agency, the Irish Government continued to have full confidence in the 
Agency, its staff and its safeguards regime. 

GC(XXV)/0R.233 


page 20 


84. MR. AMBIA (Malaysia) said that, in an effort to improve the quality of 
life through science and technology, Malaysia had embarked upon a programme of 
nuclear development. The immediate policy objectives were to apply the benefits 
of nuclear techniques in medicine, agriculture and industry. It was recognized 
in so doing that success could only be assured through mutually beneficial cooperation 
with Member States engaged in similar fields. 
85. Although Malaysia's present nuclear science programme was only a small step 
forward, it had nevertheless encountered difficulties that were a 
reflection of the shortcomings of the prevailing approach to the transfer of 
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. 
86. The reluctance to facilitate a smoother transfer of nuclear technology 
appeared to stem from an obsessive fear of possible abuse of such technology 
for nuclear proliferation. That fear had pervaded the Agency and influenced 
its programme structure. The Agency tended to engage more in regulatory than 
promotional activities - a tendency which, if not remedied, could only prejudice 


its long-term interests and jeopardise its credibility. Hence the Agency's 
future programmes would need to reflect a more balanced division between the 
regulatory and promotional activities, as enshrined in its Statute. 


87. The supplier countries had established very stringent conditions for the 
export of nuclear equipment, technology and material. Such developments were 
not conducive to the free flow of nuclear technology and the implementation of 
nuclear energy programmes in developing countries. At the same time, Malaysia 
was aware of the legitimate fears of the real dangers of nuclear proliferation. 
It was also a signatory of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and firmly supported 
its safeguards provisions. However, restraining the free flow of nuclear 
technology beyond the requirements of the Agency's safeguards objectives and 
conditions in the name of non-proliferation appeared unnecessarily restrictive. 
88. The unwarranted attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear research centre, a 
facility under safeguards, had serious implications for the Agency. It had been 
a flagrant violation of international law and all norms of international 
behaviour. Furthermore, it constituted an attack on the Agency's safeguards 
system, which had been accepted internationally as the foundation of NPT. His 
delegation strongly condemned the Israeli military attack. 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 21 


89. With regard to the disposal of low-level radioactive waste through sea 
dumping, Malaysia felt strongly that such a method of disposal should not be 
allowed to create adverse effects on the environment and should accord with 
internationally agreed procedures, the dumping being carried out under supervision. 
90. It was clear that energy was vital for the socio-economic development of 
all countries and that nuclear energy was the only alternative energy source 
immediately available for power generation. International consensus on the 
question of assurances of supply, consistent with the requirements of nonproliferation, 
was therefore vital. The progress made in the work of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and in preparations for the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, scheduled to take place in 1983, was promising. 
His Government attached great importance to both sets of deliberations and 
hoped that they would contribute to the development of a nuclear energy order 
meeting the needs of all concerned. 
91. The advanced countries were in possession of a vast amount of nuclear technology 
in comparison with the developing countries. It was therefore encouraging 
that certain delegates from the advanced countries had emphasized the need to 
share the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. Yet there still existed a gap 
between policy and implementation, or rather between declarations of intent and 
their translation into concrete action. 
92. There was consequently a need for greater and speedier transfer of technology 
to the developing countries in order for them to meet their energy 
requirements and for a policy of less dependence on conventional sources of energy. 
It was hoped that some action in the form of a concrete resolution would be taken 
during the present Conference session. 
93. It would be naive to assume that the advanced countries would render such 
services without considering their own interests. In the present-day interdependent 
world, however, it was in the interest of all countries that the lessdeveloped 
countries should be assisted in their development. After all, the 
greater the success achieved in the economic growth of the developing countries, 
the more they would be able to contribute to the economic well-being of the 
industrialized countries through their increased purchasing power. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 22 


94. With regard to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute, it 
was important that a solution for that issue be found without further delay. 
It was generally recognized that there were valid grounds for the amendment in 
order to achieve more equitable geographical representation on the Board. It 
was in the interest of the Agency that the imbalance in the representation of 
the various regions be redressed. Furthermore, the staffing structure of the 
Agency, particularly at the senior levels, had remained basically unchanged 
and did not reflect the composition of the Agency's membership, which had 
radically changed in the last 25 years. Serious efforts should be made to 
remedy that situation. 
95. As far as the financing of technical assistance was concerned, the problem 
had to be solved in such a way that the funding of technical assistance would 
facilitate efficient planning of programmes over a period of time. The real 
need was to arrive at an agreement for obtaining the funds on an assured and 
predictable basis. Any decision leading to the funding of the Technical 
Assistance Fund on such a basis was to be welcomed. 
96. In that connection, the Government of Malaysia would continue to attach 
importance to programmes related to the use of nuclear techniques in 
agricultural, medical and industrial applications. The co-operation programmes 
developed on the RCA model had been singularly successful, and Malaysia was 
keen to participate in projects under UNDP programmes. His delegation wished 
to express satisfaction with regard to the progress of the NUSS programme; 
increased emphasis should now be given to promoting the acceptance and use of 
NUSS documents through intensive missions, training courses and seminars. 
97. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Agency for its assistance and cooperation 
in the development of Malaysia's infrastructure for nuclear science 
and technology and to express gratitude to the Governments of Australia, 
Japan, the United States, Pakistan, India, the Federal Republic of Germany and 
France, among others, for providing technical assistance and training facilities 
on a bilateral basis for Malaysia's nuclear development programme. 
Malaysia would continue to contribute to the Technical Assistance Fund, with a 
contribution of US $14 400 for 1982. 
GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 23 


98. Mr. ROSENZWEIG-DIAZ (Mexico) said he wished to start by commending 
Sigvard Eklund for the great skill with which he had guided the affairs of the 
Agency during his years of service as Director General and by warmly welcoming 
Zimbabwe as a new Member of the Agency. 
99. At a meeting of the Board of Governors on 17 September he had had the 
satisfaction of voting in favour of the resolution set out in document GOV/2054, 
by which South Africa had been excluded from the work of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS). Mexico's attitude on that issue was based, of course, 
on its categorical rejection of racial segregation as an inhuman practice, 
but also on certain legal and technical considerations. While it was undoubtedly 
true that the regime in Pretoria was an important supplier of uranium, it 
owed that status to the extraction of ore from a territory which it was 
occupying illegally, a territory for which the United Nations had direct 
responsibility. If it had allowed South Africa to continue its participation 
in CAS, the Board would in effect have been sanctioning the actions of a United 
Nations Member State against the United Nations, and the theft of resources 
belonging to the people of Namibia. 
100. It was unfortunate that, eleven years after the entry into force of NPT, 
the Treaty should have failed to halt the arms race and to prevent the use of 
nuclear energy for military purposes by certain industrialized countries. 
In that connection he wished to state that the Government of Mexico was 
resolutely opposed to the development of the neutron bomb. 
101. Mexico had unequivocally condemned Israel's military attack on 
the Iraqi nuclear research centre, which had damaged the installations and also 
resulted in a loss of human life. That action, apart from posing a threat 
to the security and peace of the region, had demonstrated a clear disregard 
for the Agency's safeguards system and NPT, and could seriously prejudice 
progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
102. In that connection, the delegation of Mexico wished to stress the inalienable 
right of all Member States of the Agency - a right laid down in Article II 
of the Statute and in Article IV of NPT - to pursue the peaceful uses of atomic 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 


page 24 


energy as a means of promoting their scientific, economic and technological 
development and the obligation of all Members of the United Nations - laid down 
in Article 2.4 of the United Nations Charter-to refrain from the threat or the 
use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any 
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. 


103. The Mexican energy programme published in the course of 1981 specified 
the goals of electricity generation for the last decade of the century. Under 
that programme, nuclear power was to contributed 2500 MW in 1990 and 20 000 MW 
in the year 2000; in other words, the percentage of electric power generated 
by nuclear reactors was to rise to about 20% by the end of the century. 
104. However, the feasibility of Mexico's programme would depend in large 
degree on the economic and political state of the nuclear market in the years 
to come; the country was not bent on developing its nuclear infrastructure 
whatever the cost. Characteristic of Mexico's nuclear programme as a whole 
was a determination to retain autonomy in decision-making and to accentuate 
technological independence. The respect which potential supplier countries 
showed for that position of principle would be a determining factor in the 
selection of new reactors for the coming decade. 
105. The developing countries had not yet seen any compensation for their 
unilateral and voluntary renunciation of nuclear weapons, and many of them observing 
that States not party to NPT had succeeded in gaining broad access 
to nuclear technology - were beginning to wonder whether the Treaty had not 
become an obstacle rather than a help where the civilian uses of nuclear energy 
were concerned. Mexico maintained that non-proliferation concerns must not be 
used as a pretext to prevent States from acquiring and developing nuclear 
technology or to impose on them conditions incompatible with sovereignty 


and independence. 


106. During the past six years there had been no report of diversions, abuses 
or anomalies in the nuclear activities subject to Agency safeguards. But, 
despite the fact that the non-nuclear-weapon States party to NPT had scrupulously 
met their obligations under the Treaty, some nuclear exporters had unilaterally 
imposed restrictive measures which went beyond the safeguards required by 
NPT, on the pretext of wishing to prevent horizontal proliferation. Such 
GC(XXV)/0R.233 
page 25 


unilateral measures had given rise to serious problems between countries and in 
some cases had caused delays and additional costs. Consequently, Mexico was 
keenly interested in the work of CAS and hoped that it really would facilitate 
negotiations which would enable the country's nuclear requirements, including 
its need for fuel cycle services, to be satisfied. It was clearly important 
for CAS to find mechanisms by which supplies could be assured in a climate of 
confidence and harmony between supplier and consumer countries. 


107. The Agency should be an efficient vehicle for international co-operation, 
but at present a number of problems were causing the developing countries serious 
concern; if they were not solved, the mission of the Agency might be seriously 
threatened. They were: the appointment of the Director General, adequate representation 
of developing countries in the Secretariat, the question of financing 
technical assistance, and a revised composition of the Board of Governors 
(Article VI). 
108. It was most unfortunate that the Board had not attained enough convergence 
of views to agree on the appointment of a new Director General. His 
delegation felt that the Board should redouble its efforts in order to find a 
satisfactory solution to that problem in the near future. 
109. With regard to the representation of developing countries in the Secretariat, 
his delegation wanted to point out that those countries could offer highly 
qualified personnel for both administrative and technical posts at the Professional 
level. 
110. Nevertheless, in August 1981 only one out of five Deputy Directors General 
had been from a developing country; of 22 Directors, only five had been from 
developing countries; and of 115 posts at the P-5 level, only 17 had been 
occupied by nationals of those States. That problem clearly needed to be dealt 
with as soon as possible. 
111. As to the financing of technical assistance, the real criterion of growth 
should not be a comparison with figures from previous years but rather the 
actual requirements of Member States and the availability of funds. On that 
basis the growth of technical assistance was certainly inadequate. Nevertheless, 
if technical assistance targets in the past had in fact been fully met, it 
would have been possible to satisfy all the technically sound requests of Member 
States. 

GC(XXV)/OR.233 
page 26 


112. Finally, with regard to Article VI, his delegation believed that a 
reasonable and equitable increase in the size of the Board was long overdue 
and would not impair the Board's efficiency. The Board should give its 
attention to that problem again in the very near future. 
The meeting rose at 11 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.234 
May 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 September 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 24 September 1981, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the 

Paragraphs 


agenda** 

Military attack on Iraqi nuclear research 
centre and its implications for the 


8 

Agency 1 -4 


General debate and annual report for 
1980 (resumed) 5-59 


7 

Statements by the delegates of: 


Norway 5 -13 
Viet Nam 14 -17 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 18 -22 
Reply by delegates of the Republic of 


Korea and the United States of 


America 23 -24 
Lebanon 25 -30 
Zambia 31 -36 
Bangladesh 37 -41 
Austria 42 -47 
Mongolia 48 -55 
Panama 56 -59 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 27 October 1981, 
**/ GC(XXV)/652. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


82-117 



GC(XXV)/OR.234 


GC(XXV)/OR.234 


page 2 


page 3 


MILITARY ATTACK ON IRAQI NUCLEAR RESEARCH CENTRE AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR THE 
AGENCY (GC(XXV)/643, 643/Rev.1) 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Conference had decided to consider 
item 8 of the agenda in plenary session. The question of the military attack on 
the nuclear research centre and its implications for the Agency was an extremely 
serious one and its importance could not be underestimated. The matter should 
therefore be examined by the Conference very carefully because the attack 
constituted an unprecedented challenge to the Agency and its Member States. He 
hoped that the General Conference could arrive at a solution which would 
strengthen the Agency's effectiveness and re-establish confidence in the Agency 
and its safeguards system. The importance of the problem had been clearly 
demonstrated by the fact that all the delegates who had so far taken part in the 
general debate had made mention of it and others would probably do so. The time 
had come to consider definite suggestions and he asked whether any delegates 
wished to present a formal proposal. 
2. Mr. BENNINI (Algeria) said he wished to present the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXV)/653/Rev.1, which was before the General Conference. 
The sponsors of the draft resolution were Algeria, Indonesia, Jordan, Lebanon, 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, 
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia. The wording was consistent with the resolution 
adopted by the Board of Governors on 12 June 1981. It was also in keeping with 
the text adopted by the Security Council of the United Nations on 19 June 1981. 
The Israeli attack represented a challenge to the Agency and its safeguards 
system and the sponsors of the draft resolution believed that the General 
Conference should take strong measures to re-establish their credibility. 
3. The PRESIDENT noted that the draft resolution was extremely important 
and deserved to be studied carefully by members of delegations. He therefore 
proposed that consideration of item 8 be suspended and the general debate 
(item 7 of the agenda) resumed. 
4. It was so decided. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1980 (GC(XXV)/642, 642/Corr.1, 642/Corr.2) (resulted) 


5. Mr. OFSTAD (Norway) said that his delegation could accept and support 
the Agency's budget for 1982. However, it was concerned to see that the size 
of the budget was seriously affected by the exchange rate between the Austrian 
schilling and the United States dollar and suggested that the Board of 
Governors should study the problem during the preparation of the 1983 budget. 
6. The Norwegian delegation could accept the target for voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund proposed for 1982, since it would provide for a reasonable 
increase in the technical assistance given by the Agency. 
7. Norway had a special interest in the Agency's regulatory activities and 
his delegation wished to emphasize once again the importance which it attached 
to nuclear safety and protection of the environment. It also appreciated the 
important work carried out by the Agency on international plutonium storage and 
international spent fuel management. 
8. The previous year, the Nordic countries had stated in a memorandum 
addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations that they attached 
great importance to all efforts aimed at preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons to new countries; however, they had stressed that that should not 
constitute a limitation on the right of States to develop nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes as long as they accepted effective safeguards. The memorandum 
had further stressed that all non-nuclear-weapon States which were parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-ProHferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) should offically accept 
the Agency's safeguards sytem by concluding a safeguards agreement as laid down in NPT. 
9. The Norwegian delegation had read with satisfaction the Secretariat's 
conclusion that for 1980 once again all the material placed under safeguards had 
remained exclusively within peaceful nuclear activities or had been otherwise 
adequately accounted for. In that context, it was important to note that a 
significant improvement had been obtained in the attainment of inspection goals. 
The Norwegian delegation had also noted with satisfaction the arrangements made 
to carry out inspections in Iran and Iraq in spite of current difficulties. 
On the other hand, delayed safeguards reports submitted by certain States to 
the Agency were a matter of grave concern. If the practice continued, it could 
result in a lack of confidence in the Agency's safeguards system. 

GC(XXV)/OR.234 
page 4 


10. He wished to express the deep concern of his Government about the Israeli 
air attack on the nuclear research centre near Baghdad. The attack was a very 
serious matter and a clear violation of international law. It could lead to 
dangerous developments in an area where tension was already high. The 
Norwegian delegation believed that the Middle East conflict could not be 
resolved by force and that it was important for the countries in the region to 
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States. 
11. Norway believed that the problems to be considered by the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply were of great international importance. In many countries 
nuclear energy would have to be used to cover a large part of electricity 
production. There was therefore a need to consider how nuclear supplies could 
be guaranteed on a predictable and long-term basis in accordance with an 
effective system of non-proliferation. It was in that way that any development 
towards nuclear autarchy could be discouraged. 
12. The Norwegian delegation hoped that the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
for Economic and Social Development would represent a step m the right 
direction, towards facilitating the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Agency 
had a very important role to play in the preparation of the Conference and 
during the Conference itself because its work was directly relevant to the 
subject matter to be discussed. 
13. The Norwegian delegation had carefully studied the arguments put forward 
for and against changes in Article VI.A.2 of the Statute aimed at increasing 
the number of seats on the Board. Member States should certainly be satisfied 
that they had a fair chance of being represented on the Board; nevertheless, 
the Norwegian delegation was somewhat reluctant to support an increase in 
membership since the Board was already a large body and could lose its 
efficiency by further increases. 
14. Mr. NGUYEN TUAN LIEU (Viet Nam) said that his country was well aware of 
the benefits that could be derived from the peaceful uses of atomic energy and 
had been engaged for more than two decades in the development of nuclear science 
and technology, with special emphasis on applications in medicine, geological 
prospecting, agriculture and certain branches of industry. It was now 
GC(XXV)/0R.234 
page 5 


endeavouring, with the help of the USSR, to speed up work on the reconstruction 
and enlargement of the Dalat nuclear reactor, which would be used for research, 
training and the production of radioisotopes. The Socialist Republic of 
Viet Nam had signed an Agency safeguards agreement relating to the reactor 
in June 1981. 


15. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam had first taken part in the work of the 
General Conference in 1978, and since that time co-operation between it and the 
Agency had been built up. Viet Nam highly appreciated the various forms of aid 
which the Agency had provided, particularly the services of experts for technical 
assistance projects. His delegation hoped that the Agency would increase the 
assistance given to the developing countries and would continue to make it more 
effective. In the course of the past year Viet Nam had joined the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear 
Science and Technology (RCA). It was to be hoped that RCA would increase 
and strengthen co-operation between countries in the region of Asia and the 
Pacific for the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


16. The Vietnamese Government strongly condemned the Israeli aggression against 
the Iraqi nuclear research centre and asked the General Conference to take 
punitive measures, including suspension of the rights and privileges of 
membership. Responsibility for the attack fell also on those countries which 
supported the expansionist policy of Israel. 
17. The people of Viet Nam had made great sacrifices to regain their 
independence and were deeply anxious to secure peace so that they could reconstruct 
their country. The Vietnamese Government based its policy firmly on the 
principles of peace, friendship and co-operation and had frequently reaffirmed 
its wish to establish friendly and helpful relations with the other countries of 
South East Asia so as to set up a zone of peace and stability. It was against 
the wishes of Viet Nam that the hegemonistic tendencies of a certain Asian 
power were threatening peace and security in South East Asia, inciting hostility 
between peoples and raising barriers against co-operation between the countries 
in the region. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam condemned the nuclear arms 
race of the war-mongering imperialist circles and greatly valued the peace 
initiatives recently taken by the USSR. It was playing an active part in the 
struggle to eliminate once and for all the risk of nuclear war and in the fight 
to defend world peace. 

GC(XXV)/0R.234 
page 6 


18. Mr. CHOI (People's Democratic Republic of Korea) said that the Agency's 
annual report for 1980 and the Director General's statement provided a detailed 
analysis of past activities and recent developments in the field of nuclear 
energy. The Agency had effectively carried out its mission in the past year, 
particularly with regard to work on the safety of nuclear power plants and the 
fuel cycle, the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme and the use of radioisotopes 
and radiation in agriculture, medicine, food preservation and other fields. 
19. Technical assistance to the developing countries was an important aspect 
of the Agency's activities, and he welcomed the proposed increase in the 
target for voluntary contributions from $13 million in 1981 to $16 million in 
1982. The Technical Assistance Fund had, of course, grown each year but it 
still fell far short of the requirements of the developing countries: a 
number of sound projects had not been approved because of a shortage of funds 
or qualified personnel. 
20. His delegation noted with satisfaction that the Secretariat had not 
detected any diversion of a significant quantity of nuclear material and that it 
felt it was reasonable to conclude that all safeguarded material had remained in 
peaceful nuclear activities or had otherwise been adequately accounted for. 
His delegation had been angered by the barbaric military attack carried out by 
Israel on the Iraqi nuclear centre in June and strongly condemned that act of 
violence as an attack on international law and a challenge to the Agency. The 
Agency's safeguards system should be improved, particularly by increasing the 
effectiveness of inspection activities, special emphasis being given to areas 
and regions where there was a real danger of nuclear weapons proliferation. 
21. His Government attached great importance to the establishment of a fuel 
and power industry. The Sixth Congress of the Workers' Party of Korea had 
launched a large-scale power development programme aimed at an annual production 
of 120 million tonnes of coal and 100 000 million kWh of electricity by 
the end of the 1980s. His country had to increase its electricity production by 
constructing hydro and thermal power plants and at the same time developing new 
energy sources. It was for those reasons that the Party Congress had planned 
the construction of a nuclear power plant in the 1980s. Finally, a great deal 
of research and development work in nuclear power was being carried out and 
major efforts were being made to train qualified specialists. 
GC(XXV)/OR.234 
page 7 


22. His Government had always maintained a peaceful policy in Asia and the 
world. In March of the current year, a joint declaration on the establishment 
of a nuclear-weapons-free zone in north-east Asia had been made by the Workers' 
Party of Korea and the Socialist Party of Japan. To that end, it called for 
the immediate withdrawal and destruction of nuclear weapons deployed in Korea, 
Japan and neighbouring waters, the prohibition of the development, testing, 
production, possession, transport, storage and use of nuclear and biochemical 
weapons and the withdrawal of foreign military bases and troops illegally 
deployed in that region. His country thus demanded the withdrawal at the 
earliest possible date of the United States armed forces and nuclear weapons 
illegally deployed in South Korea. 
23. Mr• SHIM (Republic of Korea), exercising his right of reply under 
Article 58 of the Rules of Procedure, deplored the note of political confrontation 
introduced into the General Debate in the statement of the delegate of the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Agency's General Conference was a 
forum where only mutual understanding in the field of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy should be expressed. Furthermore, that delegate's statement 
constituted blatant interference in the affairs of another State. 
24. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America), also exercising his right of 
reply, denied the accusations made against his country and pointed out that the 
Agency's General Conference was not the place for such a political debate. 
25. Mr. HAMIYE (Lebanon) said that at its twenty-fifth session the General 
Conference was facing a large number of problems. Nuclear applications had 
considerably increased in many fields and electricity requirements were growing 
from year to year, so that Member States urgently required the Agency to provide 
the world with reassurance while guaranteeing it the benefits of the atom. 

GC(XXV)/OE.234 GC(XXV)/0R.234 
page 8 page 9 


26. One of the most serious problems which the Agency had had to deal with in 
1981 was the destruction of the Iraqi nuclear centre, which was an unprecedented 
act of aggression with serious implications. Indeed, it was an act of 
aggression against the very principles and credibility of the Agency's activities. 
It was the responsibility of all Member States to make every effort to consolidate 
the Agency's activities and, in particular, to strengthen further its 
safeguards system. The expulsion of the aggressor from the Agency would merely 
confirm an existing state of affairs, as it had already excluded itself through 
its conduct. 
27. The lack of progress in the discussions within the Committee on Assurances 
of Supply was another problem. The Committee should now tackle its real work, 
which was to draw up a procedure for the supply of nuclear fuels, techniques 
and services on a secure and predictable basis which would give mutually 
acceptable assurances against the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation and 
under which parties would fulfil their contractual obligations without 
unilateral or arbitrary conditions being imposed. 
28. The replacement of the term "technical assistance" by the term "technical 
co-operation", as proposed by the Director General, well reflected the spirit 
which should prevail in relations between all members of the international 
community. Technical co-operation programmes for the developing countries should 
be further expanded and, in order to improve their effectiveness, should be 
financed through the Regular Budget. 
29. With regard to representation on the Board of Governors, he pointed out 
that the interest of the developing countries in nuclear energy had increased 
substantially and that the areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South 
Asia were under-represented; that being so, Article VI.A.2 of the Statute should 
be appropriately amended. The developing countries should also be better 
represented within the Secretariat. 
30. His delegation, also in the interests of equitable representation, 
supported the draft resolution submitted by Syria calling for the adoption 
of Arabic as an offical and working language of the General Conference. 
31. Mr. MUFAYA-MUMBUNA (Zambia) readout a message from Mr. Kenneth D. Kaunda, 
President of the Republic of Zambia, to the President of the General Conference: 


"Dear Mr. President, 


"On the occasion of the twenty-fifth regular session of the General 


Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency, I wish to extend 


to you, and to all delegates at this regular session, fraternal and 


warm greetings. I wish to take this opportunity to reaffirm Zambia's 
support of the Agency's Statute in so far as this reflects the legiti


mate needs and aspirations of the majority of the Agency's Members for 


the peaceful exploitation of the atom for the socio-economic betterment 


of mankind. 


"When the Agency came into being, some 24 years ago, very few developing 
countries were members of this organization. The situation has changed 
tremendously over the years. The developing Member States now constitute 
the majority of the Agency's Members. Many, if not all, of them 
are struggling with tremendous energy requirement problems, food problems, 
health problems and other socio-economic problems. In this regard, the 
Agency must play its commensurate role in helping to solve these problems, 
not through any paternalistic arrangements, but through the co-operative 
efforts of all Members as sovereign States in all activities of the 
Agency, including the shaping and maintenance of a more dynamically 
responsive and up-to-date Statute. 


"I trust that this session of the Conference will continue to work 
toward promoting interdependence, understanding and peace among Member 
States, and socio-economic development, especially in the less developed 


Member States, through the peaceful exploitation of the atom. To this 


end, I strongly implore all of you at this session to give undivided 


attention to strengthening the Agency's technical assistance programme. 


"I believe that the attainment of these goals requires a great deal of 


political will. Without it, not much can be achieved. Above all, the 
cardinal ingredient for our success is love amongst us as individuals 
and as Member States. The Agency should be an instrument for peace, 
and not for war, for development and not for destruction. 


"Without love, man's exploitation of the atom will be misguided, as we 
have witnessed over the past 36 years. Without love, mankind has been 
led to develop devices for mass destruction. The nuclear arms race is 
unnecessary, wasteful of scarce resources and suicidal. It could and 
should be reversed. To this end, the Agency can, through strong 
political will and love, play an important role. 


"Finally, allow me, on behalf of the people of Zambia and on my own 
behalf, to wish the Conference and the Agency success, and may God 
bless you all." 



GC(XXV)/OR.234 
page 10 


32. The Zambian delegation warmly welcomed the entry into the Agency of 
Zimbabwe, a country with which Zambia had much in common, and fervently hoped 
Namibia would also be able to become a Member of the Agency, which would help 
to put an end to the shameless exploitation of its natural resources, especially 
uranium, by its racist and illegal occupier. 
33. In 1980, Zambia had continued to receive technical assistance from the 
Agency, but the execution of some projects had encountered certain difficulties, 
due in particular to delays in the delivery of radioactive materials and equipment 
and in the designation of some experts. Unfortunately, the real level of 
technical assistance in 1980 had declined from that in 1979, and the costs of 
experts' services had increased rapidly. Those increases were apparently 
administrative in origin, and efforts should be made to improve the effectiveness 
of technical assistance, especially by providing experts' services where they 
were most needed. As to the financing of the technical assistance programme, 
it was only too obvious that all had not been done to arrive at a solution, 
which could be found only by financing that programme under the Regular Budget 
in the same way as safeguards. All Member States still opposing that type of 
arrangement should change their attitude for the sake of development, understanding 
and goodwill between all Member States. Zambia would contribute to 
the Technical Assistance Fund in accordance with its base rate of assessment. 
34. In Zambia, one of the Government's principal interests in the nuclear 
field was uranium ore prospecting and mining, a programme for which the Agency 
was not sparing of its assistance. The prospects were promising, but the 
resources, mining of which would commence in the near future, would be exclusively 
for peaceful purposes and would not be sold to enemies of the Zambian 
State. His country was prepared to co-operate with any parties interested in 
that undertaking provided that they respected its policy guidelines. 
35. With regard to the composition of the Board of Governors, he wished to 
give further emphasis to a point made in the message from the President of the 
Republic of Zambia: the African region was the least represented on the Board 
(21.33%). That situation would become worse as new African States became 
Members. Article VI.A.2 should therefore be amended in such a way that the 
areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia reached a representation 
of 33.33%. 
GC(XXV)/OR.234 
page 11 


36. Zambia wished to associate itself with all peace-loving and progressive 
States which had unreservedly condemned Israel's attack on the Iraqi nuclear 
reactor. His delegation would support any disciplinary measure that might be 
taken against Israel. It also supported the Director General's proposal that 
the scope of the Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva Convention of 1949 
should be enlarged to prohibit military attacks on all nuclear facilities. 
37. Mr. ISLAM (Bangladesh), reiterating his country's firm commitment to 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, said that as long as there was no complete 
ban on nuclear weapons, and as long as Articles IV and VI of NPT were not really 
applied, non-proliferation might well remain a myth. His delegation strongly 
condemned the bombing of the Iraqi nuclear research centre by Israel. The Agency 
should take appropriate steps to preserve the confidence of Member States in the 
Agency and its safeguards system. 
38. Examination of the Agency's budget for 1982 showed that of the expenditure 
of $29 452 000 foreseen for technical assistance only $4 477 000 came under the 
Regular Budget, the remainder consisting of voluntary contributions and extrabudgetary 
resources. That imbalance should be corrected, and the Agency should 
take all possible measures to increase the resources available for technical 
assistance. His delegation wished to propose the following measures: first, 
the Agency should urge UNDP, the Interim Fund of the United Nations Conference 
on Science and Technology for Development and other funding organizations for 
research and development to increase their contributions; secondly, a revolving 
fund could be established to give developing countries access to resources for 
emergency purposes; thirdly, the Agency should organize seminars or symposia in 
developing countries in order to increase local participation; fourthly, better 
use should be made of the technical manpower and funds in the developing 
countries by means of structures based on the concept of technical co-operation 
between developing countries. The Regional Co-operative Agreement was a good 
example of how that concept could work. 
39. Bangladesh was attempting to establish a nuclear power programme in order 
to reduce the shortage of electricity which was slowing down its industrialization 
and to benefit from the advantages of nuclear energy for science 
and technology. Like other developing countries, Bangladesh needed small 
and medium reactors, but the initial investment cost of any nuclear power/ 
plant was very high and was increasing every year. His delegation urged 

GC(XXV)/0R.234 
page 12 


the Agency, which was already interested in the matter, to look for a way of 
solving the financial problem. To that end, it could encourage manufacturers 
to supply small and medium power reactors to the developing countries and also 
attempt to persuade the World Bank and other financing agencies, such as the 
Asian Development Bank, to offer special loans for the purchase of such 
reactors. His delegation was grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had 
already provided to his country in that field and suggested that the Agency 
should convene a conference of suppliers, possible recipients and financing 
agencies with a view to finding a practical solution to the problem. 


40. In undertaking nuclear power programmes, developing countries needed help 
for the entire fuel cycle; his delegation was therefore strongly in favour of 
the establishment of regional fuel cycle centres. 
41. With regard to the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA), his country had 
been participating actively in all RCA projects since the signing of the 
Agreement in 1972, and hoped that the IAEA and the developed countries would 
increase their financial contribution to those activities. His Government was 
prepared to make its Dacca facilities available to RCA countries for use as an 
Asian research and training centre. He also invited all States party to 
RCA to hold the fifth RCA Working Group meeting in Dacca in 1983. The tenth 
anniversary of RCA would be in September 1982, during the twenty-sixth regular 
session of the General Conference. It would also coincide with the International 
Conference on Nuclear Power Experience, to be held in Vienna from 13 to 
17 September 1982 under the auspices of the Agency. On that occasion, the 
anniversary of RCA could be celebrated by a one-day seminar on the activities 
pursued under the Agreement with the participation of the signatory States. 
42. Mr. MUSSI (Austria) noted with satisfaction that 17% of world electricity 
would be nuclear in 1985, but regretted that prospects for the future 
of nuclear power were less promising, especially in the developing countries, 
where its introduction depended largely on the technical development and 
availability of small reactors. Technical assistance was an important activity 
of the Agency, and Austria's voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance 
Fund would be raised to US $115 200, an increase by 207, over 1981. 
GC(XXV)/OR.234 
page 13 


43. Austria had always supported the principle of non-proliferation and the 
Agency's safeguards activities. Since the complex of problems associated with 
non-proliferation went, as a whole, far beyond the Agency's field of action, 
each country must make its own effort, within the framework of its own policies, 
to improve international security. In that context a central role must be 
attributed to the Agency and its safeguards system. 
44. Austria condemned without reservation Israel's attack on the Iraqi nuclear 
research centre, an act that constituted sufficient grounds for suspending 
Israel's right to exercise the privileges of membership. Austria hesitated to 
advocate such action only because it had always supported the principle of 
universality in international organizations. It subscribed entirely to the 
provisions of resolution 487/1981 of the Security Council. 
45. His delegation hoped that negotiations between supplier and recipient 
States in the Committee on Assurances of Supply would be crowned with success. 
However, the recipient countries must understand that access to nuclear techniques 
could be allowed only if adequate safeguards precluded the possibility 
of their use for purposes other than those intended. Access to those techniques 
should therefore be proportional to the scope of safeguards. As a 
signatory of NPT, Austria had accepted "full-scope safeguards"; it seemed quite 
unjustified for countries not to place all their nuclear activities under 
Agency safeguards, as that was the only way of ensuring full access to nuclear 
technology on the one hand and the application of full-scope safeguards on the 
other. 
46. Recalling two legal instruments signed by the Agency and the Austrian 
Government, the Agreement Supplementing the Agreement Regarding the Headquarters 
of the IAEA and the Agreement Regarding the Establishment and Administration of 
a Common Fund for Financing Major Repairs and Replacements, the former would 
enter into force on 1 October 1981 and the latter had entered into force 
retroactively as of 1 January 1981. His delegation was gratified at the 
fruitful co-operation between a scientific organization like the Agency and its 
host country, which was not limited to making facilities available but also 
involved useful exchanges of information between the Agency's laboratories and 
Austrian scientific research institutions. 

GC(XXV)/0R.234 
page 14 


47. During the Conference session in New Delhi in 1979, the Austrian delegation 
had made a proposal concerning the trans-frontier aspects of nuclear power 
stations, and the Agency had been requested to determine a set of criteria which 
States would have to take into account when they entered into negotiations concerning 
the construction of a nuclear power station near a common border. 
Austria hoped that the question of the safety criteria applicable to nuclear 
power stations near frontiers would be considered by a technical working group 
within the framework of the Agency and that a catalogue of minimum standards 
applicable in negotiations between neighbouring States would be prepared, so that 
identical safety criteria would apply, at least between neighbouring countries. 
48. Mr. SODNOM (Mongolia) said that in July 1981 his country had commemorated 
the sixtieth anniversary of the Mongolian people's revolution, which 
had marked the beginning of considerable achievements and profound changes in 
that country. After passing directly from feudalism to socialism, his country 
had experienced rapid economic development, improvement in the standard of 
living, the achievement of full literacy of the population and cultural and 
scientific progress. The development of Mongolia was based on a diversified 
and close co-operation with the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. In 
March 1981, for example, a Mongolian cosmonaut had for the first time joined 
Soviet colleagues in an orbital flight, in the Soyuz VI space station. 
49. The twenty-fifth regular session of the General Conference was being held 
in difficult times, when imperialist and reactionary powers were attempting to 
increase international tension and to re-open the arms race. To such attempts 
Mongolia opposed a policy of peace, dialogue and co-operation, as defined by the 
twenty-sixth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and in the 
appeal "To the parliaments and peoples of the world" issued by the Supreme 
Soviet of the USSR. The best way of ensuring peace and security was to stop 
the arms race, to take effective action towards disarmament and to conduct constructive 
international negotiations. In that connection, universal adherence 
to NPT was of particular importance. 
50. Mongolia condemned the attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre, which had caused damage not only to Iraq, but also to the Agency, to 
its prestige and its safeguards system and to international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Mongolia fully supported the resolutions 
adopted by the United Nations Security Council and by the Board of Governors of 
the Agency on that subject. 
GC(XXV)/0R.234 
page 15 


51. In view of the difficult situation in Asia, the eighteenth Congress of the 
Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party had proposed the preparation of a convention 
on non-aggression and renunciation of force in relations between the 
States of Asia and the Pacific. A regional conference, to which all the 
Permanent Members of the Security Council could be invited in addition, might 
be held for that purpose. 
52. His delegation in principle approved of the annual report for 1980 because 
it clearly reflected the development of the Agency's activities, which had 
contributed to the progress of international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy and to a strengthening of the regime aimed at securing nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
53. Mongolia attached great importance to co-operation with the Agency and 
considered that nuclear energy played a fundamental role in solving many problems 
of economic and social development. His country approved of the Agency's 
technical assistance activities and remained convinced that they should be 
financed by voluntary contributions paid in national currency by Member States. 
Mongolia was prepared to make its modest contribution to the Techncial Assistance 
Fund. 
54. With regard to the budget for 1982, constant attention should be given to 
possibilities of reducing unproductive costs and achieving savings, though without 
prejudice to the Agency's principal programmes. 
55. In conclusion, his delegation hoped the present session of the General 
Conference would promote the further development of international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the strengthening of the nonproliferation 
regime,and would thus contribute to the peace and well-being of 
all the States and peoples of the world. 
56. Mr. KOREF (Panama) reiterated that his Government strongly condemned 
the military attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear research centre. 
57. The Agency's technical assistance was of the greatest importance to the 
developing countries: through it they could benefit from the advantages of 
nuclear energy not only for the production of electricity but also in areas such 
as agriculture, medicine and industry. The use of nuclear techniques in agriculture 
and stockbreeding, for example, and the increased production that would 
result from it, would enable developing countries to free resources for the 

GC(XXV)/OR.234 
page 16 


import of advanced technology. It was therefore desirable to increase the funds 
available for technical assistance. 


58. With regard to voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund, 
it was necessary to reform the present system of fixing a target by negotiation, 
because that system was humiliating for the developing countries and 
unpleasant for the developed countries. 
59. His delegation recommended that the Agency recruit more staff from developing 
countries, since such staff not only had the necessary technical competence but 
were also well acquainted with the situation in the developing regions of the 
world. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.235 
June 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 24 September 1981, at 3.5 p.m. 


In the Chair; Mr. AGIOBU-KEMMER (Nigeria) Vice-President 
later: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) President 
later: Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada) Vice-President 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda** 


General debate and annual report for 1980 
(continued) 1 - 144 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Kenya 1 -13 
Jordan 14 -23 
Turkey 24 -32 
Spain 33 -45 
Portugal 46 -50 
Saudi Arabia 51 -56 
Chile 57 -65 
Egypt 66 -78 
Israel 79 -94 
Sri Lanka 95 -100 
Sweden 101 -112 
Greece 113 -135 
Qatar 136 — 144 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 2 October 1981. 
**_/ GC(XXV)/652. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


82-578 



GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1980 (GC (XXV)/642, 642/Corr.1, 
642/Corr.2) (continued) 


1. Mr. ONYANGO (Kenya) thanked the Secretariat, and particularly the 
Director General, Dr. Sigvard Eklund, for the very fine and efficient services 
rendered by the Agency. 
2. The Kenyan delegation fully endorsed the admission of the Republic of 
Zimbabwe. The heroic people of that country had for almost a decade fought 
against oppressive forces and had come out victorious. It was not easy to run 
a multi-racial society and Kenya had found from experience that it was best to 
turn an entirely new page in racial relationships, completely forgiving the 
past and acting without recrimination. 
3. Developing countries were just starting on the nuclear road. In Kenya, 
radioisotopes were beginning to be used in agriculture, veterinary services, 
medicine and the non-destructive testing of materials. With the help of 
technical assistance from the Agency, the Laboratory for Application of 
Nuclear Sciences at the University of Nairobi was carrying out elemental 
analysis using automated nuclear techniques. Phase Two of the Nuclear 
Medicine Project had been completed, and the department in question was run 
entirely by local staff. The third phase, involving the introduction of two 
gamma cameras and a third cobalt-60 unit was starting. Training of nuclear 
physicists and engineers at post-graduate level had just begun. In the 
Nuclear Applications Laboratory, a Mossbauer spectrometer was soon to be 
installed, while a Van de Graaff accelerator was envisaged for 1983. The 
critical element in all those innovations was manpower training. 
4. It was well known that the Agency's work could be broadly classified into 
promotional and regulatory activities. There could be little doubt that there 
was much more to be done in the field of promotion than in regulation. 
However, over the last few years the expenditure on safeguards, a regulatory 
function, had grown at a comparative rate which seemed to indicate that 
technical assistance, a promotional function, was taking a back seat. The 
financing of technical assistance was left to the mercy of benevolent richer 
nations willing to make voluntary contributions. That practice did not lend 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 3 


itself to stable and predictable funding that would make long-term planning 
possible. Even the recently introducted indicative planning figures were not 
satisfactory as they still depended on voluntary contributions. The Kenyan 
delegation would welcome discussion on the question of including technical 
assistance in the Agency's Regular Budget. 


5. In connection with the draft budget for 1982, it was difficult to resist 
the temptation of thinking that the near-zero growth had been achieved at the 
expense of promotional activities, and particularly of the technical 
assistance programme. The importance of the Agency safeguards regime should 
not of course be understated. The problem, however, was its size and rate of 
growth relative to the equally important promotional functions. In that 
regard, the Kenyan delegation also noted with concern the very low level of 
activities in Life Sciences and the Joint PAO/IAEA Division, which provided 
the scientific back-up to technical assistance. 
6. Kenya was opposed to financing the International Plutonium Storage (IPS) 
study from the Regular Budget and to merging IPS and safeguards. The whole 
question of the financing of IPS needed to be fully discussed not only by the 
Board but also by the General Conference so that an acceptable solution could 
be found. 
7. The question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 had been on the agenda 
for many years. It was common knowledge that the regions of Africa and the 
Middle East and South Asia had representations of 21% and 23%, respectively, 
while the average regional representation on the Board was of the order of 
33%. When Zimbabwe became a Member State the percentage representation of 
Africa would be reduced to 20%. The Kenyan delegation would request a modest 
increase of three seats for Africa, to give a representation of 32%. 
8. It was gratifying to note that the Director General had recognized in his 
address the disparity within the Secretariat between the numbers of staff from 
developing and developed countries. That disparity was most pronounced in the 
higher, policy-making echelons. The sooner the position was rectified the 
better. 

GC(XXV) /OR.235 
page 4 


9. The Kenyan delegation believed that, if safeguards were to be applied at 
all, they had to be uniform and universal. In that connection, many Agency 
reports were biased in the sense that they mentioned installations in 
developing countries that were not safeguarded while saying nothing about the 
facilities that were not safeguarded in the developed countries and in Israel 
and South Africa. 
10. Kenya believed in resolving international conflicts by peaceful means and 
strongly condemned the June attack on the Iraqi nuclear facilities by Israel. 
It was prepared to support an appropriate resolution against Israel. 
11. It was almost inconceivable that, in spite of many United Nations 
resolutions and of condemnation by nation after nation, the South African 
regime continued with its abhorrent practice of apartheid. The Kenyan 
delegation therefore supported the resolution prohibiting South Africa from 
participating in all meetings and all work of the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply. 
12. A whole year had passed since the question of the election of a new 
Director General had first been raised. It was a thorny issue which required 
a great deal of wisdom, tact, good will, sincerity and accommodation. Both 
sides at the negotiating table would have to be honest and show a spirit of 
compromise so that an amicable solution could be found. 
13. There was no cause for pessimism since all organizations experienced 
problems. The Agency had been formed with very noble objectives and on the 
whole had done extremely well. It would no doubt grow from strength to 
strength in the future so as to better serve the needs of all its Members. 
14. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) paid tribute to the Director General for the 
wisdom and competence with which he had conducted the Agency's affairs over 
the past twenty years. He also wished to congratulate Zimbabwe on its 
acceptance for membership of the Agency. 
GC (XXV)/OR. 235 
page 5 


15. The Israeli attack on the Tamuz reactor on 7 June 1981 underlined that 
country's determination to persist in its aggression against not only the 
Palestinian people, but also the whole Arab nation. Part and parcel of that 
aggressive policy was the construction in the early sixties of the nuclear 
reactor at Dimona in the Negev desert with the help of certain industrially 
advanced countries. Israel's refusal to sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty and 
its rejection of any Agency control of the development of its nuclear 
programme were in themselves ample proof that the reactor was intended not for 
peaceful but for aggresssive purposes. Despite that, Israel was attempting by 
force to deprive the countries in that area of their right to legitimate 
scientific progress. The Iraqi nuclear reactor had been built in compliance 
with international regulations and was subject to the control of the Agency, 
whose report on 12 June 1981 had acknowledged that fact and stated that the 
reactor was intended for peaceful purposes, thus refuting Israeli claims that 
a nuclear bomb was being prepared with the help of the reactor. 
16. The attack had brought to light a number of facts which merited serious 
consideration. The first was that Israel possessed a nuclear reactor at 
Dimona but, thanks to the efforts of certain Powers, had not been required to 
account for it nor been put under pressure to sign the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. The United Nations must also shoulder some blame for not using all 
its moral influence to make Israel heed international treaties even though it 
lacked the executive power to bring that about. Secondly, the world community 
should look with the utmost concern at the dangerous international precedent 
set by that act of aggression. If a firm stand were not taken against such 
action, there would be a loss of confidence within the international 
community, countries would seek their own protection by means of force and the 
basis of international peace would be undermined. Thirdly, the credibility of 
the Agency's safeguards and its ability to oversee their effectiveness had 
been called into question by the attack. Israel's destruction of the reactor 
on the grounds that Agency control over it was inadequate had dealt a damaging 
blow to world confidence in the Agency. 

GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 6 


17. It was the duty of the international community to ensure that Israel sign 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty and submit its nuclear reactors and research 
centres to international control in order to prevent their use for military 
purposes. The Jordanian delegation therefore recommended the suspension of 
Israel from the rights and privileges of membership in the Agency and urged 
all nations of the world to adopt a similar course until such time as Israel 
agreed to adhere to the provisions of the Agency's Statute. 
18. Although a small country with limited resources, Jordan was making 
considerable economic progress. Contrary to the expectations of most, Jordan 
had no indigenous conventional sources of energy except recently explored oil 
shale deposits which could not yet be utilized because of limited world 
experience in that field. The average annual rate of increase in energy 
demand in recent years indicated the rapid pace of development but also gave 
rise to concern over the increasing cost of oil imports and resultant balance 
of payments difficulties. 
19. His Government was fully aware that nuclear energy represented one of the 
solutions to the world energy problem but unfortunately his country could not 
install nuclear plants before the turn of the century unless demand for 
electrical power grew to such an extent that at least a small or medium-sized 
power reactor could be accommodated. However, Jordan realized the importance 
of making preparations for that era, and was therefore already recruiting and 
training the necessary manpower and establishing a regulatory infrastrcuture. 
20. The Agency had an important role to play in helping the Third World 
achieve its objectives. He therefore expected the Agency to supply more 
technical assistance to those countries and to achieve an equitable balance 
between safeguards and technical assistance activities. 
21. His country shared the view of other developing countries that they were 
under-represented at the policy-making levels in the Agency. Also, it 
favoured an amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute to increase the 
representation of the developing countries on the Board of Governors. 
GC(XXV)/0R.235 
page 7 


22. His delegation supported the Director General's call in his statement to 
the Conference for the enlargement of the scope of the additional protocol of 
1977 to the Geneva Convention of 1949 and for urgent consideration to be given 
by the United Nations Committee on Disarmament to the general prohibition of 
military attacks on all nuclear establishments and not just nuclear power 
plants. 
23. Jordan strongly urged the General Conference to amend, at its current 
session. Article 86 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference so as 
to make Arabic an official and working language of the Conference, in line 
with the situation in the United Nations and in several specialized agencies. 
24. Mr. BARUTCU (Turkey) said that, during the 24 years of the Agency's 
existence, many developments and changes had taken place, but none of them had 
ever so seriously overshadowed its affairs as the event which had taken place 
recently in the Middle East, namely, the premeditated attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear research centre by Israel. Turkey had strongly condemned that act of 
aggression, which had been carried out by a country that refused to sign NPT 
and to subject its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards, against a party to 
NPT whose nuclear activities were wholly covered by the IAEA safeguards 
system. It was his delegation's hope that that unprecedented event, which had 
rightly attracted the attention and condemnation of the world community, would 
not constitute a precedent, and that all ways and means would be sought to 
remedy the damage done and to prevent the occurrence of a similar event in 
future. 
25. The twenty-fifth regular session of the General Conference was thus 
starting under difficult circumstances. The agenda comprised virtually all 
the items that had become traditional, plus one concerning the matter he had 
just mentioned and one on the succession to the Agency's leadership. Despite 
seven months of continuous efforts it had not been possible so far to bring 
the last-named matter to a successful end. He believed that those efforts 
should continue during the General Conference in order to find a satisfactory 
solution among the possibilities that existed, including the continuation of 
the present leadership of the Agency. 

GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 8 


26. Other items on the agenda indicated clearly that the IAEA was besieged 
with important issues, the solution of which was not possible owing to a lack 
of trust and understanding in the relations between the developed and the 
developing countries. The membership of the Agaency had grown, and nuclear 
energy had emerged as one of the very few alternative sources of energy for a 
vast number of countries. It was therefore natural that the divergences of 
views among the groups of countries in the Agency had also grown along with 
those changes. That situation merely reflected the importance both developed 
and developing countries attached to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
Turkey believed that, by persevering efforts, it would be possible to 
reconcile the differences of views that existed. 
27. The impact of the oil crisis had been most damaging of all for the 
developing countries. In the past few years, for example, almost all Turkey's 
export earnings had had to be spent on oil imports. As a result, nuclear 
power had emerged as a very valuable alternative to conventional energy 
sources. However, so far only four developing countries had been able to make 
use of nuclear power, and that accounted for only 1% of the electricity 
generating capacity of all developing countries. His delegation believed that 
it was of the utmost importance that assistance should be accorded to those 
countries by the Agency and the developed world, without the risk of 
proliferation being incurred. NPT and the Agency's safeguards system provided 
the necessary assurances against that risk. 
28. The transfer of technology for peaceful purposes should not therefore be 
hindered, and each country must be free in its options for nuclear fuel 
strategies. It was there that the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) 
came in. Supply assurances for nuclear material, equipment, technology and 
fuel cycle services and non-proliferation had become interrelated, and the 
relevant commercial transactions must be conducted on a basis of "consensus", 
with full participation by all countries having nuclear power and research and 
development programmes. The public media bore a heavy responsibility in 
avoiding the spread of unfounded fears, not only concerning the safety of 
nuclear plants but also concerning proliferation, which had a negative 
influence on international nuclear trade. 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 9 


29. Turkey, having acceded to NPT, had also taken the next step, namely the 
conclusion of a safeguards agreement with the Agency. It had been signed on 
30 June 1981 and, upon ratification by the Turkish Government, had entered 
into force on 1 September 1981. Under the new Turkish administration, a code 
had been prepared for a complete reorganization of the Turkish Atomic Energy 
Commission. A new long-term programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
would shortly be implemented and a science and technology committee attached 
to the Prime Minister's office would be established as a policy-making and 
co-ordinating body. 
30. He wished to express his delegation's satisfaction at the assurance given 
by the Director General regarding the adequate representation of the 
developing countries on the staff of the Agency, particularly at the senior 
level. He noted that as a very positive and welcome development in the 
Agency's staffing policy. 
31. Turning to technical assistance he said his delegation believed that that 
activity was one of the main pillars of the Agency. Although the Agency had 
implemented its technical assistance programmes as efficiently as possible, 
the fact remained that those programmes had been on a scale much lower than 
that needed by the developing countries. It was most important that the 
promotional activities of the Agency should be properly balanced against its 
regulatory activities. It was equally important that technical assistance 
funds should be properly distributed among the various activities. In his 
opinion that was not always the case. However, Turkey greatly appreciated the 
assistance it had been receiving from the Agency and looked forward to 
increased technical assistance and co-operation. 
32. In conclusion, he wished to inform the Conference that Turkey had already 
pledged its voluntary contribution for 1982 at the level corresponding to its 
rate of assessment. 
33. Mr. LOPEZ RODRIGUEZ (Spain) said that in order to improve efficiency 
the Spanish Government had now separated the functions of nuclear research and 
development, on the one hand, and nuclear safety and radiological protection 

GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 10 


on the other, and in April 1981 had set up a new body - the Nuclear Safety 
Council (CSN) - an independent organization which did not come under the 
central Spanish administration. One of its functions would be to advise on 
legislative matters within its field of competence. 


34. As regards Spain's nuclear fuel cycle activities, the objectives and 
responsibilities of the National Uranium Company (ENUSA), which was 
responsible for uranium prospecting and uranium studies both inside and 
outside the country, had been defined by the Spanish administration. 
35. The Nuclear Energy Board (JEN) had consequently been restructured and was 
now concentrating on nuclear research and development, basically for the 
purpose of providing technological support for the Nuclear Safety Council and 
the National Uranium Company. 
36. In October 1980, the JEN had received permission to set up a second 
research centre, at Soria, and a licence had been granted at the same time for 
provisional operation of the first unit of the Almaraz power station, which 
had a pressurized light-water reactor (930 MW(e)). That meant that there was 
now a second generation of nuclear reactors in Spain, Almaraz I having gone 
critical during the present year. 
37. In November and December 1980, licences for the construction of the 
Trillo II and Vandellos II power plants (pressurized light-water reactors), 
each with an output of 930 MW(e), had been issued. 
38. At the present time the Spanish nuclear situation was as follows: four 
nuclear power plants in operation with a combined capacity of 2030 MW(e); 
eleven plants under construction with a total capacity of 10 535 MW(e); and 
three power plants, with a scheduled capacity of 3000 MW(e), which, when ready 
(1999), would bring Spain's installed nuclear capacity up to 15 565 MW(e). 
Estimates of uranium resources in Spain costing less than $30 per pound of 
U O amounted at the present time to 21 000 tonnes; in 1980 uranium 


3 8 
production had reached 190 tonnes. 


GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 11 


39. The National Uranium Company had applied for a licence to build a new ore 
concentrate plant, as a result of which its treatment capacity would be a 
million tonnes of ore a year. That would be a 700-tonne increase in the 
annual production of concentrate. In December 1980, the Company had been 
licensed to build a fuel element fabrication plant for light-water reactors, 
which was due to start production early in 1983. 
40. The Spanish Government fully supported international co-operation in the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. In that connection it greatly 
commended the work done by the Agency in the delicate matter of translating 
the hopes placed in nuclear energy into reality. The stage of development 
reached by nuclear energy in the world appeared to justify consideration of 
certain specific questions relating to structure, programmes and procedure so 
that the Agency could take the necessary steps to discharge its functions more 
effectively in the future. 
41. As regards, for example, adapting the size and composition of the Board 
of Governors to present conditions, without impairing its efficiency, both 
equitable representation and efficiency had to be carefully weighed up when 
contemplating any change in the structure or rules of procedure of the 
policy-making organs of the Agency. Also, maximum effort was needed to ensure 
that technical assistance to the developing countries took the form of 
appropriate technological co-operation and requisite economic measures as the 
use of nuclear energy in those countries gradually progressed. 
42. In the field of bilateral co-operation, he wished to mention the 
additional nuclear co-operation agreement signed in December 1980 by the 
Governments of Spain and Colombia and the agreement concluded by Spain and 
Portugal on co-operation in the safety of nuclear power plants located near 
their common border; also, a protocol relating to nuclear safety had been 
signed by the JEN and the Portuguese Protection and Safety Board. In addition 
there was continuing co-operation between Spain and Ecuador for the 
construction of a nuclear research centre in the latter country, and between 
Spain and Mexico. 

GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 12 


43. Furthermore, Spain was co-operating with a number of international 
organizations. For example, in the previous year an agreement had been 
concluded with EURATOM in the field of nuclear fusion and an Agency training 
course had been held in Madrid on the role of nuclear energy in national 
energy programmes. In October there was likewise to be a joint IAEA/NEA/WHO 
symposium on "The application of the dose limitation system in nuclear fuel 
cycle facilities and other radiation practices". 
44. Reference should also be made to the recent signing by Spain and the 
Agency of safeguards agreements relating to four research establishments and 
one nuclear power plantj they had not been under safeguards before because of 
the complex nature of the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
in Spain. All Spanish facilities of the type in question were now under 
international safeguards. 
45. The decisions taken by the Government of Spain were designed to help 
create a climate of greater international trust, especially in the nuclear 
field. It was for that reason that the Spanish delegation resolutely 
condemned the attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear research centre in June as 
an act of violence against the basic principles of international law and a 
danger to world peace. Furthermore, the attack was a challenge to the 
authority of the Agency and to its credibility in the matter of safeguards. 
It was to be hoped that an event of such gravity would find due reflection in 
the work of the General Conference. 


46. Mr. CARREIRA PICK (Portugal) congratulated Zimbabwe on its admission 
to the Agency. 
47. A number of points in the annual report were worthy of comment, 
particularly the paradoxical situation existing in many countries whereby they 
recognized the limitations of their primary resources but did not have the 
will to prevent a slowing down in their nuclear programmes. The Agency should 
make every effort to reverse that situation, which was due largely to public 
opinion. Any initiative on the Agency's part which helped to make the most 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 13 


sensitive aspects of nuclear energy, particularly the final disposal of 
radioactive wastes and the possibility of diversion of nuclear materials for 
non-peaceful purposes, more acceptable to the public would be welcome. 


48. With regard to technical assistance and training activities, the Agency's 
assistance to Portugal in the fields of uranium exploration, the planning of 
nuclear programme activities, nuclear safety and research had been most 
fruitful. Contact between Agency experts and Portuguese workers involved in 
the nuclear field was particularly beneficial. 
49. Portugal's indigenous energy resources were poor and the country was 
therefore highly dependent on foreign imports - particularly oil, whose share 
of total imports had risen from about 4% in 1973 to 25% in 1980. In those 
circumstances, nuclear energy seemed a likely alternative for the future. The 
first national energy plan was currently being prepared and would, when 
finalized, define the nuclear component in the national grid. Until the 
results of that plan were known, activities connected with the installation of 
nuclear power plants would continue under the policy recently defined by the 
Minister for Industry and Energy in order to prepare the infrastructure and 
train the manpower required for a nuclear power programme. Uranium 
exploration and exploitation activities were also continuing. The same policy 
laid down guidelines on several points, including the provision of the public 
with information on several aspects relating to the production of electricity 
by nuclear power plants, the preparation of the administrative structures 
required for nuclear safety and the licensing and control of nuclear plants, 
site selection for nuclear power plants, the definition of electricity 
requirements for the next three decades and, finally, the participation of 
Portugal in international nuclear energy activities. 
50. He recalled that the Portuguese Government had expressed its strong 
condemnation of the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi nuclear facilities at 
the time because it constituted a violation of the principles of international 
law. That attack was an extremely serious step which contributed to the 
tension which already existed in the region. 

GC (XXV)/OR. 235 
page 14 


Mr. Xuto (Thailand), President, took the Chair. 


51. Mr. KABBANI (Saudi Arabia) said that the Agency was passing through 
an important phase in its history. Although many meetings had been held at 
the cost of much time and effort, the Board of Governors had failed to appoint 
a new Director General. The matter was being made difficult not only by 
differing views and conflicting interests, but also by the need to find an 
incumbent possessing the same high qualifications as the present one. 
52. At its present session the General Conference was faced with an 
exceptionally critical and challenging situation owing to the unwarranted 
attack on the peaceful nuclear establishments of a country which was not only 
a State Member of the Agency but also one which had signed and ratified NPT. 
Iraq had complied with all its international commitments and had concluded a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. That criminal attack had been carried 
out by Israel, which had repeatedly refused to join NPT and was challenging 
the whole nuclear community and endangering world peace and security. 
Israel's criminal act had been an attack on the Agency's integrity and had 
undermined confidence in its safeguards. 
53. It was high time to stop giving preferential treatment to one Member 
State which was disloyal to the international community and was motivated by 
previous grievances and sufferings, especially when that State had chosen to 
be governed by none other than the leader of the well-known terrorist 
organization Irgun Zvai Leumi, which in 1948 had annihilated the village of 
Der-Yassin killing 254 Palestinian citizens, mainly women and children. To 
continue closing one's eyes to Israel's crimes and the parallel crimes of its 
twin, the South African regime, was to give them the green light for continued 
atrocities and murders. The Saudi Arabian delegation therefore requested the 
Conference not only to condemn the act of aggression but to approve the 
suspension of Israel in accordance with the resolution put before it by the 
Board of Governors. 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 15 


54. He wished to touch briefly on another important matter, namely, the 
confidentiality of safeguards information. Those countries which wanted all 
States to accede to NPT should refrain from accepting confidential information 
from citizens of theirs employed as Agency inspectors. It was satisfactory to 
know that the Director General had given instructions for an urgent in-depth 
review of the whole pattern of security and confidentiality of safeguards 
material and documentation. He trusted that the Board would be informed of 
the outcome of that review. 
55. Two items on the agenda at the present session were of special concern to 
all States and to the developing countries in particular; one was "The 
financing of technical assistance" and the other was "Amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute". Regarding the amendment of Article VI.A.2, he 
believed the matter should not be pushed back and forth between the Board and 
the General Conference. The Board had repeatedly demonstrated that it was not 
able to submit a concrete recommendation. For the past five years the Board 
had merely transmitted the records of its deliberations on the matter to the 
Conference. As to the financing of technical assistance, he sincerely hoped 
that the matter would not suffer from the delaying tactics which were holding 
up a decision on amending Article VI.A.2. 
56. Until recently Saudi Arabia had had very modest nuclear activities, 
supervised by the Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral Resources. However, a few 
months previously nuclear activities had become the responsibility of the 
National Centre for Science and Technology. He hoped to be able to announce, 
in the near future, the formulation of a programme for peaceful uses of the 
atom in the Kingdom, particularly in nuclear power generation. Saudi Arabia 
was following with great interest the development of nuclear power as an 
alternative energy source which would replace limited oil resources. He 
wished in conclusion to remind the Conference once again of Saudi Arabia's 
policy in the field of energy: while Saudi Arabia was doing its utmost to 
help industrial countries, it felt it to be the duty of those countries to 
conserve oil and to develop and use every other available source of energy. 

GC (XXV)/OR. 23 5 
page 16 


57. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) recalled that at the twenty-third regular 
session of the Conference Chile had been elected to membership of the Board of 
Governors, an office which, during the past two years, had enabled it to 
maintain close contact with the Agency. He wished to take the opportunity of 
thanking the friendly countries which had assisted Chile in carrying out the 
important functions of that office. 
58. The Chilean Government believed that the Agency should avoid politics, 
since it was an essentially technical organization and its activities should 
be directed at improving the technical capacity of all its Member States and 
ensuring observance of safety standards and safeguards by all of them without 
exception. 
59. His delegation was deeply disturbed at the apparent impossibility of 
arriving at agreement on the appointment of a new Director General. It 
believed that the marked polarization in the position of the various groups of 
States was by no means beneficial to the Agency's future work. 
60. The policy of the Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission had always been to 
place emphasis on peaceful nuclear applications, and for that reason it was 
implementing programmes in such areas as health, agriculture, the study of 
water resources, and foodstuffs. 
61. He now wished to present to the Conference a few remarks on the most 
relevant aspects of nuclear development in Chile. The Commission had entered 
upon a stage of internal reorganization, giving priority to nuclear safety and 
radiation protection, in connection with which work was actively proceeding on 
the drafting and introduction of legislation in those fields. 
62. Studies connected with nuclear power had been postponed until 1985 
because Chile had avaiable other, renewable and non-renewable, energy sources 
which for the time being enabled it to meet its requirements. However, steps 
would be taken to keep abreast of developments elsewhere. 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 17 


63. He particularly wished to express Chile's support for and confidence in 
the Agency's safeguards activities and other work such as technical assistance 
or, more properly, "technical co-operation", as the Director General had 
called it in his statement. It was also important not to forget the 
importance of training programmes, since technical co-operation could not be 
effective without a personnel infrastructure able to benefit from transfers of 
technology. In that context he repeated his country's offer to place at the 
disposal of Member States the infrastructure of the Chilean nuclear 
facilities, together with the skill of its scientists and technicians in 
training personnel from the developing countries. 
64. Regarding safeguards, his delegation believed that bilateral agreements 
between various States and the Agency should be respected by both parties, and 
that any amendments thereto should also be negotiated bilaterally. 
65. In conclusion he expressed the hope that the work now being planned would 
be implemented and reflected in new successes for the International Atomic 
Energy Agency. 
66. Mr. OSMAN (Egypt) said that the 25th regular session of the General 
Conference represented a significant event for Egypt. It was the first 
session of the Conference to be held following Egypt's ratification of NPT, in 
February 1981, and the subsequent successful conclusion of the safeguards 
agreement with the Agency, which had been approved by the Board of Governors a 
few days previously. 
67. He felt it his duty to explain briefly to the Conference the 
considerations which had prompted Egypt to ratify NPT almost 13 years after it 
has signed it, on 1 July 1968, the day it was opened for signature. 
68. Egypt had been encouraged by the positive atmosphere created by the 
resolution adopted by consensus at the 35th session of the United Nations 
General Assembly, upon Egypt's initiative, for the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Egypt's ratification of NPT 
affirmed, in fact, its commitment to the establishment of such a zone. The 

GC (XXV) /OR. 235 
page 18 


Egyptian delegation to the present, 36th session of the United Nations General 
Assembly would shortly submit a new plan for the speedy attainment of that 
objective. 


69. Moreover, in view of the fact that Egypt had developed an ambitious 
scheme for the commissioning by the year 2000 of eight nuclear power plants 
with an approximate total capacity of 8000 MW(e), it had been realized that 
such a large-scale project could not be accomplished under present 
circumstances without the ratification of NPT, a step which would assure all 
nations of the peaceful orientation of Egypt's nuclear programme. 
70. It gave him great pleasure to announce that an agreement between Egypt 
and the Federal Republic of Germany for co-operation in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy had been initialled in Cairo scarcely two 
weeks previously. It had been preceded by a similar agreement with France in 
March and another one with the United States in June. Each of those three 
major co-operation agreements provided for the building of nuclear power 
plants with an approximate total capacity of 2000 MW(e). Other agreements had 
also been reached with Sweden and the United Kingdom. 
71. In an era marked by an intensive search for new and renewable sources of 
energy, investing in nuclear power was imperative for many nations, 
particularly developing ones. That was certainly the case with Egypt, where 
plans aimed at brining the nuclear share of total power generation to about 
40% by the year 2000. 
72. It had been that atmosphere of the need to invest in and rely upon 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes which had motivated Egypt to join other 
interested nations in the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS). He looked forward with great hopes to the forthcoming round of 
discussions within CAS, in November 1981. He felt that the time had come to 
concentrate on the real issues, in order rapidly to reach equitable solutions 
which would provide receiving countries with assurances that their supply of 
nuclear material, equipment and services would not be interrupted under any 
circumstances. 


GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 19 


73. For many developing countries of the world technical assistance was the 
prerequisite for developing and sustaining nuclear technology. The Agency's 
technical assistance programme was one of its most important activities, 
particularly for developing countries. His delegation therefore supported all 
efforts to expand and consolidate the provision of technical assistance and 
noted with satisfaction that the Board had established, in the previous years, 
indicative planning figures for the targets for voluntary contributions over a 
three-year period. While that action was a step in the right direction, the 
funds available for technical assistance were still nothing like enough to 
enable projects in many developing countries to be carried out. Egypt 
therefore hoped that ultimately technical assistance would be financed from 
the Regular Budget or by equally predictable and assured means. Following its 
consistent policy of support for technical assistance his Government had 
decided to maintain its voluntary contribution for 1982 at the same level as 
in previous years. 
74. Closely related to the needs and the expanding activities of the 
developing countries in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was 
the matter of an equitable geographical redistribution of key posts in the 
Secretariat, as well as an improvement in the position of the 
under-represented regions, particularly Africa, on the Board of Governors. 
75. All that the Agency had been doing over the years to promote peaceful 
nuclear activities on the one hand and to build up a reliable and credible 
system of safeguards on the other had received a severe blow as a result of 
the premeditated unprovoked Israeli attack on Iraq. Egypt had been impressed 
by the swift action taken by the Board of Governors on 12 June 1981, strongly 
condemning Israel and recommending that the General Conference consider all 
the implications of the Israeli aggression, including suspending the exercise 
by Israel of the privileges and rights of membership as well as suspending the 
provision of any assistance to Israel under Agency technical assistance 
programmes. 
76. He hoped that the Conference would live up to the expectations of the 
Board of Governors on that issue. 



GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 20 


77. The Israeli attack on the Iraqi peaceful atomic installation was the 
greatest challenge the Agency had ever faced. If the Agency was to continue 
to carry out its functions properly the Israeli attack, which had been 
virtually an attack on the integrity of the Agency, should not be allowed to 
go unpunished. He believed that the draft resolution now before the 
Conference corresponded to international legality as reflected both in the 
resolution adopted by the Board of Governors on 12 June 1981 and in United 
Nations Security Council resolution 487 unanimously adopted on 19 June 1981. 
Egypt therefore supported the draft resolution. 
78. Trusting that the Conference would give full support to the introduction 
of Arabic as an official and working language of the Conference, he wished in 
conclusion to express on behalf of his delegation his sincere hopes that the 
present session of the General Conference would contribute to a renewal of the 
confidence and trust of the world community in the valuable and indispensalbe 
work of the Agency. 
79. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said that one of the major issues dominating the 
present session of the General Conference was the military operation carried 
out by Israel in June. In view of the plethora of pejorative phrases used by 
certain delegations to describe the incident, it would be approprite to 
recount the circumstances leading up to the decision by the Government of 
Israel to disable the inactive Tamuz-I reactor near Baghdad before its 
start-up. 
80. The Iraqi delegate had sought to convince the General Conference that he 
represented a peaceful country which had been the innocent victim of a 
military attack. It was therefore necessary for the Israeli delegation to 
make known certain facts of the matter. 
81. Iraq had been committed to the destruction of Israel ever since Israel 
had been established and had taken every opportunity to promote that 
objective. Iraq had actively participated in all the wars against Israel 
since 1948. Iraq had also rejected any proposal for direct or indirect 
negotiations with Israel. 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 21 


82. Iraq had never accepted the United Nations Security Council 
resolution 242, which remained the only agreed basis for the peaceful solution 
of the Middle East conflict. Furthermore, Iraq considered itself the leader 
of the so-called rejectionist front. The Iraqi delegate had said in his 
speech that Israel had bombed the Tamuz complex in September 1980. He 
appeared to have forgotten that his country had initiated a year before, and 
was still waging, war with Iran. The truth was that the attack had been 
carried out and officially claimed by Iran. By distorting the truth, Iraq was 
trying to conceal the real reason why it had not requested at the time any 
action on behalf of the Agency against Iran. The real motive behind the 
present motion was to single out Israel as a target. The Iraqi delegate had 
kept from the present Conference technical data on the Iraqi nuclear 
programme. Those data would have tarnished the image of innocence that Iraq 
was trying to create. Many references had been made at the present Conference 
to the Board of Governors' resolution of June 1981. In that connection the 
Conference should recall that the Israeli representative had been prevented 
from speaking before the text of that resolution had been adopted. Israel's 
concern about the Iraqi nuclear programme had been shared in authoritative 
governmental and professional assessments throughout the world. 
83. Israel's assessment of the Iraqi nuclear threat was as follows: in 1975 
Iraq had extended its nuclear interests. After prolonged negotiations an 
agreement for nuclear co-operation had been sigend by France and Iraq. During 
the negotiations preceding the agreement, the Iraqis had asked the French to 
supply them with a 500-MW(e) gas-graphite power reactor. 
84. Graphite reactors were best suited for the production of Plutonium. 
Dual-purpose gas-graphite power reactors were designed to produce both 
military plutonium and electricity. Power programmes based on that type of 
dual-purpose reactor, which had been implemented mainlay in the United Kingdom 
and France, had been discontinued in the early 1970s, when it had become clear 
that the most efficient power reactors were those of the PWR and BWR types. 
The Iraqi request for a gas-graphite reactor in 1974-75 had therefore been 
highly suspicious, since a reactor of that kind could produce some 400 kg of 
weapons-grade plutonium annually. 

GC (XXV)/OR. 235 
page 22 


85. France had halted the production of that type of reactor in the late 
1960s, which had been the reason given by the French for not supplying one to 
Iraq. 
86. The Iraqis had not accepted the alternative offer of a conventional 
nuclear power reactor (PWR or BWR) but had chosen an Osiris research reactor, 
a very advanced type with relatively high power. 
87. Iraq had acquired all the nuclear facilities and expertise required for 
the development of nuclear weapons: (a) A high-power MTR specially designed 
for testing the influence of radiation on power reactor construction 
materials, Osiraq was suitable for the production of plutonium in significant 
quantities; (b) A fuel fabrication facility, which could produce large 
quantities of power-reactor-type fuel elements, although Iraq had no use for 
such elements in the conceivable future other than as uranium targets for the 
production of plutonium; (c) Equipment for separating plutonium from highly 
radioactive irradiated uranium; (d) Large quantities of natural uranium to 
assure an adequate supply of raw material for uranium target manufacturing. 
88. The combination of those ingredients exposed the true nature of the Iraqi 
programme. It was clear that by 1985 Iraq would have been in possession of 
sufficient weapons-grade plutonium to produce at least one nuclear weapon 
device. 
89. It had also become evident from the safeguards standpoint that the 
preference for Osiraq and supporting facilities was a premeditated attempt to 
exploit limitations on Agency safeguards on MTRs for the purpose of embarking 
on a nuclear weapons programme without risking detection: (a) Safeguards did 
not apply to research within the facility. In the case of research reactors, 
that meant that no clarification needed to be given to the inspector for any 
experiment conducted within the reactor, and only the inventory of the 
declared fuel had to be accounted for. In the case of a large-size MTR such 
as Osiraq, that limitation permitted the insertion of various targets 
including, for instance, undeclared natural uranium, for which the reactor 
operator was not accountable to the inspector; (b) That activity could be 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 23 


obviated by removal of such uranium charges before inspections; (c) Mo 
television or photographic surveillance measures for monitoring in between 
inspection visits were provided for under the present safeguards approach for 
such MTRs; (d) Iraq had rejected inspection by the Agency in 1980 at the time 
when weapons-grade uranium had been stored there; (e) Uranium concentrates 
purchased by Iraq were not subject to safeguards. The conversion of 
concentrates to target quality U0_ did not require any sophisticated 
equipment. It was within the capability of Iraq to reach that stage by 
utilizing the auxiliary facilities, which would remain outside the scope of 
safeguards as long as Iraq maintained that it was not processing plutonium or 
fabricating fuel in them; (f) Iraq had been in a position to proceed as far 
as it wished in its nuclear weapons programme and to exercise its right of 
withdrawal from NPT at three months' notice without fear of sanctions. 


90. Over the years Israel had tried to deal with the threat diplomatically by 
appealing to Iraq's suppliers and urging other Governments to use their 


influence, but to no avail. 


91. The military operation against Tamuz-I had been neither an attack on the 
IAEA nor an expression of no confidence in its safeguards system. Israel was 
highly appreciative of the Agency's efforts to discharge its duties loyally 
and effectively within the limits of the mandate defined by the international 
community. Isreal believed that the Agency's mandate should be expanded, but 
that could be done only if all Member States recognized that its universality 
was the best guarantee of effectiveness. 
92. Another issue raised at the present Conference was the question of 
adherence to NPT. A precondition for NPT was the existence of peace, which 
did not exist today in the Middle East. As the Director General had told the 
Conference, NPT should be regarded as based and nourished on mutual trust 
between the nuclear- and non-nuclear-weapon States and not on mistrust. 
Israel had studied various aspects of NPT in relation to the conditions 
prevailing in the Middle East and had concluded that the turbulent and 
constantly shifting conditions still prevailing there prevented the Treaty's 
implementation in good faith on the part of many of the States in the region. 

GC (XXV) /OR. 235 
page 24 


93. Since 1974, Israel had been appealing to all States in the region to 
negotiate the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone modelled on the 
Tlatelolco Treaty. The Government of Israel held that to be a promising way 
of removing further threats in the region. Israel had recently taken the 
initiative regarding the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East. Israel had joined the consensus on the Egyptian initiative, 
after its own initiative had been rejected by the Arab countries. Israel 
considered that its initiatives deserved general support and would continue 
during the current session of the United Nations General Assembly to act in 
the same spirit. Any attempt to ostracize Israel by the Agency might tend to 
undermine Israel's faith in the Agency's preparedness to discharge its global 
and comprehensive mission. That might discourage Israel from seeking to 
develop its initiative for a nuclear-weapon-free Middle East. Such a course 
would be as much out of keeping with the interests of the Agency and the world 
community as it would be out of keeping with the hopes and desires of the 
Government of Israel. 
94. The Conference should urge the States in the Middle East to initiate, as 
soon as possible, direct negotiations for a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
region. 
95. Mr. DHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) said that he wished to begin by 
welcoming Zimbabwe to the Agency. Turning to the role of his country as a 
Member State, he recalled that in 1980, his Government had hosted a symposium 
on combination processes in food preservation and a meeting on legislative 
aspects of food irradiation sponsored by the Agency; towards the end of 1981, 
his country would be hosting a seminar on nuclear techniques in water 
management. 
96. The need for nuclear techniques and nuclear power in Sri Lanka had become 
more evident as a result of accelerated growth in economic, agricultural and 
industrial activity. For the first ten years of its existence, the Sri Lankan 
Atomic Energy Authority had played only a promotional role in seeking IAEA 
assistance in the application of nuclear techniques on behalf of non-nuclear 
institutions. However, a nuclear programme which was based only on 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 25 


non-nuclear institutions and foreign assistance could not be effective. 
Consequently, since 1980 scientists and technicians belonging to the Atomic 
Energy Authority were being trained in various aspects of nuclear science, and 
funds were being provided for peaceful nuclear activities. Also, the 
Authority's scientific and technical staff was being expanded. In 1980 
bilateral co-operative agreements had been concluded with two countries. 
Those measures would promote the use of peaceful nuclear techniques and 
accelerate the development of Sri Lanka. 


97. Hydroelectric power was the only source of energy in Sri Lanka, and a 
large fraction of his country's export earnings was committed to oil imports. 
Unprecedented growth in electricity demand over the previous three years 
combined with insufficient supplies of water to provide adequate hydroelectric 
power had resulted in power cuts which were detrimental to industrial growth. 
Gas turbines were being installed to increase the supply of electricity. In 
the medium term, his country would have to depend on imported coal, and in the 
long run it would be necessary to use the most economical forms of energy. In 
1980 his Government had decided, in principle, that nuclear power would have 
to be used in the long term. Preparations, including training and the 
establishment of the necessary infrastructure, would have to begin without 
further delay, albeit in the face of some anti-nuclear protests. 
98. Sri Lanka was party to the regional co-operative agreement between 
countries in the region of Asia and the Pacific (RCA) and a strong advocate of 
the principle of regional co-operation. The large amount of support received 
from UNDP for RCA activities demonstrated the success achieved by those 
countries in nuclear co-operation. 
99. The military attack on a nuclear facility under Agency safeguards was a 
matter of grave concern, and it was necessary to ensure that similar raids did 
not occur again. His delegation endorsed the views expressed by the Director 
General on that matter. 

GC (XXV)/OR. 23 5 
page 26 


100. His delegation wished to record its deep appreciation of the effective 
manner in which Dr. Eklund had directed the activities of the Agency during a 
difficult year. Finally, his country would contribute its share of the 
voluntary contributions for 1982. 
Mr. Copithorne (Canada), Vice-President, took the Chair. 


101. Mr. THAM (Sweden) said it was only two months since the conclusion of 
a major event in the energy field - the United Nations Conference on New and 
Renewable Sources of Energy, held in Nairobi. The main achievement of the 
Conference had been the highlighting of a major challenge, namely the 
transition from an era of inexpensive oil to one characterized by higher 
prices, greater efficiency in energy use and more diverse energy sources. The 
•effects of that transition would be different for developing and developed 
countries. Indeed, the energy issue was closely related to certain other 
issues of disputation between North and South. 
102. The Nairobi Conference had clearly stated that all energy sources must 
contribute to the move away from excessive oil consumption. It had devoted 
considerable time to some energy sources but had omitted any mention of 
nuclear energy. It was clear, however, that nuclear energy would in fact form 
an important part of the world's energy balance. 
103. In that connection, the Agency had a very important role to play as the 
primary international organization for co-operation in the nuclear field and 
it could make a special contribution in a number of areas. 
104. One area had to do with industrial and administrative infrastructures. 
Nuclear -energy -required advanced technology, not only in reactors but also in 
ancillary installations, and made great demands of a legal, administrative and 
social nature. National supervisory bodies with high technical expertise had 
to be set up and educational systems had to be adapted. That constituted an 
important field of activity for technical assistance. The Agency must be 
capable of rendering such assistance in the planning and implementation of 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 27 


nuclear power programmes. On the other hand it should not become simply a 
promoter of nuclear energy in all circumstances. No country should embark on 
nuclear energy before it had made a thorough analysis of the options available. 


105. Nuclear energy also posed other challenges. Its credibility depended 
heavily on its safety record. While responsibility for safety was primarily a 
national concern, there were also international implications. Sweden welcomed 
the expanding work that the Agency was doing in that field and welcomed the 
Director General's announcement at the June meeting of the Board that he 
intended to report annually on major developments. Since the last session of 
the General Conference, it had had the pleasure of hosting an important Agency 
meeting on the subject of power plant safety. 
106. A further development, which had so far only been the subject of 
preliminary discussions, was the proposal for an international convention to 
facilitate the provision of emergency assistance in the event of a civil 
nuclear accident. Sweden had already established such a system with its 
Nordic neighbours. Something similar, but on a wider international scale, 
would help to increase confidence in the safety of nuclear power. 
107. The prospects for nuclear power also depended on confidence that 
supplies, services and other forms of international co-operation could be 
expected to remain predictable. Equally important, there must be confidence 
that trade in the nuclear field would not lead to proliferation of nuclear 
weapons or the fear of such proliferation. 
108. Pending the establishment of such a system of international co-operation, 
a number of helpful steps could and should be taken. They included an agreed 
safeguards system, agreed levels of physical protection and agreed mechanisms 
for the management of spent fuel and separated Plutonium. In that connection 
the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and the Expert Groups 
on International Plutonium Storage (IPS) and International Spent Fuel 
Management (ISFM) were important. Progress in the substantive work of those 

GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 28 


bodies was one of the essential prerequisites for a successful outcome of the 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy, to be held in 1983. 


109. During the previous year there had been encouraging developments in the 
policies of some supplier Governments. There were, however, also signs of 
certain actions which could prove disastrous to the objective of improved 
security of supply and predictability in nuclear co-operation. They included 
possible actions by some non-nuclear-weapon States in the direction of nuclear 
explosive capability. Such actions would indeed drastically reduce confidence 
in nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
110. The public, the media and political leaders not specially acquainted with 
nuclear matters generally knew only of the safeguards role of the Agency, and 
indeed it was true that no other intergovernmental organization played that 
particular role. A further reason why safeguards stood out to so many people 
was the trust that they had been able to generate. Doubts about the 
acceptability of nuclear energy had many times been allayed by reference to 
the fact that Agency safeguards were applied. The effectiveness of those 
safeguards depended not only on their scope but also on their ability to 
detect diversion of fissile material. It was a continuing challenge to the 
Agency's staff to adapt the techniques to new technologies. 
111. A very disturbing incident during 1981 had been the unjustified Israeli 
bombing of the Iraqi reactor. The Swedish Government strongly condemned that 
attack as a flagrant violation of international law. 
112. At the United Nations Conference in Nairobi, the Prime Minister of 
Jamaica, Mr. Edward Seaga, had put great emphasis on the fact that the present 


pace of technological development, while offering the promise of breakthroughs 


in the use of new and renewable resources, was still not sufficiently rapid. 


At the same time, many existing technologies did not have sufficient exposure 


to the markets of the developing world. He had proposed that in order to 


remedy the situation an international research and development centre should 


be created within an existing organization such as the IAEA. That interesting 


proposal should be given further attention. 


GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 29 


113. Mr. PETROU (Greece), paying a tribute to the Director General, said 
that it was under Dr. Eklund's direction that the Agency had maintained its 
crucial role in the nuclear co-operation field and gained universal respect. 
114. The twenty-fifth session of the General Conference was taking place in an 
atmosphere of worsening energy crisis, as was reflected in the Agency's report 
for 1980. 
115. Energy was vital for all countries, and food production, environmental 
conditions, quality of life, economic survival in general and thus, to a 
certain extent, political independence were closely connected with the 
assurance of energy supply. New energy sources alternative to coal and oil, 
which involved technical, physical and political problems, were essential. 
The United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy held in 
Nairobi in August had underlined the need for alternative sources and called 
for further action within the framework of the United Nations. 
116. Greece, which was largely dependent on imported oil, considered it very 
important to develop new technology and to diversify its energy sources. 
Apart from exploiting water power and lignite, Greece had embarked on 
establishing the infrastructure for a more systematic use of geothermal, solar 
and wind energy. However, Greece attached an increasing importance to nuclear 
energy, for nuclear power had a vital role in meeting future energy 
requirements. 
117. In June, the economic summit held in Ottawa had resolved to encourage 
greater public acceptance of nuclear energy and respond to public concerns 
about safety, health, nuclear waste management and non-proliferation, in which 
connection the role of the Agency was crucial. Besides, the Agency must 
continue and intensify its activities aimed at maintaining international 
confidence in nuclear power, while providing Governments with objective advice 
and recommendations, and assist them in general in restoring public confidence 
in their nuclear energy policies. 

GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 30 


118. The Agency's safeguards were an indispensable basis for a system of 
confidence-building measures, which could be strengthened by the work of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply and the Expert Group on International 
Plutonium Storage and by activities in the field of nuclear safety and 
radioactive waste management. 
119. An effective safeguards system which would not hamper nuclear trade was 
essential within the framework of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which was the 
cornerstone of the international nuclear order. 
120. Greece, which had been among the first countries to sign and ratify NPT, 
welcomed the ratification of the Treaty by Egypt and Turkey and urged the 
States which had not acceded to the Treaty to do so without delay. 
121. Since it was difficult to stop a country from switching from a peaceful 
to a military nuclear programme if it had the political will to do so, 
non-proliferation was a political and not a technical problem. That explained 
the difficulties being faced by the existing non-proliferation regime. 
122. Greece was particularly gratified to learn from the Agency's report on 
safeguards that no anomaly had been detected which would indicate diversion of 
a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material. 
123. Recalling the President's observation that the safeguards system was one 
of the two main pillars of the Agency and thus of its credibility, he 
considered that any action which was detrimental to the credibility of the 
system and of the Agency undermined the confidence needed, both 
internationally and nationally, for the development of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes - that is, for its development as an alternatiave energy 
source - and must be condemned. 
124. That was one of the reasons why the Greek Government had immediately 
condemned the attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear reactor on 7 June 1981 as 
a clear and unacceptable violation of international law, and shared the 
misgivings expressed by the Director General about the consequences of the 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 31 


attack. The statement by the delegate of the United Kingdom on behalf of all 
States Members of the European Community on the subject also reflected 
Greece's concern. He hoped that the Conference would adopt a decision which 
would strike a balance between the condemnation of such acts and the 
desirability of maintaining the universality of the Agency. 


125. A basic prerequisite for the development of national nuclear programmes 
was security of supply. In that connection it was encouraging to note the 
wide participation by Member States in the work of the Committee on Assurances 
of Supply (CAS), which underlined the interest in and the need for predictable 
and reliable supplies for large investments in nuclear programmes. Greece had 
supported the establishment of CAS and was a member of it. 
126. He hoped that the work of CAS would be accelerated and substantial issues 
would be tackled in a balanced way so as to lead not only to a better 
understanding but also to concrete results. 
127. Greece supported the continuation of the discussions on international 
plutonium storage and considered that the comprehensive proposal submitted by 
France, the United Kingdom and the Federal Republid of Germany provided a 
useful basis for further discussions, which could lead to a potential 
international plutonium storage regime. It also hoped that the discussions on 
spent fuel management would yield positive results. 
128. His country strongly supported the work of the Nuclear Safety Standards 
(NUSS) programme, which was of help to the Greek nuclear programme and to the 
Nuclear Regulatory Service. 


129. Although preparatory planning and site selection had suffered some delay, 
Greece's electricity requirements were expected to be met partially from 
nuclear power by 1990 so that, with further diversification of primary energy 
sources and production from oil wells, the burden of oil imports would be 
alleviated. 

GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 32 


130. Within the framework of safety-building measures Greece would 
particularly welcome an agreement or a code of conduct covering trans-frontier 
problems of nuclear safety. 
131. It was also in favour of continuing the Agency's programmes on the use of 
radioisotopes and radiation techniques. 
132. His Government strongly supported the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, the financing of which must be eguitalbe and fair and permit its 
expansion on a predictable basis. It was heartening to note that the 
technical assistance budget for 1981 showed a real growth, as compared to a 
zero growth in the Regular Budget. 
133. The Greek Government welcomed the indicative planning figure for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund for 198 3, and had 
already pledged to pay $56 000 to the Fund in 1982 in line with its base rate 
of assessment. 
134. Greece was a donor and a recipient of technical assistance, and it 
greatly appreciated the Agency's assistance in uranium exploration around the 
Strimon basin in the Serres area in northern Greece, where reasonably assured 
reserves of 4000 t of U.0o and estimated additional reserves of 10 000 t 
i o 
of U 0 had so far been discovered. 


3 o 


135. More equitable representation of the different areas on the Board and 
wider distribution of senior posts in the Secretariat would help the Board to 
reach consensus solutions. However, it was not advisable to link those 
questions to the appointment of a new Director General, which concerned all 
Members of the Agency. A new Director General must be appointed on the basis 
of his competence, objectivity, personality and experience only and any 
appointment process which might appear to undermine a priori his credibility 
and, thus, the prestige of the Agency must be avoided. 
GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 33 


136. Mr. AL-KHATER (Qatar) said that Qatar took an active interest in the 
work of the Agency and in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. His 
Government believed that it was the inalienable right of each nation to 
develop its programme for the peaceful applications of nuclear energy in 
accordance with its circumstances and needs. The development of nuclear power 
was particularly urgent in the developing countries since, as had been pointed 
out by the Director General on several occasions, in the long run it was the 
safest and most economical form of power generation; his country took a 
particular interest in it for generating electricity and for desalination. 
137. However, the developing countries with nuclear power programmes had to 
invest heavily in them and should be assured of supplies on a long-term 
basis. In that connection he welcomed the establishment of the Committee on 
Assurrances of Supply. 
138. His country favoured the cause of the non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and had always supported the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in the Middle East. Unfortunately, that noble objective had not been met 
so far because of the intransigence of Israel. Not only did Israel refuse to 
accede to NPT and to place its nuclear installations under Agency safeguards, 
but it had also created a very dangerous precedent by carrying out an 
unprovoked and unwarranted military attack against the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre on 7 June 1981. 
139. Clearly Israel was bent on denying the right of certain Member States of 
the Agency to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes to further their 
scientific, technological and economic development. It had attacked Iraq 
despite the fact that Iraq had fully subscribed to the Agency's safeguards 
system and was a party to NPT. Apart from the implications of the Israeli 
action for the Arab countries and the fact that it endangered security and 
peace in the Middle East, it had done serious damage to the Agency's 

GC(XXV)/OR.235 
page 34 


safeguards regime by undermining its credibility, and had harmed the cause of 
non-proliferation. The Israeli action had been overwhelmingly condemned by 
the Board of Governors and by the Security Council of the United Nations. For 
those reasons he strongly urged the Conference to expel Israel from the Agency 
for its criminal action against another Member State. 


140. Turning to the activities of the Agency, he expressed his delegation's 
support of those activities; however, it was necessary to strike a balance 
between regulatory and promotional activities, with more attention being paid 
to technical assistance. 
141. It was his delegation's view that technical assistance should be financed 
from the Regular Budget to ensure predictable and assured resources for an 
activity which was of crucial importance to the developing countries. 
142. Over the past four years, the General Conference and the Board had been 
considering the question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute; 
however, no solution had yet been achieved. In that connection he called for 
an appropriate increase in the representation of Africa and of the Middle East 
and South Asia, which were under-represented. 
143. Qatar fully supported the draft resolution submitted by the Syrian Arab 
Republic regarding the amendment of Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference in order to introduce Arabic as an official and working 
language of the General Conference. 
144. Finally, Qatar fully supported the holding in 1983, after suitable 
preparation, of a United Nations conference for the promotion of international 
co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
The meeting rose at 5.58 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.236 
May 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 25 September 1981 at 11.35 a.m. 
President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda** 


15 Examination of delegates' credentials 1 -3 


General debate and annual report for 1980 
(resumed) 4 - 34 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Uruguay 4 -6 
Cuba 7-11 
Algeria 12 - 15 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 16 - 19 
United Arab Emirates 20 - 23 
Bolivia 24 - 26 
Paraguay 27 - 29 
Reply by Iraq to the statement 


by the delegate of Israel 30 - 34 


*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 23 October 1981. 
** GC(XXV)/652. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


82-741 



GC(XXV)/OR.236 
page 2 


EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXV)/656) 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Committee had met the 
previous day to examine the credentials of all delegates in accordance with 
Article 28 of the Rules of Procedure. Paragraph 11 of the Committee's report 
(GC(XXV)/656) contained a draft resolution. 


2. If there were no objections, he would take it that the General Conference 
wished to adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXV)/656. 
3. It was so decided. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1980 (GC(XXV)/642, 642/Corr.1, 
642/Corr.2) (resumed) 


4. Mr. GIBILS (Uruguay) said that the first steps towards the 
installation of a nuclear centre in Uruguay had been taken by the National 
Nuclear Energy Commission. Those arrangements, which coincided with the 
twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the Commission, had received 
valuable assistance from the Argentine National Nuclear Energy Commission. 
Uruguay was convinced of the importance of nuclear co-operation at the 
regional level and had therefore offered itself, and been accepted, as host to 
the next meeting of the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (CIEN) in 
1983. 
5. In accordance with Article III of the Statute, technical assistance was 
the primary function of the Agency. However, such assistance continued to be 
financed from voluntary contributions while safeguards were funded from the 
Regular Budget. For the future of nuclear energy, and particularly in the 
interests of the technical progress of the developing countries, who 
represented the majority of the Agency's Members, the two principal 
activities, technical assistance and safeguards, should be given, at the very 
least, something closer to equal treatment. In view of the Agency's financial 
difficulties, a policy of zero real growth should be pursued in the budget. 
GC(XXV)/OR.236 
page 3 


Technical assistance should not be adversely affected, however, as it had to 


satisfy growing needs which derived from advances in technology. His 
delegation could nonetheless support the proposed target for voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance Fund for 1982. 


6. With regard to the immediate problems confronting the General Conference, 
his delegation was concerned at the delay in appointing a new Director 
General. That delay did nothing to further the cause of nuclear development 
in the world and, in the final analysis, it was the developing countries who 
were the main victims. The various regions, including Latin America, should 
be properly and equitably represented on the Board of Governors. His 
delegation was also in favour of a sizable increase in technical assistance 
for the developing countries and for improved representation of those 
countries within the Secretariat. In conclusion he recalled that, while 
Uruguay had already strongly condemned the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear 
research centre, it nevertheless considered that question to be the 
responsibility of the United Nations. 
7. Mr. CABALLERO (Cuba), after welcoming the approval of fraternal 
Zimbabwe for membership -of the Agency, said the world community had many 
reasons for disquiet in view of certain recent developments in the nuclear 
field. The odious military attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre both discredited and compromised the Agency's international safeguards 
functions. That act, carried out in defiance of the most basic norms of 
international law in the extremely sensitive nuclear field, must not go 
unpunished. In that connection, Cuba supported the resolutions of the United 
Nations Security Council and the Agency's Board of Governors as well as the 
resolution condemning nuclear co-operation between Israel and South Africa. 
His country also supported the resolution of the Board of Governors aimed at 
excluding the racist regime in Pretoria from the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply. 
8. Another deplorable affair had not gone unnoticed by the Cuban 
delegation? a safeguards inspector, a United States citizen who had resigned 
from the Agency, had transmitted confidential Agency documents to the United 

GC (XXV)/OR. 236 
page 4 


States mission in Vienna and had made certain statements to the Foreign 
Relations Committee of the United States Senate the day after his 
resignation. His serious misconduct had helped to undermine the Agency's 
authority and confidence in it, and all measures should be taken to ensure 
that such an incident was not repeated. Unfortunately, there were a number of 
other worrying matters facing the international community. On 6 August, the 
anniversary of the Hiroshima bombing, the United States Government had 
announced that it would go ahead with manufacturing the neutron bomb. That 
decision was not strictly an internal one as the weapon in question was 
intended for use in Western Europe. Combined with the deployment in Western 
Europe of medium-range nuclear weapons, it could only serve to accelerate the 
hazardous and costly arms race and increase the danger of a nuclear war. All 
progress which could be accomplished towards nuclear disarmament was therefore 
vitally important, and that applied particularly to the ratification of 
SALT II and the continuation of the strategic arms limitation talks. 
Unfortunately, the United States was pursuing an aggressive policy in Central 
America and the Caribbean, a policy which must be stopped. 


9. For its part, Cuba saw in the atom only a source of energy to promote the 
economic and social development of its people. Among recent accomplishments 
in that sphere in his country were the construction of the Juragua nuclear 
power plant, the establishment near that plant of a polytechnical college to 
train medium-grade scientists and workers qualified in the nuclear power 
field, and the measures taken in connection with the setting up of the Faculty 
of Nuclear Science and Technology at the University of Havana. In the past 
year, national radiological protection standards had been approved and had 
come into force. Thanks to co-operation with the CMEA (Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance) countries a nuclear research centre was to be built in 
the near future. The Agency had contributed to the construction of a food 
irradiation facility and, a few months previously, Cuba had joined the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS). Furthermore, subsidiary 
arrangements in connection with safeguards agreements relating to the Juragua 
nuclear power plant and the research reactor of the Nuclear Research Institute 
had been negotiated. 
GC(XXV)/OR.236 
page 5 


10. He fully agreed with those delegates who advocated a better balance 
between the financing of technical assistance and that of safeguards. Cuba 
would contribute to the technical assistance programme in proportion to its 
base rate of assessment. 
11. With regard to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, he drew 
attention to United Nations General Assembly resolution 32/49 and said that a 
solution must be reached which accorded with the principle of equitalbe 
geographical representation and the interests of the developing countries. 
12. Mr. BENNINI (Algeria) observed that the blow dealt to the Agency's 
credibility by the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre had 
been worsened by the contempt shown by the Israeli leaders in stating that the 
exclusion of Israel from the Agency would do them no harm. It was quite 
evident that attacks of that type were not the affair of one country alone. 
The scorn shown for the Agency and the Charter of the United Nations as well 
as the serious consequences of the attack for international security and for 
the credibility of the Agency and its safeguards system should dispel all 
traces of complacency and called for the expulsion of Israel from the Agency 
in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the Board and by the Security 
Council of the United Nations. If appropriate sanctions were not applied, the 
precedent thus set would open the door to all types of aggression: the South 
African regime might conceivably decide that the peaceful nuclear activities 
of some particular African country constituted an imminent threat to itself 
and therefore follow Israel's example. 
13. With regard to the inequitable representation of the developing countries 
in general and the region of Africa in particular on the Board, none of the 
arguments put forward during the various discussions of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute could cast any doubt on the need to uphold the principle of equitable 
representation on the Board. Furthermore, although the countries supplying 
nuclear equipment were appreciative of the progress made by the developing 
countries in their nuclear programmes and although they employed a large 
number of scientists and administrative staff from Third World countries, they 
still maintained that the developing countries as a whole could not muster 

GC (XXV)/OR.236 
page 6 


sufficiently qualified candidates for the technical and administrative posts 
in the Agency. There, too, the imbalance should be corrected, and action was 
urgently needed to broaden the participation of the developing countries at 
all levels and particularly in the senior and decision-making positions. 


14. Under Article II of the Statute, technical assistance was the main task 
of the Agency and had as its corollary the other, no less important, task of 
safeguards. Contrary to the Statute and to common sense, the order of those 
tasks had been reversed. If that situation were allowed to endure, it would 
bring harm to the Agency. It was high time that the necessary steps were 
taken to finance technical assistance from the Regular Budget, to provide the 
necessary resources on a predictable and assured basis and to ensure that 
those resources kept pace with the increasing number of countries entering the 
nuclear age and with the advancing nuclear programmes of the developing 
countries. 
15. His delegation attached particular importance to the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Development, to be held in 
1983, and hoped that it would provide the opportunity for a genuine 
confirmation of the inalienable right of all States to develop research into 
and the production and application of, nuclear energy for peaceful purposes on 
a non-discriminatory basis. The Agency had an essential role to play in that 
regard, and its efficiency could only be increased by democratization of the 
rules governing its operation. 
16. Mr. ESKANGI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) observed with regret that the 
Board had not yet been able to take a decision ensuring equitable geographical 
representation in the Board and among the Agency's staff; his delegation 
would wish that principle to be taken duly into account. He also supported 
the action to amend Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure to include Arabic among 
the working languages of the General Conference, and his delegation was ready 
to lend its assistance in that regard. 
GC(XXV)/OR.236 
page 7 


17. The barbarous air raid by the "Zionist entity" against civilian 
facilities in Iraq was a typical act of State terrorism which had been 
vigorously condemned by the majority of the Member State of the United 
Nations. In the name of "security", the "Zionist entity" was trampling on the 
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, massacring the population of 
southern Lebanon, attacking the Arab nation and bombarding nuclear research 
facilities. Zionism and Naziism were comparable in their arrogance, their 
messianic aggressiveness and their brutal contempt for the law of nations and 
the international community. The arguments put forward by the Israeli 
aggressors were without foundation .as Iraq's programme for developing peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy was being conducted under safeguards. His 
country had appreciated the position adopted by the Board in unreservedly 
condemning the act of Zionist aggression against Iraq and reiterating the 
right of all States to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The 
"Zionist entity" could not pursue such practices without the unconditional 
political, economic, technical and military support of the United States. It 
was not surprising, therefore, to note that the representative of the United 
States had sought to justify the raid of 7 June 1981, which had been a 
flagrant violation of all the principles of international law. No 
justification could alter that irrefutable fact, and the "Zionist entity" 
could be diverted from its aggressive course only if the necessary 
countermeasures, including its expulsion from the Agency, were adopted. The 
United States, which had attacked the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, should be the 
last to talk about co-operation in matters of safety and safeguards. 
18. His delegation shared the view expressed by most delegations that the 
financing of the Agency's technical assistance programme should reflect the 
fundamental needs of the developing countries. He congratulated the Agency on 
its untiring efforts to increase the effectiveness of the technical assistance 
programme and was grateful for the two missions to his country which had been 
arranged in 1981. Nevertheless, his delegation had reservations regarding the 
provision of technical assistance to the "Zionist entity". 

GC(XXV)/OR.236 
page 8 


19. The General Conference should take vigorous steps to defend NPT, the 
Agency, the safeguards system and the inalienable right of all States to 
develop research into, and the production and peaceful applications of, 
nuclear energy. The General Conference should not fail to expel the "Zionist 
entity" from the Agency, for only that action would prevent a recurrence of 
similar aggressive acts in the future. 
20. Mr. AL MAZROUI (United Arab Emirates) said that his delegation 
supported the draft resolution submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic 
concerning the amendment of Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure to include 
Arabic as a working language of the General Conference. 
21. The military attack by Israel against Iraq, a Member State party to NPT 
which had accepted safeguards on all its nuclear activities, was a dangerous 
act of terrorism which the world had strongly condemned. The act had 
far-reaching consequences for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and should 
not go unpunished by the international community, particularly the Agency, 
lest other countries follow that dangerous precedent. Apart from encouraging 
Israel to embark on other, similar adventures in the Middle East, where a 
number of countries were planning to build nuclear power plants, failure to 
take action against Israel might also be an incentive to other countries to 
attack nuclear facilities in neighbouring States which they suspected of 
developing nuclear weapons. The purpose of Israel was obviously to check the 
technical and economic development of its neighbours by preventing them from 
acquiring nuclear facilities for peaceful purposes. All peace-loving nations 
should counter that aggression. Since Israel had proved beyond doubt that it 
was not willing to respect the Charter of the United Nations, his country 
strongly urged its expulsion from the Agency. That action was essential if 
faith in the Agency was to be preserved. The Arab countries, including the 
oil producers, were determined to continue building nuclear facilities in 
spite of the attitude of their enemy. 
GC(XXV)/OR.236 
page 9 


22. His delegation regretted that no decision had yet been taken on the 
amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. Such an amendment was essential 
since the regions of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia were 
under-represented on the Board. 
23. Lastly, he announced that his Government would make a voluntary 
contribution for the technical assistance programme in 1982 corresponding 
fully to its base rate of assessment. At the same time, however, it strongly 
recommended that the programme be funded in future from the Regular Budget, 
because technical assistance was no less important to the developing countries 
than safeguards. 
24. Mr. AMPUERO ANGULO (Bolivia) stated that his country was in need of 
all possible assistance in developing nuclear technology for peaceful 
purposes. He therefore wished to associate himself with those Member States 
which had stated that the Agency should increase the funds earmarked for 
technical assistance so that countries like his own could count on more 
substantial and more effective support for their nuclear development. 
25. Bolivia was a profoundly peace-loving country, and the activities which 
his country planned to pursue in the field of atomic energy were based on 
respect to NPT and Agency safeguards. His delegation defended the inalienable 
right of all countries to develop atomic energy for peaceful purposes and 
objected to all forms of outside interference in the internal affairs of a 
country. 
26. Bolivia was grateful for the assistance it received from the Agency and 
other friendly countries. His country had recently hosted the 12th session of 
the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission and had the honour to preside 
over that Commission for the next two years. As Chairman of that body and on 
behalf of its members, he wished to extend his cordial greetings to the 
President of the General Conference. The Commission had recently decided to 
implement nuclear projects at the sub-regional level and hoped that they would 
receive the Agency's support. 

GC (XXV)/OR. 236 
page 10 


27. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) observed that his country was attending a 
session of the General Conference in Vienna for the first time as a full 
Member of the Agency. He wished to review the progress of the Paraguayan 
nuclear programme since the regular session of the General Conference held in 
Rio de Janeiro. That had been the first attended by a Paraguayan delegation, 
which had given a brief summary of his country's ambitious nuclear programme. 
28. Uranium prospecting was continuing, and contracts had been concluded with 
two North American firms, one operating in the east and one in the west of 
Paraguay. However, in view of the amount of hydroelectric power available 
from the plants on the River Parana, his country would not be short of energy 
until the middle of the next century. The large hydroelectric power plants 
being constructed jointly with Brazil and Argentina would have an aggregate 
installed power of approximately 23 000 MW, of which one half would be made 
available to Paraguay. The prospects opened up by that source of electricity 
ranged from the possible export of methanol-based synthetic fuels to the 
development of food production. The hydroelectric facilities were being 
commissioned just at the right time since Paraguay had doubled its consumption 
of electricity in the space of 4-5 years, whereas average world consumption 
was doubling only every 10 years. Without the large hydroelectric stations, 
which would provide low-cost, home-produced energy, the prospects for the 
social and economic development of Paraguay would have been nil since most of 
the energy required would have had to be imported in the form of oil. 
29. Paraguay was nevertheless interested in developing renewable sources of 
energy such as biomass and wind power. The National Atomic Energy Commisssion 
was continuing research into the medical and agricultural applications of 
nuclear energy. Design studies for a nuclear research centre were nearly 
finished, and Paraguay would shortly be seeking the assistance of the Agency 
in selecting a site. Two nuclear medicine centres, one of which would benefit 
from the co-operation of the Agency, were nearing completion. 
30. Mr. AL-ZAHAWI (Iraq), exercising his right of reply, observed that 
the statement by the Israeli delegation the previous day had been completely 
out of order and had served as a further demonstration of Israel's insolence, 
GC(XXV)/OR.236 
page 11 


defiance and intransigence. In attacking the policy of Iraq, which refused to 
accept Israel's diktat, the Israeli delegation had sought to justify the 
premeditated, criminal attack on Iraq's safeguarded nuclear reactor. That 
attack had been universally condemned as unjustifiable, inexcusable and 
absolutely impermissible. Israel's statement was an insult to the Agency and 
to what it stood for, as well as to all the delegations attending the General 
Conference session. 


31. The representative of Israel had had the audacity to refer to Security 
Council resolution 242, when in fact Israel was doing its utmost to sabotage 
that resolution by its policy of expansion and annexation of the occupied 
Palestinian and Arab territories. The Israeli delegation had also had the 
audacity to attack the Iraqi programme while Israel was the only party in the 
region which had secretly acquired a nuclear capability. The statements by 
the Israeli delegation were entirely without foundation; even responsible 
Israeli citizens had no faith in them. 
32. As proof, it sufficed to refer to an article published in the Christian 
Science Monitor on 24 June 1981 by Richard Wilson, Professor of Physics and 
former director of the Energy and Environmental Policy Center at the 
University of Harvard. He (Mr. Al-Zahawi) quoted an extract from that article 
from which it emerged that there was no tangible evidence that Iraq was 
preparing to make a nuclear bomb with French and Italian help. The most 
likely purpose of the reactor was to make Iraq the foremost research centre in 
the Arab world and Baghdad the scientific and cultural centre that it once had 
been. He also quoted a report by the Brookings Institution ("Nuclear Arms in 
the Third World") which stated that the Central Intelligence Agency had known 
since 1974 that Israel had produced atomic weapons through the acquisition, 
partly by clandestine means, of large quantities of uranium and that, 
according to the New York Times, Israel might have obtained that uranium in 
the mid-1960s from a national nuclear facility at Apollo, Pennsylvania. 
Israel, and not India, would thus have become the sixth nuclear-weapon State 
and the only State in the Third World to possess a militarily significant 
force (10 or more bombs). He also quoted extracts from the report by a group 
of experts appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in 

GC(XXV)/OR.236 
page 12 


accordance with resolution 34/89 of the General Assembly, which also concluded 
that during the 1950s and 1960s Israel had co-operated closely in the nuclear 
field with several countries which had helped it to acquire the necessary 
equipment, materials and technology. In the Middle East all known nuclear 
facilities were under safeguards, with the exception of the Dimona research 
reactor in Israel, which could yield enough plutonium each year to manufacture 
a nuclear explosive device. The group of experts had concluded that there was 
every reason to think that Israel, in view of the facilities, nuclear 
materials, scientific and technical knowledge and experienced staff at its 
disposal, had in any event the capability to manufacture nuclear weapons 
within a very short time. 


33. Having attacked the Agency's safeugards system, the Israeli delegation 
had had the audacity to raise the question of universality as "the best 
guarantee for the effectiveness of the Agency": that was the ultimate in 
hypocrisy and cynicism. Israel believed that, by remaining a Member State of 
the Agency, it could gain implicit acceptance for its intolerable and 
unprecedented attack on the Iraqi facilities. 
34. No delegation could take seriously the Israeli call for the establishment 
of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East. Israel held the record for the 
greatest number of condemnations issued by the United Nations for its 
aggressive acts and violations of the Charter. He listed the many resolutions 
that had called for the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the region and 
pointed out that Israel had been the only Member State of the United Nations 
to abstain from voting on all those resolutions. As the group of experts had 
showed, the only way that Israel could acquire credibility was to renounce its 
possession of nuclear weapons and submit all its nuclear activities to 
international safeguards, either by signing NPT or by unilateral acceptance of 
such safeguards. Israel had itself destroyed long ago any credibility it 
might have had in the eyes of the international community. 
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m. 



GC(XXV)/OR.237 
May 1982* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FIFTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1981 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Saturday, 26 September 1981, at 4.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda** 


8 Military attack on Iraqi nuclear research centre 
1 -76 


and its implications for the Agency (resumed) 
77 -79 


18 Appointment of the External Auditor 
80 -81 


19 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 


5 Arrangements for the Conference 


(b) Closing date of the Session and opening date 
of the next session 82 -83 
16 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 84 -87 


Report by the Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole on the following items: 88 -104 


The Agency's accounts for 1980 
The Agency's budget for 1982 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions 


for 1982 
The financing of technical assistance 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 
Amendment of Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure 


of the General Conference 


20 Report on voluntary contributions pledged to the 
Technical Assistance Fund for 1982 105 - 106 


16 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
(resumed) 107 - 123 


17 Appointment of the Director General 124 - 148 


Closing of the session 149 - 158 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 12 October 1981. 
** GC(XXV)/652. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXV)/INF/201/Rev.2. 


82-787 



GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 2 


MILITARY ATTACK ON IRAQI NUCLEAR RESEARCH CENTRE AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR THE 
AGENCY <GC(XXV)/653/Rev.2, 653/Rev.2/Corr.1, 654/Rev.1) (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT said that lengthy consultations had been held and he 
wished to thank all those who had assisted in trying to find an agreed 
solution. Two draft resolutions had been submitted (documents 
GC(XXV)/653/Rev.2, as modified by GC(XXV)/653/Rev.2/Corr.1, and 
GC(XXV)/654/Rev.1). He understood that the Conference wished to proceed first 
to a vote on the draft resolution contained in GC(XXV)/653/Rev,2. 
2. It was so decided. 
3. The PRESIDENT said that before the vote was taken he would give the 
floor to the delegations of Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. 
4. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said his delegation rejected the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(xxv)/653/Rev.2 since it represented an attempt to 
drag the Conference into a political debate and threatened an illegal action 
against a Member State. The language and spirit of Article XIX of the Statute 
were clear; the violations referred to were non-compliance with inspection 
procedures (Article XII.C) or arrears of more than two years in the payment of 
membership dues. Israel had an immaculate record on those points. Attempts 
to introduce politics would erode the authority of the Agency and hamper it in 
the performance of its duties. It was anyway clear that acceptance of 
safeguards could not be a condition of Agency membership. 
5. Israel had shared its experience in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
with other developing countries and had extended its help to them. On various 
occasions it had declared itself ready to expand those activities. The 
suspension of technical assistance to Israel by the Agency would be contrary 
to the provisions of Article III.A.l. Also, such a decision would erode the 
principle of universality, which was fundamental to the Agency's existence. 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 3 


6. Israel had been trying to promote the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in the Middle East and had called on other States to join in creating such a 
zone. That initiative would be harmed if the General Conference adopted the 
draft resolution under discussion. 
7. He requested all delegates to bear those points in mind when they voted. 
8. Mr. KHAYAT (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXV)/653/Rev.2 was the weakest imaginable response to the Israeli 
act of aggression against Iraq and the international community. Many Member 
States considered that any delay in the suspension of Israel from the rights 
of membership would in fact represent a suspension of the safeguards system 
and of the Agency's rules. 
9. Israel had in effect already excluded itself from the community of 
peaceful users of atomic energy. Any disregard of the military attack would 
tend to encourage future acts of war by Israel. 
10. The PRESIDENT said that, in accordance with what had been agreed, he 
would now ask the Conference to vote on the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXV)/653/Rev. 2. 
11. At the request of Mr. Al-Kital (Iraq), a roll-call vote was taken. 
12. Sri Lanka, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
13. The result of the vote was as follows; 
In favour; Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democractic 
People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, German Democratic 
Republic, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, 
Republic of Korea, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, 


Mongolia, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, 



GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 4 


Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sri Lanka, 
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, 
Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia 


Against: Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Guatemala, Israel, Paraguay, 
United States of America, Uruguay 


Abstaining; Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 


Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, 


Greece, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, 


Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, 


Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 


Ireland. 


14. There were 51 votes in favour and 8 against, with 27 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 


15. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said he wished to express his appreciation of the 
way delegations had dealt with the Board's recommendation on the subject of 
the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre. Statements made in 
the course of the general debate had shown that the majority of Members took a 
very serious view of the Israeli action. Many had demanded that Israel be 
expelled or at least suspended. It was regrettable that such a step had been 
obstructed by certain States, who had tried to use the principle of 
universality as an agrument to keep Israel in the Agency. Their move would be 
considered by the Arab world as a biased and political act, which could damage 
international co-operation. 
16. The Iraqi Government was not satisfied with the action that had so far 
been taken and reserved the right to pursue the matter further. 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 5 


17. Mr. DEPRSCH BARTSCH (Chile) said it was common knowledge that his 
country had traditionally defended the right of States to participate as 
members of international organizations. It opposed any form of suspension 
from the Agency as being inconsistent with the Statute. The resolution that 
had been adopted implied that Israel could be suspended for not submitting to 
safeguards. However, acceptance of safeguards could not be a prerequisite for 
membership of the Agency. 
18. Chile had condemned the Israeli attack at the June meetings of the Board, 
but believed the necessary actions had already been taken by the competent 
international bodies. It was now deeply concerned about the increasing 
politicization of the Agency, which was clearly a technical organization; that 
trend hampered the work of the Agency and led only to sterile confrontation. 
19. Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela), before beginning his statement, protested 
because his country had not been inscribed in the speakers' list, although a 
request for inscription had been made in good time and repeatedly. 
20. In his statement he said that Venezuela had condemned, through various 
channels and in different fora, the Israeli attack on a peaceful nuclear 
facility in Iraq as a violation of the principles and standards of 
international law and an assault against the Agency's safeguards system. 
21. Venezuela had voted in favour of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXV)/653/Rev.2, but had reservations concerning operative paragraph 3 as it 
prejudged the future action of the General Conference. Venezuela had doubts 
about the competence of the General Conference to apply, with a political aim, 
a measure like that expressed in operative paragraph 3. The Security Council, 
or - failing that - the General Assembly, was the competent organ for applying 
sanctions against a country that had committed aggression. 
22. Reiterating Venezuela's confidence in the Agency, he said his country 
would have difficulties in supporting a recommendation along the lines 
foreseen in operative paragraph 3 as it would be contrary to the principle of 
the universality of international organizations. 

GC (XXV)/OR. 237 
page 6 


23. Speaking on behalf of the Member States of the European Community, 
Mr. KELLY (United Kingdom) said that those States strongly condemned Israel 
for its premediated and unjustified attack on the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre. Nevertheless, they saw a serious practical difficulty with the 
procedure proposed in the draft resolution. Operative paragraph 3 implied 
that if Israel failed to implement Security Council resolution 487, which 
called upon it to place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards, 
the General Conference could at its next session consider suspending Israel 
from the rights and privileges of membership. However, Article XIX.B, which 
dealt with the suspension of rights and privileges, could be invoked only if 
there had been persistent violation of the Statute or of any agreement entered 
into in pursuance of it. The Statute did not require the application of 
safeguards to all the nuclear facilities in a country, so it would not be 
violated if Israel failed to implement the Security Council resolution. It 
was not the job of the Agency, whose tasks were not political, to attempt to 
enforce resolutions of the Security Council, which was the senior political 
body of the United Nations family. 
24. The draft resolution submitted by Member States of the European Community 
(GC(XXV)/654/Rev.1) had proposed a solemn warning that any further Israeli 
action would have most serious consequences for the position of that country 
in the Agency and had called upon Israel to refrain from any action 
inconsistent with the Agency's objectives. It had also contained a request to 
the Board of Governors not to consider the provision of any further technical 
assistance to Israel for the time being and to undertake an urgent examination 
of ways of increasing the provision of technical assistance to Iraq. Finally, 
it had reaffirmed confidence in the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards 
system. 


25. However much the Israeli action deserved condemnation, the principle of 
universality of participation in organizations of the United Nations family, 
upon which their effective working so much depended should not be breached. 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 7 


26. Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) said that his delegation had voted in 
favour of the resolution. However, it wished to express reservations with 
regard to operative paragraph 3, as it opposed extreme measures with a 
political content which lay outside the technical terms of reference of the 
Agency and affected the principle of universality. In addition, if Israel was 
suspended from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership, there 
would be no means of making that country submit its nuclear facilities to 
Agency safeguards. 
27. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said that the decision adopted by the General 
Conference was an arbitrary and discriminatory act carried out for political 
reasons. The military operation of 7 June 1981 could not possibly justify 
that decision, which was incompatible with the Statute of the Agency. 
28. By adopting the resolution, the Conference had helped to convert the 
Agency into an instrument of political warfare and had endangered the Agency's 
authority, which it owed to its reputation as a responsible and autonomous 
body. The Agency had regrettably now joined other United Nations agencies 
whose efficiency had been greatly impaired by their involvement in politics. 
29. The decision was discriminatory because Israel had been singled out for 
special attention. The fact that there were other Member States which did not 
comply with, nor had any intention of complying with, the basic requirements 
of the Agency's Statute or their obligations under international agreements 
had been completely disregarded. 
30. For its part, Israel had recently taken a number of initiatives towards 
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East which was 
to be freely negotiated and modelled on the Tlatelolco Treaty. That was a 
promising way of eliminating further threats in the region. The decision by 
the Conference had been distinctly unhelpful to that cause. 
31. Israel rejected the condemnation of the destruction of the Iraqi nuclear 
reactor. The decision to destroy the reactor had been taken only when it had 


become absolutely certain that Iraq was on the verge of producing nuclear 


bombs, the principal target of which would have been Israel. 



GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 8 


32. Mr. YAMATO (Japan) said that his delegation had abstained in the vote 
on the draft resolution. It would have voted against the original draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXV)/653 if that had been put to a vote, 
and it acknowledged the improvements made in the revised draft. Despite those 
improvements, however, a number of difficulties had remained. 
33. First, as the Agency was highly technical in nature, the principle of the 
universality of its membership must be carefully safeguarded. Any encroachment 
on that principle should be avoided as far as possible. Secondly, there 
was some legal doubt as to whether suspension could be enforced in the present 
case under Article XIX.B of the Statute, as that required persistent 
violations of the provisions of the Statute before action could be taken. 
34. In addition, his delegation believed that acceptance of safeguards, 
however desirable, was a separate issue unrelated to that of suspension. The 
linking of the two issues - suspension and acceptance of safeguards - was 
therefore irrelevant. 
35. His delegation strongly condemned the Israeli attack, which was a grave 
challenge to the Agency's safeguards system. Japan's abstention in the vote 
did not imply any weakening of its sense of outrage at, or codemnation of, the 
Israeli attack. 
36. Mr. do NASCIMENTO e SILVA (Brazil) said that his Government had on 
several occasions joined the international community in condemning the Israeli 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear installations as a totally unjustifiable act of 
aggression. 
37. His delegation had abstained in the vote on the resolution just adopted 
for several reasons. Traditionally, Brazil was not in favour of the expulsion 


or the suspension of Member States from United Nations bodies. In addition, 


his delegation had specific doubts regarding the effectiveness of the 


expulsion or suspension of a Member State from an organization such as the 


Agency, which had an important role to play in safeguarding the peaceful uses 


of nuclear energy. 


GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 9 


38. The references to the Non-Proliferation Treaty in the text of the 
resolution constituted a further reason for Brazil's abstention. It was 
widely known that Brazil maintained a firm position on the Treaty because of 
its discriminatory nature. 
39. Finally, the concept of the inalienable right of all States to develop 
fully nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, a concept which his Government 
supported, was connected in the resolution with the vague concept of 
"internationally accepted safeguards". 
40. In conclusion, his delegation wished to reiterate its firm belief in the 
effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system. 
41. Mr. DALAL (India) recalled his country's clear and unequivocal 
condemnation of the unjustified military attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear 
research centre. That attack had threatened the maintenance of international 
peace and security in clear violation of the United Nations Charter. It was 
also an act of aggression by one Member of the Agency against another and had 
therefore merited punitive action by the current session of the General 
Conference. Following the Board's recommendation for certain action to be 
taken by the Conference, India had supported the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXV)/653/Rev.2. 
42. His delegation also wished to reiterate its consistent position on 
certain issues raised during the discussion of the question and mentioned in 
the resolution. References to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons and to full-scope and other safeguards were irrelevant and only served 
to divert attention away from Israel's unprovoked aggression. Even if Iraq 
had not been a party to NPT and had not accepted safeguards at all, the attack 
would have been equally reprehensible. His delegation's vote in favour of the 
resolution should not be taken to imply any change in its position on issues 
such as NPT, full-scope safeguards and the criteria relevant for suspension of 
membership in the Agency. 

GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 10 


43. In his view, the grounds for the suspension of Israel's membership were 
its repeated disregard and grave violations of the basic provisions of the 
Statute, in law and in spirit? they were not conditional upon any factors 
external to the Agency. 
44. Mr. ALHOm (Finland) said that his delegation had abstained in the 
vote because it objected to paragraph 3 of the resolution, which contained the 
concept of suspending a Member State from the exercise of its privileges and 
rights of membership. Apart from anything else, it was questionable whether 
suspension was the best method of achieving the desired goal. His delegation 
could, however, accept in principle other parts of the resolution. 
45. Finland's views on the Israeli attack had been expressed on several 
occasions. It supported resolution 487 of the United Nations Security Council 
as well as the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors on 12 June 1981. 
The attack represented a new form of international violence; it had been 
carried out against a State party to NPT, and on a facility under Agency 
safeguards. It must not be repeated. 
46. Mr. KROI (Albania) said that his delegation had abstained because it 
could not condone the deferment of the issue to the next session of the 
General Conference. Israel's acts had been committed and ought to be 
condemned immediately. His Government deplored the attack and wished to 
express its solidarity with the Arab peoples. 
47. Mr. PULIT (Argentina) said his Government condemned the Israeli 
attack, which violated the principles of international law. It constituted a 
dangerous precedent as well as an attack on the Agency's role in safeguarding 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. His delegation had supported the 
resolution for those reasons, but it also had certain reservations. The 
reference to NPT was neither a positive part of, nor an additional reason for, 
the condemnation of Israel. The Non-Proliferation Treaty, to which his 
country was not a party, was not part of the Agency's Statute nor could it in 
any way be considered to be complementary to it. 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 11 


4 8. Similarly, his delegation had strong reservations concerning paragraph 3 
of the resolution. Argentina had always maintained that no Member State 
should be excluded from an international forum since such action had 
consequences which were contrary to the objectives of the international 
organizations. The suspension of Israel would be counterproductive and would 
further weaken the influence or control which the international community was 
able to exercise. 
49. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said that, as a technical and scientific 
organization, the Agency should avoid involvement in politics and concentrate 
on activities such as manpower training and monitoring compliance with safety 
standards and safeguards, which should be applied in all Member States without 
exception. His country supported the principle of the universality of 
international organizations and the inalienable right of all Member States to 
participate in all those activities which concerned them. The purpose of 
developing nuclear energy for peaceful purposes was the well-being of Member 
States. For those reasons, Paraguay could not support any measure which was 
aimed at suspending the basic rights of, or expelling, any Member of the 
Agency, particularly as there was no basis for such action in the Statute. It 
had therefore voted against the resolution. His country's political stand on 
the question had been made clear in the United Nations. 
50. Mr. MEYER (Uruguay), explaining his country's vote on the resolution, 
said that the matter had already been discussed in the appropriate forum of 
the United Nations and, because of its political nature, was outside the scope 
of the Agency. Uruguay had always defended peace and scientific progress: it 
condemned aggression, supported the principle of non-intervention in the 
internal affairs of countries and maintained that any act which represented a 
threat to world peace should be dealt with in the United Nations. 
51. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) said that his Government had 
voted against the resolution because it opposed operative paragraphs 1, 2, 3 
and 4 of it. It could not support the view that the Israeli action 
constituted an attack on the Agency and its safeguards regime or that it had 
caused damage to that regime. His Government disagreed with those 

GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 12 


international observers who had concluded that the international safeguards 
system was ineffective. It had confidence in that system, believing that, 
although not perfect, it would continue to be improved to take into account 
recent technological developments. 


52. The United States opposed suspension of technical assistance to Israel on 
the grounds that such a sanction was contrary to the Statute. As a Member of 
the Agency, Israel was entitled to participate in the Agency's technical 
assistance programme. Technically sound proposals and available resources, 
not political considerations, had been and should continue to be the criteria 
used by the Agency under that programme. 
53. His delegation most vigorously opposed paragraph 3 of the resolution; 
which requested the General Conference to consider at its next session the 
suspension of Israel's privileges and rights of membership if by that time it 
had not complied with United Nations Security Council resolution 487. Given 
the recommendation of the Board of Governors in June, it could only be assumed 
that the resolution's sponsors had decided to defer the matter for another 
year because they realized that a significant number of Member States would 
not support suspension. Such a delay would only prolong that divisive issue 
and continue to distract the Agency from its regular duties. It was another 
example of the Agency, a technical body, being turned into a forum for 
debating political issues. That pattern of abusing the United Nations system 
to carry on political vendettas was corrosively dangerous. The politicization 
of specialized international organizations such as the Agency must cease. 
54. His Government believed that the suspension of Israel's membership would 
be harmful to the objectives of the Agency and to peace and security in the 
Middle East. It found no legal basis for such suspension. Article XIX.B of 
the Statute specifically dealt with that question. First, the Article stated 
that a Member could only be suspended when it ".... has persistently violated 
the provisions of this Statute or of any agreement entered into by it pursuant 
to this Statute ...." Although Security Council resolution 487 (1981) 
condemned Israel's raid on the Iraqi nuclear reactor, the Israeli action did 
not violate any specific provision of the Agency's Statute or any agreement 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 13 


entered into by Israel pursuant to the Statute. The attack therefore did not 
constitute proper grounds for a resolution of suspension under Article XIX.B. 
Secondly, even if the Israeli attack could be deemed a violation of the 
Agency's Statute, it could not be construed as the kind of "persistent" 
violation required for suspension. The adjective "persistent" obviously 


indicated a course of conduct occurring over an extended period of time and 
involving repeated separate incidents. Further, it also involved the notion 
of wilful continuation of disregard for opposition or warnings. The 
Conference was concerned in the present case merely with a single act which 
clearly did not involve a course of conduct which would justify the 
application of Article XIX.B. 


55. Suspension of Israel from the exercise of the privileges and rights of 
Agency membership would also be inconsistent with Security Council 
resolution 487. First, the resolution contained no recommendation that 
Israel's privileges or rights of membership in the Agency be withdrawn. It 
did, however, contain a specific provision calling upon Israel "urgently to 
place its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards". The latter provision 
recognized that it was in the interest of the community of States to encourage 
Israel's maximum participation in the safeguards activities of the Agency. 
Suspension would thus run counter to the considered judgement of the United 
Nations organ specifically entrusted with responsibility for the maintenance 
of international peace and security, a responsibility recognized by the Agency 
in Article 1(3) of its relationship agreement with the United Nations— . It 
would be improper and inappropriate, therefore, for the Agency to attempt to 
enforce a decision made by another United Nations body. 
56. Acceptance of safeguards was not a condition of membership in the Agaency 
nor was non-acceptance grounds for suspension under the Statute. Several 
Agency Members did not accept safeguards on all their nuclear facilities. 
1/ Contained in document INFCIRC/11. 



GC (XXV)/OR. 237 


page 14 


57. Those supporting the resolution were now maintaining that the primary 
legal basis for suspension was Article IV.B. That Article, however, quite 
clearly applied only to the consideration of new Members. Even if that 
criterion were accepted, it could not be concluded that the Israeli action 
constituted grounds for suspension. Military action across national 
boundaries involving Members of the United Nations had occurred in every 
continent since the foundation of that organization, but no nation had yet 
been suspended for failure to act in accordance with the purposes and 
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. 
58. The meaning of the resolution just adopted should be made quite clear. 
The proposal to consider the matter a year hence in no way prejudged the 
outcome of that consideration. It did not constitute a recommendation by the 
General Conference at its present session for suspension. In addition to his 
delegation's objections to the resolution on legal grounds, it believed that 
it was not in the interests of the international community to deprive Israel 
of the rights of membership, in the one agency designed to promote the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the broad extension of international 
safeguards. His Government had urged and would continue to urge Israel to 
sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty, to accept Agency safeguards on all its 
nuclear facilities and to work towards a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East. Any hope of progress in those endeavours would be severely 
damaged by Israel's suspension from the exercise of the privileges and rights 
of Agency membership. 
59. His Government had immediately condemned the Israeli air strike and had 
joined others in the Security Council in the adoption of resolution 487. Such 
acts of violence undermined the stability and well-being of the Middle East. 
The problem of recurring violence in that troubled region was a political 
one; the solution lay outside the mandate of the Agency and was, in fact, 
being tackled in other fora. 
60. In conclusion, he wished to make clear his country's grave concern over 
the proposal to suspend Israel. The suspension of Israel from any United 
Nations body could have serious consequences for the continued participation 
of the United States and would jeopardize its continued support. 


GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 15 


61. Mr. ESKANGI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) stated that his delegation 
reserved the right to appeal to the General Conference to take stronger 
measures against Israel in order to ensure respect for NPT and safeguards 
agreements. If the General Conference failed to take the appropriate action, 
the Agency and its safeguards system would be placed in great danger. 
62. Mr. MUSSI (Austria) recalled that his country had condemned the 
Israeli attack as a serious violation of the United Nations Charter and as a 
breach of the norms of international law which might impair the effectiveness 
and credibility of the Agency. His delegation would have welcomed a 
resolution which exhausted all the legal possibilities for sanctions against 
Israel. It was to be hoped that efforts could be made before the twenty-sixth 
regular session of the General Conference to find a resolution which 
constituted an appropriate response to the Israeli action and which took due 
account of the legal position. With the exception of operative paragraph 3, 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXV)/653/Rev.2 would have been acceptable 
to his delegation. 
63. Mr. CAIRO (Guatemala) declared that his country was opposed, as a 
matter of principle, to depriving a Member State of its rights. However, that 
statement should not be taken to mean that Guatemala condoned the Israeli 
attack nor that it was against operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the 
resolution. 
64. Mr. MANZ (Switzerland) explained that his country was consistently 
opposed to the suspension of the rights and privileges of any Member State of 
any universally oriented international organization if the statutory 
conditions governing that suspension were not satisfied. According to the 
Statute, the right to be a Member State of the Agency was not subject to the 
acceptance of safeguards, and it was therefore not possible to consider 
suspending a Member State not satisfying that condition. 
65. Nevertheless, his Government strongly condemned the use of force in 
relations between States. Respect for international public law was an 


essential requirement for proper international co-operation. His delegation 



GC (XXV)/OR. 237 
page 16 


therefore condemned the Israeli attack, deploring it all the more since inter 
alia - it had caused serious harm to the Agency's safeguards system, to 
which his country attached the greatest importance. Switzerland had always 
been a defender of the principle that attacks, even in the event of armed 
conflict, should not be launched against facilities containing substances 
which could be dangerous to the civilian population, such as a nuclear power 
plant. That principle had been enshrined in Article 56 of the Additional 
Protocol to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 concerning the protection 
of victims of international armed conflicts. 


66. Mr. CALISTO VARELA (Ecuador) recalled that his country had voted in 
favour of Security Council resolution 487 (1981) condemning the Israeli act of 
aggression, which had also been publicly censured by the President of the 
Republic of Ecuador. His country was a firm supporter of the principle that 
the use of force was proscribed by the international community. 
67. His delegation had, however, reservations regarding operative 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the resolution, which went beyond the Agency's 
competence in calling upon it to judge political acts. Moreover, operative 
paragraph 3 prejudged the line to be adopted at the twenty-sixth regular 
session of the General Conference and could jeopardize the functioning of the 
Agency through the suspension or exclusion, albeit temporary, of one or more 
of its Member States. 
Mr. THAM (Sweden) observed that his country had strongly condemned 
the Israeli attack as a flagrant violation of international law which could 
under no circumstances be justified. Israel had sought to apply Article 51 of 
the United Nations Charter, which permitted the exercise of self-defence in 
the event of an armed attack until such time as the Security Council had taken 
the necessary measures to maintain international peace and security. The 
construction of a nuclear research reactor could certainly not be viewed as a 
threatened or imminent armed attack. The Israeli interpretation of Article 51 
implied that the concept of legitimate self-defence could be extended almost 
limitlessly to cover all conceivable dangers. World peace would, indeed, be 
in jeopardy if other nations adopted that argument. The Israeli attack could 


GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 17 


seriously undermine respect for the safeguards system. Sweden could not 
support operative paragraph 3 of the resolution since suspension would not be 
in accordance with the Statute. His delegation did support, however, the 
other operative paragraphs and fully endorsed the Security Council's call upon 
Israel to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 


69. Mr. SUAREZ de PUGA (Spain) recalled that his country had unreservedly 
condemned the Israeli attack in the Security Council. Although supporting the 
resolution, his Government still maintained that every State should be free to 
decide whether or not to accede to NPT. Furthermore, his delegation could not 
support preambular paragraph (h) of the resolution. 
70. Mr. SYVERTSEN (Norway) stated that his country and Iceland strongly 
condemned the Israeli raid, which constituted a serious threat to the 
safeguards system - the foundation of NPT. Being confirmed supporters of the 
principle of universality, however, both Norway and Iceland regarded the call 
for the suspension of Israel as unjustified. Furthermore, such action would 
not be in accordance with the Statute. 
71. Mr. OTALORA (Colombia) explained that his country pursued a 
traditional policy of non-interference in the affairs of other countries. 
Colombia had severely condemned the Israeli raid in the United Nations at the 
appropriate time. The Agency was a purely technical organization which was 
not competent to deal with political matters. 
72. Mr. KOREF (Panama) declared that his delegation had supported the 
resolution because consideration of the suspension of Israel had been 
postponed until the twenty-sixth regular session of the General Conference. 
Such suspension could be justified only in the event of great danger. His 
delegation had also supported the resolution because it was consistent with 
the relevant resolutions adopted by the Board of Governors and the Security 
Council of the United Nations. 

GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 18 


7 3. Mr. PARIS-STEFFENS (Costa Rica) said that his country vigorously 
condemned any wilful act of aggresssion by one country against another. It 
therefore condemned the Israeli raid as well as all other acts of aggression 
that had punctuated the short history of the United Nations. His delegation 
had, however, very serious reservations regarding operative paragraphs 2 and 3 
of the resolution. The legality of operative paragraph 3 was dubious since it 
represented an attempt to force the acceptance of safeguards upon a Member 
State and especially since it was not envisaged to take similar action against 
all other Member States whose facilities were not subject to safeguards. 
74. Mr. AMPUERO ANGULO (Bolivia) recalled that his delegation had already 
censured Israel for its attack. He had voted against the resolution because 
the Agency was not the place to apply sanctions based on political motives. 
Since consideration of the suspension of Israel's privileges had been 
postponed for one year, much of the Agency's time would be taken up with that 
matter. The General Conference should confine itself to encouraging Israel to 
comply with the terms of resolution 487 (1981) adopted by the Security 
Council, which was the body empowered to deal with political problems between 
States. His delegation renewed its appeal for respect for the right of 
countries to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and for 
non-interference in their internal affairs. 
75. Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada), speaking also on behalf of the Governments 
of Australia and New Zealand, said that they would have been prepared to 
support a resolution again condemning the attack in strong and forthright 
terms. However, the draft resolution in document GC(XXV)/653/Rev.2 touched 
upon the question of universality in international organizations, and 
operative paragraph 3 was prejuducial in that regard. 
76. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) observed that the suspension of 
privileges was intended to be applied under the conditions described in 
Article XIX of the Statute. Universality had no place if those conditions 
existed. In accordance with Article II of the Statute, Iraq was seeking to 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity by constructing nuclear facilities. The attack by Israel on those 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 19 


facilities constituted a violation of Article II. The threat by the Prime 
Minister of Israel to destroy any other Arab nuclear facilities constituted a 
persistent violation of the Statute, as defined in Article XIX.B. 


APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 


77. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that the Agency's External 
Auditor had originally been appointed to audit the Agency's accounts for 
1976-77 and had since been reappointed for two further periods. Under 
2/ 


Financial Regulation 12.01— the External Auditor was to be appointed from 
among the Auditors General of Member States, and it was customary for the 
President to put before the Conference a specific proposal for such an 
appointment. In the light of the consultations which had been held, he 
accordingly proposed that the Comptroller and Auditor General of Kenya be 
appointed to audit the Agency's accounts for 1982-83. 


78. The President's proposal was accepted. 
79. The PRESIDENT said he took it that the Conference would wish him to 
convey its gratitude to the Netherlands Government, which had placed the 
services of its Auditor General at the Agency's disposal since 1976. During 
that period the Conference had had a number of opportunities to express its 
great appreciation of the excellent work done by the Auditor General and his 
staff. 
2/ INFCIRC/8/Rev.1. 


GC (XXV)/OR.237 
page 20 


ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


80. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was at present 
represented on the Staff Pension Committee by two members - Mr. Scheller 
(Federal Republic of Germany) and Miss CastafSo (Philippines) - and by 
Mr. Rybka (Hungary) and Mr. Alvarez Vita (Peru) as alternates. Since three of 
them were no longer able to serve on the Committee, he proposed that the 
General Conference elect Mr. Aman (Indonesia) and Mr. Hofland (Netherlands) as 
members and Mr. Ugalde Bilbao (Chile) and Mr. Rybka (Hungary) as alternates. 
81. Mr. Aman (Indonesia) and Mr. Hofland (Netherlands) were elected as 
members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee and Mr. Ugalde Bilbao (Chile) 
and Mr. Rybka (Hungagy) as alternates. 
The meeting was suspended at 6.25 p.m. and resumed at 10.40 p.m. 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(b) CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 
82. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure, 
the Conference had to fix a closing date for the session, on the 
recommendation of the General Committee. The General Committee had considered 
the matter and had authorized him to recommend on its behalf that Saturday, 
26 September be fixed as the closing date of the twenty-fifth regular 
3/ 


session.— 


83. The recommendation of the General Committee was accepted. 
3/ The Conference in fact ended at 1.20 a.m. on Sunday, 27 September. 

GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 21 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXV)/644, 657) 


84. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that 11 Members had to be 
elected to the Board from the geographical areas specified in paragraph 2 of 
document GC(XXV)/657 to ensure that the Board would be constituted in 
accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute. 
85. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Ecuadorian delegation 
and a member of the United Kingdom delegation acted as tellers. 
86. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members of the Board of 
Governors. 
87. The PRESIDENT said that the counting of votes would take some time 
and therefore suggested that the remaining business under item 16 be deferred 
until the tellers had reported to him. 
REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


88. Mr. DALAL (India), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, presented 
the Committee's report on items 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the agenda, which 
had been referred to it by the General Conference for examination. 
89. The Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the following 
draft resolutions: 
The draft resolution contained in Part I of document GC(XXV)/645 
(item 9 - The Agency's accounts for 1980); 


The three draft resolutions set out in Annex VII to "~\ Ki2-Hj 
document GC(XXV)/646 and the draft resolution in document GC(XXV)/659 
(item 10 - The Agency's budget for 1982); 

The draft resolution set forth in document GC(XXV)/647 (item 11 -
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1982) ( 



GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 22 


The draft resolution in document GC(XXV)/660 (item 12 - The financing 
of technical assistance); 


The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXV)/661 (item 13 -
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute); and 


The draft resolution in document GC(XXV)/650 (item 14 - Amendment of 
Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference). 


90. The PRESIDENT thanked the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and 
suggested that the draft resolutions and proposals relating to the items of 
the agenda that had been referred to the Committee could now be considered by 
the General Conference with a view of their adoption. 
91. It was so agreed. 
The Agency's accounts for 1980 
92. The draft resolution contained in Part I of document GC(XXV)/645 was 
adopted. 
The Agency's budget for 1982 


93. The three draft resolutions contained in Annex VII to document f 
GC(XXV)/646 and the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXV)/659 were 
adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1982 


94. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXV)/647 was adopted. 
The financing of technical assistance 


GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 23 


96. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) made the following statement— : 
(1) "First, I should like to discuss the resolution adopted under agenda 
item 10. 
(2) "In accepting this resolution, my Government as well as other 
Governments understands that operative paragraph one applies to 
Professional personal and is not intended to mean that existing IAEA 
personnel should be dismissed or in any way deprived to their rights as 
staff members, and further, that any increases in staff members drawn 
from developing areas would occur only by filling available and 
authorized vacancies on the IAEA staff. 
(3) "In addition, with respect to preambular paragraph (e) of this 
resolution, my Government wishes to point out our understanding that UN 
resolutions 35/210 and 33/143 refer only to the United Nations 
Secretariat, and not to the whole UN system. Further, UN resolutions 
concerning staffing generally avoid dividing the composition of the 
Secretariat into two camps, that is developed and developing countries. 
Instead, they generally refer to the need for increased appointment of 
nationals of under-represented Member States. Accordingly, we would hope 
that this resolution will not have an undesirable polarizing effect on 
this Agency. 
(4) "I should now like to turn to the resolution adopted under agenda 
item 12. 
(5) "In accepting this resolution, the United States has again registered 
its support of the Agency's technical assistance programme. We were able 
to join the consensus in support of this text on the basis of a clear 
common understanding that it in no way prejudices the ways one can assure 
that technical assistance is supported on a predictable basis. 
(6) "I wish to emphasize that my Government is unable to agree to provide 
for the financing of technical assistance from the regular budgets of 
international organizations or commit itself in advance to increase its 
voluntary contributions to the IAEA. Future contributions obviously must 
be governed by our budgetary and appropriation process. We understand 
other important donor countries are in the same position. The United 
States has given very generously to this organization for more than 
20 years and we hope to be able to continue to do so. But my Government 


i_/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 89(b) of the Conference's Rules of Procedure. 

95. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXV)/66Q was adopted. 

GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 24 


cannot accept any arrangement which is not in accord with our established 


policy and Congressional appropriations process. Accordingly, our 


acceptance of this resolution, particularly operative paragraph one, must 


be read in this light. 


(7) "The present arrangement in which an understanding was reached on 
indicative planning figures for the target for the Technical Assistance 
Fund for a three-year period appears to be working well. And, while 
there is no commitment to provide contributions to the Technical 
Assistance Fund, there is no evidence to suggest that Member States are 
not willing to provide stable and predictable technical assistance 
financing, voluntarily and in good faith." 
97. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), speaking on behalf 
of the Bulgarian, Byelorussian, Hungarian, German Democratic Republic, Polish, 
Ukrainian and Czechoslovak delegations, said that the fact that those 
delegations had not opposed the resolutions which had just been approved did 
not indicate any change in the positions they had adopted up till then. They 
would continue to maintain those positions at future meetings of the Board of 
Governors. 
98. He wished to make some specific comments on the resolution concerning the 
financing of technical assistance contained in document GC(XXV)/660. His 
delegation fully supported the Agency's activities in the field of technical 
assistance and felt that technical assistance to the Agency's developing 
Member States should be increased. It understood the importance which the 
developing countries attached to increasing technical assistance and to its 
provision through predictable and assured resources; that was necessary for 
sound planning of the development of peaceful nuclear activities in those 
countries and was reflected in the resolution adopted. The East European 
countries had consistently increased the size of their contributions each year 
and, as could be seen from document GC(XXV)/651/Rev.5, had in most cases 
exceeded the figure recommended for them for 1982. In so doing, they had kept 
to the accepted practice in the Agency of providing that assistance in 
national currency. The arrangement whereby the donor State determined the 
currency in which its contribution was made stemmed from the voluntary 
principle of technical assistance and complied fully with the Agency's 
Statute. On that basis his country had already agreed to the establishment of 
indicative planning figures for the years 1981-83. 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 25 


99. It should also be pointed out that the resolution adopted represented a 
compromise. In particular, it contained a proposal to request the Board of 
Governors to take the necessary measures so that technical assistance was 
funded either through the Regular Budget or through comparably predictable and 
assured resources. 
100. He had been instructed to say that, when the Board considered the matter, 
his delegation would oppose the transfer of the Agency's Technical Assistance 
Fund from a voluntary to a compulsory basis with funding supplied through the 
Regular Budget. Such a step would be contradictory to the Agency's Statute. 
The resolution adopted mentioned another method of financing technical 
assistance, namely on a voluntary basis. His delegation fully supported that 
approach and was confident that it would provide the broadest foundation for 
increasing technical assistance in a predictable and assured way. 
101. Mr. DE PEYSTER (France) explained that his delegation's support for 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXV)/660 should in no way be 
seen as prejudging its position on that matter in the future. In any event, 
the adoption of that resolution could not mean any alteration of the Statute, 
which did not provide for the funding of technical assistance through the 
Regular Budget. 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


102. The draft resolution in document GC(XXV)/661 was adopted. 
103. Mr. RIOSALIDO (Spain) explained that, in a spirit of co-operation, 
his delegation had not objected to the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXV)/661 on the understanding that the study by the Board would 
take full account of the records of the discussions on that subject in the 
Committee of the Whole, so that the study would cover the amendment of 
Article VI as a whole. 

GC(XXV)/OR.237 GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 26 page 27 


Amendment of Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference 


108. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Latin America 
GC(XXV)/650, 650/Corr.1 and 2) 


104. The draft resolution In document GC(XXV)/650 was adopted. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FUND FOR 
1982 (GC(XXV)/651/Rev.5) 


105. The PRESIDENT stated that by 1 p.m. on 25 September 1981, 56 Member 
States had pledged voluntary contributions amounting to $8 071 794, to which 
had to be added a pledge of $33 600 by Romania, making a total of $8 105 394. 
Because of the dates fixed for the adoption of their national budgets, some 
Member States were not yet able to pledge their contributions, but would do so 
at a later stage. 
106. The pledges so far amounted to 50.66% of the target figure. He therefore 
appealed to Member States that had not yet done so to pledge their voluntary 
contributions at their earliest convenience, for which purpose they should 
contact the Agency Secretariat. His appeal was addressed in particular to 
those Member States which were sufficiently developed to be able to afford 
easily their base rate share of the target recommended by the Board. 
The meeting was suspended at 11.25 p.m. and resumed at 12.15 a.m. 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXV)/644, 657) (resumed) 


107. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of the 
voting: 
was as follows: 


Abstentions: 17 
Valid votes: 145 
Required majority: 37 
Votes obtained: 
Panama 77 
Colombia 68 

109. Having obtained the required majority, Panama and Colombia were elected 
to the Board. 
110. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Western Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 8 
Valid votes: 154 
Required majority: 39 
Votes obtained: 


Spain 78 
Netherlands 76 


111. Having obtained the required majority, Spain and the Netherlands were 
elected to the Board. 
112. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Eastern Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions:


 2 
Valid votes:


 160 
Required majority:


 41 
Votes obtained: 
Romania 81 
Czechoslovakia


 79 



GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 28 


113. Having obtained the required majority, Romania and Czechoslovakia were 
elected to the Board. 
114. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was as 
follows; 
Abstentions; 5 
Valid votes; 157 
Required majority; 40 
Votes obtained; 
Zambia 79 
Algeria 78 

115. Having obtained the required majority, Zambia and Algeria were elected to 
the Board. 
116. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions; 5 
Valid votes: 7 6 
Required majority: 39 
Votes obtained; 


Bangladesh 76 


117. Having obtained the required majority, Bangladesh was elected to the 
Board. 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 29 


118. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Far East 
was as follows; 
Abstentions: 1 
Valid votes; 76 
Required majority: 39 
Votes obtained: 
Republic of Korea 47 
Mongolia 29 

119. Having obtained the required majority, the Republic of Korea was elected 
to the Board. 
120. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific or of the Far East was as 
follows; 
Abstentions: 1 
Valid votes: 80 
Required majority: 41 
Votes obtained: 


Indonesia 80 


121. Having obtained the required majority, Indonesia was elected to the Board. 
122. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, 
recalled that under Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold office from 
the end of the current session until the end of the twenty-seventh regular 
session of the General Conference, i.e. for a period of two years. 
123. He thanked the delegations of Ecuador and the United Kingdom, which had 
provided tellers, the two tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistance. 

GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 30 


APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL (GC(XXV)/658) 


124. The PRESIDENT declared that, pursuant to Article VILA of the 
Statute, the Board had appointed Mr. Hans Blix to serve as Director General of 
the Agency for a term of four years from 1 December 1981 and had requested the 
General Conference to approve that appointment by adopting the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXV)/658. 
125. The draft resolution in document GC(XXV)/658 concerning the appointment 
of the Director General was adopted. 
126. The PRESIDENT proposed that the Conference confirm the appointment of 
Mr. Blix by acclamation. 
127. The Conference confirmed the appointment of Mr. Blix to the post of 
Director General by acclamation. 
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blix entered the meeting. 


128. The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Blix that the Conference had approved his 
appointment to the post of Director General. He was pleased to be the first 
to congratulate him, and invited him to take the oath of office. 
129. Mr. BLIX took the following oath: 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyality, discretion and 
conscience the functions entrusted to me as Director General of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency, to discharge these 
functions and to regulate my conduct with the interests of the 
Agency only in view, and not to seek or accept instructions in 
regard to the performance of my duties from any Government or 
other authority external to the Agency." 


130. Mr. BLIX said that he wished to express his gratitude to the General 
Conference for its approval of his appointment as Director General. He 
pledged to do his utmost to live up to the confidence placed in him. It was 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 31 


perhaps inevitable that the choice of the executive head of an international 
organization was influenced by views on his country of origin. No one could 
entirely free himself from his background, and he had to admit that he was 
another Swede. It should be emphasized, however, that the step from a 
national to an international civil service was a fundamental one. It was 
important, indeed vital, that international civil servants enjoy the full 
support of all Member states. To that end, they must be guided in their work 
exclusively by the objectives and principles laid down in the statute of the 
international organization they served and by the guidelines established by 
the policy-making organs of that organization. 


131. An international organization was the common tool of its founding Member 
States and needed their continued co-operation to function successfully. The 
co-operation of its staff was also a prerequisite, and they must effectively, 
diligently and intelligently perform all the tasks incumbent upon them. He 
wished to assure the Conference that he would devote all his energies to the 
service of the Agency. He did not have the scientific background nor the 
erudition of Mr. Eklund. That was a handicap which he recognized and which 
could not be remedied. He trusted that it would be compensated to some extent 
by competence within the staff. 
132. During his 20 years as Director General, Mr. Eklund had helped to build 
up one of the world's most effective and competent international 
organizations, and all were indebted to him. He (Mr. Blix) could offer only 
the experience of a career during which he had been extensively involved in 
international law and organization, disarmament, detente and development 
co-operation. Energy, including nuclear energy, was an important item in all 
those areas. He had also learned from experience that it was vitally 
important to listen to the voices of all countries, both large and small, from 
both East and West, North and South. Harmony was created only when all the 
instruments were in tune. He was aware that much needed to be done by the 
Member States and by the staff of the Agaency to bring about agreement and 
consensus. The Member States did have different interests in various 

GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 32 


matters. However, all were agreed on the importance of nuclear energy, its 
technical promotion, its safe use and its public acceptance. The need for 
safeguards to guarantee exclusively peaceful uses of nuclear energy was also 
generally recognized. He was a strong supporter of technical assistance, 
which was vitally important to the developing countries and hence to the 
Agency. Lastly, he was deeply convinced of the need for international 
community building. The growing interdependence of all States had an 
inescapable corollary in the need for consultation, co-operation and common 
action. That was, first of all, the task of Governments, but the staff and 
the Director General of an international organization could and should 
facilitate and contribute to that task. 


133. The PRESIDENT observed that Mr. Blix came to the Agency with a 
distinguished career in international law, both in the academic field and in 
the service of his Government. He had gained experience in the work of the 
United Nations system and had achieved great distinction in representing his 
country in many important activities of the United Nations. He knew from 
experience the aspirations and problems of the developing countries and had 
worked in the cause of disarmament: both fields were central to the work and 
progress of the Agency. He had supported the cause of nuclear energy in his 
own country, and the Agency could look to him to champion the spread and 
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. He would be assuming the 
leadership of the Agency at a very important and difficult time and he could 
rest assured of the support of a competent and experienced Secretariat which 
had been guided over the previous 20 years by the very able, wise and 
dedicated leadership of Mr. Eklund. In following Mr. Eklund, Mr. Blix was 
perhaps taking on the most challenging task in his distinguished career. He 
(the President) was confident that he would carry out that task with 
dedication and distinction. 


134. On behalf of all Member States he wished to pay tribute to Mr. Eklund for 
his services to the Agency. Throughout his long career as Director General, 
he had given dedicated and selfless service to the development of peaceful 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 33 


nuclear energy and its techniques for the betterment of mankind and to the 
cause of non-proliferation. The Agency, the United Nations and the world had 
much to thank Mr. Eklund for, and he was sure that the Conference would join 
him in applauding Mr. Eklund's distinguished services to the Agency and 
wishing him and his family all good fortune in the years ahead. 


135. Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada), speaking as the outgoing Chairman of the 
Board of Governors, recalled that Mr. Eklund had served the Agency for a 
period of 20 years, during which nuclear energy had firmly established itself 
as the only foreseeable alternative to fast-disappearing fossil fuels. That 
achievement was in no small part due to Mr. Eklund's personal conviction and 
determination concerning the potential of nuclear power to enhance the quality 
of life. During that same period, the membership of the Agency had more than 
doubled. There had been many crises, some small and some large, but 
Mr. Eklund's calm counsel and personal dedication had always carried the 
Agency through. 


136. The outgoing Board of Governors had unanimously adopted the following 
resolution in appreciation of Mr. Eklund's long service to the Agency and to 
the nuclear community of the world: 
"The Board of Governors, 


(a) Recalling that Dr. Sigvard Eklund has served the Agency 
throughout his twenty years of service as Director General 
faithfully and with untiring dedication, 
(b) Deeply appreciative of the contribution he has made to the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy and the cause of 


peace, 


(c) Conscious that no man has done more than he to further the 
development of the Agency and the attainment of the objectives of 


its Statute, and 



GC (XXV)/OR. 237 
page 34 


(d) Mindful of his great human qualities and his achievements 
as a statesmen and scientist, 
Expresses its sincerest gratitude and deepest appreciation to him for 
the way in which he has discharged the responsibilities of his high 
office." 


137. Mr. Eklund had served well the cause of the individual Members of the 
Agency, and they offered him their gratitude, respect and homage for his 
outstanding leadership. They hoped that he would continue to be associated 
with their joint endeavours to implement the key objective of the Agency, that 
of accelerating and enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world. The charm, warmth and dedication 
of Mr. Eklund's wife, Anna-Greta, would long be remembered. On behalf of all 
concerned, he offered his deepest and humblest appreciation to both Mr. and 
Mrs. Eklund. 
The meeting rose and stood in prolonged applause. 


138. Mr. SETHNA (India) said that on behalf of his delegation he wished to 
congratulate Mr. Blix on his appointment and welcome him to the Agency. He 
was coming with a distinguished record in national and international affairs 
and was bringing with him qualities which would serve him well. He was 
replacing someone who had become a legend and in that difficult task he could 
be certain of the fullest support. 
139. Mr. Eklund had had the unique distinction of serving for five terms. 
When he had joined the Agency he had brought with him a sound knowledge of 
nuclear energy, which had been an essential qualification in the early years. 
He had guided the Agency with wisdom and courage through difficult times. His 
patience had become proverbial. Member States owed him a great debt of 
gratitude. 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 35 


140. As a farewell tribute, he proposed that Mr. Eklund be given the title of 
Director General Emeritus of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
141. The proposal was approved by acclamation. 
142. Mr. Eklund (Director General) said he wanted on his own behalf and 
that of his wife to express warm appreciation for the kind words that had been 
addressed to them during the general debate and the present meeting. It had 
been a privilege to serve the Agency and its Member States. He had been very 
happy in his work and the years had passed very quickly. He was deeply 
indebted to the specialists in Member States who had kept him informed of 
progress in the nuclear field. 
143. He thanked the Members of the Board of Governors, who had always been 
extremely helpful to him in his work. He particularly appreciated the 
confidence they had shown in him on the question of the appointment of senior 
staff. They had never refused to accept any of his proposals. 
144. He was also grateful to the members of the Secretariat. It had been a 
good and disciplined staff, which had worked well and efficiently. Many of 
them had shown those qualities which Dag Hammarskjold had thought essential 
for their profession - "an inner quietness and a heightened awareness". 
145. He wanted to make special mention of two people with whom he had had the 
privilege of working over a long period; Dr. Hall, the former Deputy Director 
General of Administration, and Professor Zheludev, former Deputy Director 
General of Technical Operations. He also wished to say a special word in 
gratitude to the staff of his office, who had served him so faithfully. 
Finally, he thanked the General Conference for the unexpected honour it had 
done him by conferring on him the title of Director General Emeritus. 

GC (XXV)/OR. 237 
page 36 


146. Congratulating his successor, Mr. Blix, he said he could wish him nothing 
better than that he should enjoy the same confidence, understanding and 
collaboration from the Board, Member States and the Secretariat as he himself 
had. 
147. The future of the Agency was closely related to the question whether 
nuclear energy had a long-term future or not. He himself belonged to those 
who thought that it did. In that context, the Agency could contribute much to 
the fostering of nuclear energy for peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world. 
148. Finally, he wanted once again to thank everybody on behalf of himself and 
his wife. 
The meeting rose and stood in prolonged applause. 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


149. Mr. KELLY (United Kingdom), speaking on behalf of the Western Europe 
group, said the fact that the Conference had successfully completed a 
difficult week of meetings was to a large extent due to the ability and wisdom 
of the President, who deserved everyone's deep appreciation. 
150. As spokesman for the Latin American countries, Mr. CALISTO VARELA 
(Ecuador) paid tribute to the President for the intelligent way he had guided 
the twenty-fifth session through its complex tasks. He also thanked the host 
country, Austria, for its hospitality, and the Secretariat for the competent 
and diligent work it had done. He assured the Director General elect of the 
full support of the Latin American countries. 
GC(XXV)/OR.237 
page 37 


151. Mr. BENNINI (Algeria), speaking for the African group, complimented 
the President on the competent and efficient manner in which he had conducted 
the discussions. He also congratulated Mr. Blix on his appointment and paid 
tribute to Mr. Eklund for the expertise and wisdom he had shown during his 
long period of office. 
152. Mr. OSZTROVSZKY (Hungary), acting as spokesman for the East European 
countries, said that under the President's wise guidance the twenty-fifth 
session had completed its work successfully in spite of many difficulties. He 
thanked the Director General warmly for all he had done both for the Agency 
and for the progress of nuclear energy, and he congratulated Mr. Blix on his 
appointment. 
153. Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada), speaking on behalf of the North American 
region, paid tribute to the skill, efficiency and patience of the President. 
154. For the countries of the Middle East and South Asia, Mr. AL-KITAL 
(Iraq) congratulated the President on the manner in which he had conducted the 
meetings. He also thanked the host country, Austria, and the City of Vienna. 
A special tribute was due to the Director General for the wisdom and 
dedication he had shown during his tenure of office. 


155. Mr. CAMPBELL (Australia) said it was a privilege to compliment, on 
behalf of the region of South-East Asia and the Pacific, the President on 
bringing the work of the session through to a successful conclusion. He 
expressed admiration for the accomplishments of Mr. Eklund as Director General 
and welcomed Mr. Blix to the Agency. He hoped that, after a period of tension 
and distraction in the Agency, all could now return to the normal consensus 
approach in the discharge of membership responsibilities. 
156. Mr. YAMATO (Japan), as spokesman for the countries of the Far East, 
thanked the President for his expert guidance. He expressed appreciation of 
Mr. Eklund's efforts over the previous 20 years and congratulated his 
successor on his appointment. 

GC (XXV)/OR. 237 
page 38 


157. The PRESIDENT thanked all the delegates for their kind words. It had 
been a privilege to serve at the session. He also thanked the Austrian 
authorities and the City of Vienna for their hospitality and expressed his 
gratitude to all delegates for their participation and to the Director General 
and his staff for providing the necessary support for the meetings. Before 
closing the session, he invited all those present to observe a minute's 
silence for prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


158. The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-fifth session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 1.20 a.m. 



