GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
March 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Monday, 20 September 1982, at 10 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. XUTO (Thailand) 
President: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 
- Opening of the session 1 4 
- Election of the President 5-32 
1 Election of officers and appointment of the 
General Committee 33 - 37 
2 Opening statements 38 62 
3 Applications for membership of the Agency 63 - 74 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 22 September 1982. 
**/ GC(XXVI)/662. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVI)/208/Rev.4. 


83-11 



GC(XXVI)/OR 238 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the twenty-sixth regular session of 
the General Conference open. 


2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the delegates 
to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation 
A11 present rose and stood in silence for a minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed the delegates, observers, representatives 
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies, representatives 
of other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and in particular 
the Foreign Minister and the Minister for Science and Research of Austria. He 
expressed his confidence that the present session which marked the Agency's 
twenty-fifth anniversary, would be significant in helping to set the tone for 
the following quarter century in the activities of the Agency. 


4. He wished to convey his gratitude to the Government of Austria for once 
again making available the Hofburg Palace. He was deeply appreciative of the 
tributes paid to his country and to him personally on the occasion of his 
election as President of the General Conference at its twenty-fifth regular 
session. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
6. Mr. YAMATO (Japan), speaking on behalf of the Far East regional 
group, said that he had great pleasure in proposing Mr. Siazon, delegate of 
the Philippines, as President of the twenty-sixth regular session of the 
General Conference. Mr. Siazon had been associated with the Agency for a 
long time, and his experience and expert knowledge made him eminently suitable 
for the office of President. He had every confidence that the Conference would 
successfully complete its business under Mr. Siazon's guidance. 
7. Mr. ROSENZWEIG-DIAZ (Mexico), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77, 
seconded the nomination of Mr. Siazon. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 3 


8. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America), on behalf of the North America 
"regional group, Mr. KEBLUSEK (Czechoslovakia), on behalf of the Eastern Europe 
regional group, Mr. THABAULT (France), on behalf of the Western Europe regional 
group, and Mr. GEORGE (Australia), on behalf of the South East Asia and the 
Pacific regional group, supported the nomination. 


9. Mr. Siazon (Philippines) was elected President of the General Conference 
for its twenty-sixth regular session by acclamation. 
10. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, congratulating Mr. Siazon on his election, 
said that his excellent qualifications for the office would certainly benefit 
the work of the Conference. 
Mr. Siazon (Philippines) took the Chair. 


11. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for electing him as President of 
the General Conference and expressed his appreciation to the delegate of Japan 
for his kind words and to the delegates of Mexico, the United States, 
Czechoslovakia, France and Australia for their support. ',In'conducting the 
affairs of the Conference he would be guided by the example of Mr. Xuto, who 
had presided over the preceding session with consummate skill and distinction, 
12. The current session of the General Conference marked the completion of 
the first quarter century m the life of the Agency, characterized by 
successful promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and by the elaboration 
and implementation of an effective international safeguards system. 
13. The promotional activities of the Agency had facilitated the transfer to 
developing countries of nuclear technology, which had become vital for the 
solution of diverse problems related to health, food and agriculture. In the 
energy sector, as a result of the Agency's assistance, nine developing 
countries had, at the end of 1981, 34 nuclear power reactors in operation or 
under construction with a total capacity of 21 GW(e). Despite the prevailing 
economic and other difficulties associated with the introduction of nuclear 
power, it was expected that by the turn of the centjij 1 >-?0 developing 
countries would have nuclear power programmes. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 4 


14. At the end of 1981, the Agency had been responsible for the implementation 
of safeguards agreements with 87 States, and had been actually applying safeguards 
in 51 States, i.e. to at least 844 nuclear facilities. Over the past 
few years the number of inspected facilities had grown by more than 50% and, 
thanks to greater resources and increased capabilities of the Agency, inspection 
work had expanded by 25% in 1981 alone. The number of inspectors had 
risen from 36 in 1972 to about 200 in 1982. New equipment had now become 
available for routine inspection; computerization had reduced the time and 
improved the quality of safeguards data processing. Lastly, the Agency's 
training programmes for inspectors had been significantly extended. Sovereign 
Governments, including those of nuclear-weapon States, had accepted international 
verification of large and sensitive facilities in their territories. 
15. The Agency's success over the past 25 years was cause for some satisfaction. 
It was clear, however, that the future could not be assured without 
renewed international efforts to find common approaches to current and future 
problems. 
16. Public perception of nuclear power had changed from the unquestioning 
confidence of the past to the critical attitude of today. There had in fact 
been steady erosion of public confidence, arising from concern about reactor 
safety and nuclear waste disposal and from the fear that civilian nuclear 
facilities might be misused for the production of nuclear weapons. 
17. One way of assuaging public concern might be the elaboration of international 
safety standards to be incorporated in international agreements. 
Internationally binding standards had already been included in the Convention 
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and in the Convention on the 
Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (London 
Dumping Convention). Moreover, the Convention on the Law of the Sea emphasized 
the role of international standards in national legislation and called for the 
inclusion in special international instruments of specific provisions dealing 
with particular sources of pollution. 
GC(XXVI)/OE.238 
page 5 


18. International standards would facilitate public acceptance of nuclear 
power, especially among developing countries, because of the assurance that 
nuclear power plants and waste disposal systems would be constructed and 
operated in accordance with standards adopted by States on the advice of the 
most eminent international experts in their respective fields. International 
standards would also ensure that exporters provided equipment and spare parts 
produced in accordance with internationally established specifications. In 
addition to simplifying licensing procedures, international standards would, 
to a certain extent, lead to standardization of components and plant design, 
and perhaps to higher availability factors for nuclear power plants, thereby 
improving the economic competitiveness of nuclear power. 
19. Establishment of waste disposal systems beside reprocessing plants might 
offer one solution to the nuclear waste problem. That concept had been 
regarded as a viable option during the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle 
Evaluation (INFCE), and deserved further international consideration, particularly 
in the light of difficulties with waste disposal experienced by 
countries with small nuclear power programmes. Provision of waste disposal 
services on a commercial basis by some countries having the necessary facilities 
should perhaps be studied more seriously within the framework of the Agency. 
20. There should be continuing reassessment of the Agency's role in order to 
enhance its ability to meet the growing public concern about nuclear safety. 
As to the handling of radioactive wastes, the Agency should prepare and publish 
authoritative standards to keep the public better informed. And the Agency 
should also develop a programme to stress more forcefully the environmental 
benefits of nuclear power with a view to the possible formation of a coalition 
of nuclear power advocates with environmentalists. 
21. Protest activities against the dumping of radioactive wastes in the ocean 
had recently become more violent. In future, some changes in the London 
Dumping Convention would have to be made in order to allay the growing public 
concern. The Agency could perhaps be given the responsibility of verifying 

GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 6 


the environmental assessments prepared by national authorities before permits 
for dumping operations were granted. In addition, international observation by 
regional bodies and the Agency should be a requirement for all dumping operations 


22. The failure of the 1980 NPT Review Conference and the inability of the 
Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly on Disarmament to reach 
a consensus indicated that all was still not well in the efforts of the international 
community to limit the spread of nuclear weapons and that the regime 
which had been built up was as yet a fragile one. Decisive steps by the major 
Powers towards nuclear disarmament, a comprehensive test ban treaty and a cutoff 
in the production of special fissionable material for weapons purposes would 
do much to strengthen the dedication of States to non-proliferation and to 
attract new adherents to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT). 
23. The Agency's safeguards system was a vital element in the non-proliferation 
regime and its continued development and universal acceptance were objectives 
to be pursued earnestly by the international community. The value of the 
system lay in the capacity it provided for independent judgements as to whether 
nuclear materials, equipment and technology were being used for non-peaceful 
purposes. The Agency's safeguards functions would therefore become meaningless 
as soon as its ability to carry out independent verification was impaired. 


24. Many States had accepted the non-proliferation regime on the condition 
that they would have full access to the materials, equipment and technology 
necessary for their development. Today it was worth recalling that basic 
bargain. 
25. For many States, guaranteed access to fuel cycle services was an essential 
part of energy security, and thus a matter of national survival. In their 
quest for energy security, States would, if necessary, try to develop an 
indigenous nuclear fuel cycle capability, which could become a shortcut to 
nuclear proliferation. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 7 


26. The best approach would be to pursue the basic trade-off involved in NPT. 
A guarantee of full access to nuclear material, equipment and technology under 
the Treaty should be exchanged for an undertaking, also under the Treaty, to 
accept safeguards on all nuclear activities. The absence of guaranteed access 
to fuel cycle services even for States which had accepted full-scope safeguards 
was an encouragement to others to accept only facility-specific safeguards and 
to negotiate for access to fuel cycle services on an ad-hoc basis. On the 
other hand, reluctance to accept full-scope safeguards lent support to the 
rationale underlying the policy of restricted access to nuclear material, 
equipment and technology. A successful non-proliferation regime required that, 
while States must accept full-scope safeguards, they must also have guaranteed 
supplies of nuclear material, equipment and technology. 
27. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was currently engaged in a 
lively dialogue on unhampered access to fuel cycle services and on nonproliferation. 
It was hoped that the work of CAS and the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy would lead to a generally accepted set of rules for 
international trade and co-operation in the nuclear field, and that, while such 
a dialogue was in progress, no further abrupt and unilateral changes in supply 
policies would be made. Moreover, the Agency was in a position, by expanding 
its technical assistance and co-operation programme, to help those developing 
countries which were planning to start or had already embarked on nuclear 
power programmes. 
28. During the Conference it was planned to hold a seminar on technical 
co-operation in order to enable Member States to provide better guidance to the 
Board on future policies and procedures for the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme. He strongly urged delegations to participate in that seminar and 
to share their experience with a view to improving one of the principal 
activities of the Agency. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 8 


29. Proper emphasis on the essential link between a country's technical 
assistance requests and its national development objectives would greatly 
enhance the effectiveness of the Agency's technical co-operation programme. 
That approach would rightly favour multi-year projects which were more integrated 
and more easily geared to co-ordinated objectives. Its success would 
depend, however, to a large extent, on the availability of a sufficient level 
of multi-year resources for implementation of projects. 
30. Member States in Asia and the Pacific had for the past ten years enjoyed 
the benefits of regional co-operation. At present, 13 Member States of the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related 
to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA) were engaged in eight joint programmes 
in different sectors of nuclear science and technology. The Agency should 
support the establishment of similar collaborative arrangements in other 
regions. Regional projects were not only more cost-effective because of their 
higher multiplier effects; they also promoted personal contacts and created 
mutual confidence among scientists in the region. They provided the necessary 
basis for regional arrangements which could become corner-stones for international 
nuclear co-operation. 
31. The success of the Agency during the past 25 years had been due to the 
dedication to the cause of international co-operation, even during some very 
difficult periods in its history, of many persons and in particular the former 
Directors General Mr. Sterling Cole and Dr. Sigvard Eklund. He was sure that 
the Conference would join him in acknowledging their outstanding contributions. 
32. In conclusion, he expressed confidence that, given the customary good will 
and spirit of co-operation among delegates, the Conference would successfully 
complete its long programme of work. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 9 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


33. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rules 34 and 40 of its Rules of 
Procedure, the General Conference had to elect, on proposals of the President, 
eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and five 
additional members of the General Committee. He proposed that the provisions 
of Rule 40 relating to the election of the additional members of the General 
Committee be suspended and that instead a total of six additional members be 
elected. 
34. Following consultations which had been held between representatives of the 
eight geographical areas, he proposed that the delegates of the following 
Member States be elected as Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: Chile, 
the Federal Republic of Germany, India, Indonesia, Japan, Morocco, the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America. 
35. He further proposed Mr. Copithorne, the delegate of Canada, as Chairman of 
the Committee of the Whole and the delegates of the following States as 
additional members of the General Committee: Bolivia, France, the German 
Democratic Republic, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland and Zambia. 
36. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
37. The General Committee was thus duly appointed. 
OPENING STATEMENTS 


38. The PRESIDENT said that he wished to extend, on behalf of all, a 
warm welcome to the Federal President of Austria, Dr. Rudolf KirchschlSger, and 
to thank him for honouring the Conference with his presence at the opening 
meeting of the session. He invited Dr. Kirchschlager to address the General 
Conference. 
39. Dr. KIRCHSCHLAGER said that it was twenty-five years since the Agency 
had been founded and had chosen Vienna as its Headquarters. It was a pleasure 
and a privilege for him to congratulate the Agency on its jubilee, both 
personally and on behalf of the Republic of Austria, 

GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 10 


40. He was grateful for the fact that the Agency had chosen Vienna as the site 
of its Headquarters and had become part of the international and scientific life 
of Austria. As a result of its experience in co-operative work with the Agency, 
Austria had taken the decision to make use of its neutrality, its history and 
its present realities to become, as it were, a central meeting place in the 
world. There had been a direct path between the first session of the General 
Conference in 1957 and the recent opening of the Vienna International Centre, 
and the Agency had contributed greatly to that progression. 
41. Quite apart from its functions as host country, Austria was grateful, as 
a Member State, that the Agency had so effectively fulfilled all the objectives 
stated in Article II of its Statute - "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". 
It had also, insofar as sovereign States had allowed it to do so, helped to 
ensure through the exercise of its supervision and control functions that 
atomic energy would not be used for military purposes. It was not the Agency's 
fault that arms limitation or disarmament had not yet become effective and that 
the fear of nuclear weapons had had psychological consequences for the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. The Agency had, to the extent made possible to it, 
carried out its safeguards activities with exceptional competence. For that 
work and for the rest of its programme it had earned international trust and 
respect in a measure far above the average. The good reputation of the Agency 
was founded on the high professional quality and competence of all its staff. 
42. An international organization contributing to peace, health and prosperity 
must have an influence on very many branches of life. In the case of the 
Agency, that influence had grown from year to year. The basis for an even 
greater strengthening of the Agency in the future had been laid. It was to be 
hoped' that the sovereign Member States would make that possible. 
43. The PRESIDENT thanked Dr. Kirchschlager for his inspiring and thoughtprovoking 
words. He wished to take the opportunity to convey, through the 
Federal President, the deep gratitude of all associated with the Conference to 
GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 11 


the Austrian people for the hospitality and co-operation that those working 
in or for the Agency had enjoyed over the past quarter of a century. He also 
wanted to express his appreciation of the valuable contribution to the Agency's 
activities made by Austrian members of the staff. 


44. Mr. MOWAFFAK ALLAF, the representative of the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations, said he wished to convey a message to the General 
Conference from the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar. 
45. As the Agency completed twenty-five years of its existence and activity, 
it was entitled not only to congratulations but also to gratitude from the 
world community for fulfilling a unique responsibility. The Agency had the 
two-fold task of promoting the use of nuclear energy for human betterment and 
of ensuring that such use did not serve any military purpose. The nature of 
that task corresponded to the inherently dual potential of modern technology, 
which could enhance and enrich human life and also bring about death and 
destruction on a scale never before imagined. 
46. Much international attention had recently been devoted to safeguards. 
The Agency had done pioneering work in that field. Some of the technology 
which had been developed and the extensive experience gained in the elaboration 
of the safeguards system, the negotiation of agreements and the application 
of the measures involved could well be of use in evolving and implementing 
verification measures appropriate to other agreements for the limitation of 
various weapons of mass destruction. 
47. However, while the safeguards system was undoubtedly an important element 
in the effort to prevent the spread of military nuclear capability, it 
remained only one measure among several that were required. The Agency's 
safeguards were, therefore, to be seen in the relatively limited context of 
their purpose and application and, in his recent statements, the 
Director General had drawn attention to that inherent limitation. The great 
value of safeguards was as a means of establishing and increasing the 
confidence among nations which was fundamental to international security. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 12 


48. It was to be noted that some progress had been made with respect to an 
international plutonium storage scheme and that the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply was evolving proposals which could contribute to the work of the 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. Important benefits could result from a 
realistic discussion of Che uses of nuclear energy for economic, social and 
scientific purposes and the Agency was in a position to supply essential data 
for such a discussion. 
49. Excellent co-operation existed between the United Nations and the Agency. 
He expressed his deep appreciation of the Agency's efforts and conveyed to the 
General Conference his best wishes for success in the challenging task entrusted 
to it. 
50. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) read to the General Conference 
the following message from the President of the United States, :Jr. Ronald Reagan 
"The people of the United States join me in extending sincere congratulations 
on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
founding of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 


:'The International Atomic Energy Agency has established an exemplary 
record of outstanding performance as an international organization and has 
played a critical role in expanding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and peaceful nuclear research throughout the world. The United States 
continues to consider the International Atomic Energy Agency and its programmes 
of highest priority. Its safeguards programme is a vital element 
in preventing the further spread of nuclear explosives. 


"I congratulate you and the staff members of the Secretariat who have 
all contributed to the International Atomic Energy Agency's success. With 
best wishes for your success in meeting the challenges ahead." 


51. Mr. M0R0Z0V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) read to the 
General Conference the following message from the General Secretary of the 
Central Committee of the Communist Party and President of the Presidium of 
the Supreme Council of the Soviet Union, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev: 
"I wish to send my cordial greetings to the participants in the 
twenty-sixth regular session of the General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 13 


"Over the twenty-five years of its existence, this authoritative 
international organization has achieved substantial successes. The 
IAEA's many-faceted activity aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear 
weapons over our planet and at erecting a reliable barrier against the 
acquisition of this most dangerous weapon of mass destruction by those 
who would wish to use it as a threat, has won the broadest possible 
recognition. 


"To achieve the aim of limiting the nuclear arms race, the fullest 
possible consolidation of the non-proliferation regime has been and 
remains a priority objective. It also constitutes an indispensable prerequisite 
for broad-based international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. 


"The IAEA has been doing extensive work to promote the use of the 
energy of the atom for the socio-economic development of States and for 
increasing prosperity. The role of the Agency in developing nuclear 
power has been expanding. Today the IAEA is the recognized international 
body for co-ordinating the efforts of States in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 


"At a time when the danger of nuclear war is increasing, the Agency's 
activity is acquiring a special meaning and significance. The Soviet 
people are convinced that the Agency can and must make a still greater 
contribution towards the removal of the threat of a nuclear catastrophe. 
Everything possible should be done to ensure that atomic energy - a very 
great achievement of the human mind - should serve the interests of 
peace alone and never become a means of destroying life on Earth. 


"Being one o£ the sponsors behind the creation of the IAEA, the 
Soviet Union has always actively supported and will continue to support 
the Agency's work aimed at achieving those noble objectives. 


"I wish the participants in this session of the General Conference 
success in their work and I express the hope that its results will 
promote mutual understanding and co-operation." 


52. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) said he wished to convey 
a message from j_c. Honecker, the General Secretary of the Central Committee 
and Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic. 
53. The Agency was celebrating its twenty-fifth anniversary in an international 
situation of extreme complexity where the danger of nuclear war had increased. 
There was nothing more important than the task of securing peace through 
effective action to end the arms race, and the Agency had an important role to 

GG(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 14 


play in strengthening international security and co-operation. Its commitment 
to the goal of non-proliferation and its activities in safeguarding the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy deserved deep appreciation. The German Democratic 
Republic supported efforts aimed at universal acceptance of the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. It attached particularly great importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme and would continue to support it fully. 


54. Mr. ALWAN (Iraq) said that he wished to transmit a message to the 
General Conference from the President of his country, Mr- Saddam Hussein. 
55. The Agency's twenty-fifth anniversary was an appropriate occasion for Iraq 
to express its appreciation of the Agency's efforts to promote the development 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy in accordance with the principles of its 
Statute. 
56. In pursuance of its inalienable right to technological development and 
economic, social and cultural progress, Iraq had established scientific plans 
to achieve the best possible development and exploitation of its resources. In 
that context it had naturally sought alternative sources of energy to replace 
the fossil fuel resources which were gradually being depleted, and the only 
feasible technology available at the present time for that purpose appeared to 
be nuclear power. Iraq had therefore set about acquiring the infrastructure 
and technology needed for building up a nuclear capability, and, in proof of 
its exclusively peaceful intentions, had ratified NPT and concluded a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency under which all its nuclear activities had 
been subject to IAEA safeguards since 1973. Iraq had fully complied with its 
obligations, as was borne out by the Agency's annual report and by the confidence 
shown by a large number of countries advanced in nuclear technology, 
including France, Italy, India, Brazil, Romania and the USSR, which had cooperated 
with Iraq in its nuclear activities57. 
However, Iraq's major nuclear facility had been subject to premeditated 
Zionist aggression unprecedented in history, which had been aimed both at the 
existing international regime of non-proliferation and at the rights and 
efforts of the Iraqi people. That act of aggression constituted a gross 
violation of international law and of the Charter of the United Nations. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 15 


58. Nevertheless, it was to be hoped that the deliberations and decisions at 
the present regular session of the General Conference, in the twenty-fifth year 
of the Agency's existence, would be crowned with success and would foster the 
transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes in the interests of 
justice, progress and prosperity. 
59. Mr. EILAM (Israel) read out a letter from the Prime Minister of his 
country, Mr. Menachem Begin, congratulating the IAEA on its twenty-fifth 
anniversary and on its excellent performance in the complex fields of its 
responsibility. Israel continued to have confidence in the Agency's safeguards 
system and in its ability to promote the principles embodied in its Statute. 
60. Mr. XUTO (Thailand) said that he wished to convey a message to the 
General Conference from the Prime Minister of his country, 
General Prem Tinsulanonda, congratulating the IAEA on behalf of the Government 
and people of Thailand and extending their best wishes for the future 
activities of the Agency. Thailand had been an active Member of the Agency 
since its establishment in 1957 and continued to support its contribution to 
the important problem of the utilization of atomic energy for world peace and 
the prosperity of mankind. 
61. Mr. BEN REDJEB (Tunisia), speaking on a point of order, suggested 
that the Conference should devote a period of silence to the memory of the 
innocent victims who had died during the recent events in Beirut. 
62. The PRESIDENT invited the delegates to observe one minute of silence 
in honour of the victims of those events. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(XXVI)/663) 


63. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the General Conference had before it 
document GC(XXVI)/663, referring to an application for membership of the 
Agency by Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, and 
containing a recommendation by the Board of Governors and a draft resolution. 
He invited delegates to comment on that application. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 16 


64. Mr. SHASH (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the countries of 
the African group, supported the request by Namibia, represented by the 
United Nations Council for Namibia, to be admitted to the Agency as a Member. 
The United Nations and the International Court of Justice considered the 
occupation of Namibia by South Africa an illegal act, and after a long 
struggle for national independence and freedom Namibia had at last become a 
member of a number of organizations, including the World Health Organization, 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International 
Labour Organisation; Namibia had also been represented at a number of international 
conferences. The General Assembly of the United Nations had requested 
the.Agency to accept full participation by Namibia, represented by the 
United Nations Council for Namibia. The Board of Governors had received that 
request favourably and had confirmed that Namibia was capable of carrying out 
the obligations of membership of the Agency and of acting in accordance with 
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the 
Agency's Statute. He therefore proposed that the General Conference 
accept Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, as 
a new Member of the Agency. 
65. Mr. PI BIASE (Uruguay), speaking on behalf of the Latin American 
group, Mr. NY.EMETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic), speaking on behalf 
of the Eastern European group, and Mr• AL-KABBANI (Saudi Arabia), speaking 
on behalf of the Middle East and South Asia group, supported the proposal 
that Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, should 
be accepted as a Member of the Agency. 
66. Mr. KELLY (United Kingdom), speaking on behalf of the Governments of 
Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, the United Kingdom and the 
United States of America, made the following statement: 
"Our Governments have been pursuing efforts since 1977 to end the 
conflict over Namibia and to bring the territory to independence through 
free and fair elections supervised by the United Nations. Through all 
that period it has been our aim to remove by negotiations the obstacles 
preventing implementation of Security Council resolutions 385 and 435. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 17 


"These negotiations have been difficult, and progress has often 
seemed painfully slow. But recent consultations between The Five and 
the parties involved have brought us to a point where agreement on all 
but a small number of issues is complete. We all share a desire to move 
rapidly to implementation of the settlement proposals endorsed by 
Security Council resolution 435. 


"In this climate it would be deeply regrettable if any action were 
taken on Namibia in the international context which could upset the 
delicate compromises that have been reached in these negotiations, and so 
put at risk the process which we and all the international community hope 
will bring Namibia to independence in 1983. 


"When the Board of Governors voted in June this year on the proposal 
to admit Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, 
to membership of the Agency, it was pointed out on behalf of The Five 
that Namibia does not satisfy the criteria for statehood required for 
IAEA membership. Our Governments have not changed their view that to 
admit a territory to membership before it has become a sovereign independent 
State would be contrary to the Agency's Statute. 


"Although our Governments will welcome the membership of Namibia 
when it becomes an independent State, for the foregoing reasons our 
Governments' reservations against the proposal before the Conference 
must stand." 


67. Mr• YAMATO (Japan) said that his delegation had reserved its position 
and abstained from voting when the Board of Governors, during its meetings in 
June 1982, had taken the decision referred to in document GC(XXVI)/663, and 
had explained its reasons for doing so at that time; his delegation's 
position on that question remained unchanged. Also, he said that the Government 
of Japan firmly supported the early independence of Namibia. 
68. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to adopt 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVI)/663. 
69. It was so agreed. 
70. The PRESIDENT invited the representative of the United Nations 
Council for Namibia to take the floor. 
71. Mr. STARCEVIC (United Nations Council for Namibia)•thanked the 
General Conference for following the recommendation of the Board of Governors 
and admitting Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, 

GC(XXVI)/OR.238 


page 18 


to membership of the Agency. As the legal administering authority for Namibia 
until independence, the Council was acting strictly in accordance with the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and was determined 
fully to honour the obligations of membership of the Agency. 


72. The admission of Namibia to the Agency was a significant event both for 
the suffering people of occupied Namibia and for the Agency and its activities 
and goals. As the world's fifth-largest producer of uranium oxide, Namibia 
deserved to be heard in the Agency. The uranium and other resources were one of 
the principal reasons for the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by the 
apartheid regime of South Africa. In violation of the Charter and relevant 
resolutions of the United Nations, and of the Council's Decree No. 1 for the 
protection of the natural resources of Namibia, South Africa continued to 
exploit Namibian uranium in collusion with companies from several other 
countries. South Africa was known thereby to have acquired the capability to 
produce nuclear weapons, which posed a severe threat to peace and security in 
southern Africa, and to have contributed to the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons in several other countries. 
73. South Africa had been a Member of the Agency since its establishment in 
spite of those activities, which had never been subject to any effective 
restrictions or control. The Council for Namibia would therefore join those 
Members that opposed any steps or decisions which might lead to the 
strengthening of South Africa's nuclear weapons capability or its uranium 
extraction technology. The Council intended to participate in the consideration 
of all questions with which the Agency was concerned, but its prime responsibility 
would remain the protection of the rights and interests of the people 
of Namibia and the promotion of early independence of the Territory. As a 
Member of the Agency the Council would denounce and oppose the illegal 
exploitation of Namibian uranium and other natural resources by South Africa 
and seek the assistance of all the mechanisms, expertise and information offered 
by the Agency to end the occupation and exploitation of Namibia. The Council 


GC(XXVI)/OR.238 
page 19 


was convinced, therefore, that its admission to membership of the Agency 
would contribute both to the promotion of the goals and principles of the 
Agency and to the advancement of the cause of a free and independent Namibia. 


74. Mr. NIMPUNO (Indonesia), speaking on behalf of the countries of 
South East Asia and the Pacific, welcomed Namibia as the 111th Member of the 
Agency and expressed confidence in Namibia's willingness and ability to play 
an active part in strengthening the IAEA and pursuing its goal to promote the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the wellbeing of the human race. 
The meeting rose at 12 noon. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
March 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 21 September 1982, at 10.10 a.m. 


President: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 
later: Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) 
later: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 


5 Arrangements for the Conference 
1 -4 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation of 
items for initial discussion 1 -2 
(b) 
Closing date of the session and opening 
date of the next session 3 4 
6 Voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund for 1983 5 


_


4 Statement by the Director General 
6 55 


7 General debate and annual report for 1981 
56 - 173 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United States of America 56 - 81 
France 82 - 103 
Yugoslavia 104 - 113 
Federal Republic of Germany 114 - 124 
Iraq 125 - 133 
India 134 - 149 
Argentina 150 - 173 


*/ 
A provisional version of this document was issued on 24 September 1982, 


**/ GC(XXVI)/662. 


The compositions of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVI)/INF/208/Rev.4. 


83-16 



GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXVI)/662) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee, at 
its meeting the previous day, had authorized him to report on the results of its 
consideration of the agenda and the allocation of items for initial discussion. 
The General Committee recommended that the agenda should consist of all the 
items contained in the provisional agenda, as set out in document GC(XXVI)/662, 
that the items should be allocated for initial discussion as indicated in that 
document, and that, subject to the desirability of making the best use of the 
time available, the order in which the items were considered should be that 
indicated in the same document. 
2. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
3. The PRESIDENT further informed the Conference that the General 
Committee had authorized him to report that it recommended fixing Friday, 
24 September 1982, as the closing date of the twenty-sixth regular session 
and, exceptionally, because two major conferences of interest to General 
Conference delegates were scheduled to take place in September 1983, fixing 
Monday, 10 October 1983, as the opening date of the twenty-seventh regular 
session of the General Conference. 
4. 
The recommendations of the General Committee were accepted. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1983 


5. The PRESIDENT said that in June 1982 the Agency's Board of Governors 
had agreed to continue - for the years 1984, 1985 and 1986 - the practice of 
recommending indicative planning figures to serve in fixing targets for 
voluntary contributions to the Fund in order to provide for a certain degree 
of predictability as far as the targets for those years were concerned. With 
regard to 1983, however, for which year the Board had already recommended a 
target, it was important for the Secretariat to be able to make an early 
assessment of the total funds that would actually be available. Accordingly, 
all delegations in a position to do so were urged to notify the Secretariat, 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 3 


before the end of the current session, of voluntary contributions to be made by 
their countries to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1983. He 
hoped that he would be able to report, towards the end of the current session, 
that a large percentage of the target figure for 1983 had been pledged. 


STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


6. Mr. BLIX (Director General), after expressing gratitude to 
President Kirchschlager and Members of the Austrian Government for honouring the 
Conference by their presence at the opening session, said that on 29 July it had 
been 25 years since the IAEA had come into existence. It was most fitting that the 
session of the General Conference which marked that twenty-fifth anniversary 
had been immediately preceded by a conference on the many years of accumulated 
nuclear power experience. The conference held the previous week had offered no 
striking new revelations but had given a serious and sober evaluation of where 
nuclear power now stood. The exuberant optimism of the 50s and 60s and the 
dark pessimism of the 70s had given way to a realistic assessment and analysis 
of the problems and potentials of nuclear energy, and there was no doubt that 
there was an important place for nuclear power in modern society. Nine per cent 
of the world's total electricity was now generated by nuclear power plants, and 
it was expected that nuclear power would provide 20 per cent of the world's 
electricity by the end of the decade, when it and other energy sources would 
be needed to relieve some of the pressures on oil supplies. 


7. However, the fact remained that nuclear power today faced a number of 
serious problems, mainly stemming from adverse factors which could not be 
influenced by the utilities or by the nuclear industry itself. He had in mind 
the lower than anticipated growth rates for electricity consumption, resulting 
from the present world economic situation, the effect of extraordinarily high 
interest rates on the capital-intensive nuclear industry, and the climate of 
uncertainty created by delays and frequent changes of requirements in licensing 
processes. 
8. There were, nevertheless, some factors which the nuclear community could 
influence, and they should be viewed by it as a challenge. When one examined 
that challenge one was bound to ask in what way the IAEA was at present being 
used and how it could be put to better use in the future. The Agency was 
an instrument where knowledge and experience could be pooled, where a division 



GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page <4 


of labour could be agreed on, and where guidelines, standards and conventions 
could be worked out. It was a channel for technical assistance in the applications 
of nuclear science and technology, including nuclear power. It was also 
an instrument offering States international safeguards - verifying the peaceful 
nature of their nuclear installations and thereby creating confidence. 


9. The Agency was enjoined by its Statute to promote nuclear power. The 
lead and construction times for nuclear power plants needed to be reduced, 
so as to cut down costs, but without jeopardizing stringent safety requirements 
In that context, it would be useful to have internationally agreed basic 
criteria for safety, testing and quality assurance, industrial standards and 
effective project management. The Agency was playing and would continue to 
play its role in those efforts. 


10. The average availability factor for nuclear power plants, on the other 
hand, needed to be increased. Nuclear power plants in several countries had 
clearly shown that an availability factor of close to 30 per cent and sometimes 
higher was feasible; international exchange of information, including 
the supply of information to the Agency's Power Reactor Information System 


(PRIS) and evaluation of the data thus made available, could be of use in such 


endeavours. 


11. Developing countries which were planning to embark on nuclear power 
programmes needed assistance. The Agency could help by advice on appropriate 
methods of assessing the merits of nuclear power in relation to other sources 
of energy. Once decisions to launch nuclear power programmes had been taken, 
the Agency could assist with advice regarding the development of the necessary 
infrastructure and the use of available manpower. 
12. Research had to continue on the frontiers of technology; and in that 
connection the Board of Governors had approved a programme of study of the 
potential contribution of advanced reactors to the world energy supply. That 
study would include at least a preliminary consideration of later generations 
of power reactors and of fusion, in which the Agency had long played a 
significant role. 
13. He now wished to turn to a subject that was basic to the Agency's 
ability to fulfil its statutory role of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, and crucial to the issue of public acceptability - namely the subject 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 5 


of safety. The Agency's growing involvement in that field had been marked in 
June by the publication of a review of nuclear safety for 1980-81. It was 
proposed in future to issue the review annually, and thus contribute to 
making the information available in that field less fragmentary and more 


reliable. 


14. By mid-1982, almost 3000 reactor-years of operating experience had been 
accumulated by the more than 250 nuclear power plants operating in 23 countries. 
That experience showed, first, that nuclear power plants had been operating 
safely - there had been no accidents which had resulted in fatalities directly 
caused by radiation - and secondly, that even in a very serious accident, such 
as the one at Three Mile Island (TMI), the nuclear safety systems worked, 
even if there was still room for improvements in effectiveness. 


15. For the general public the effect of TMI had been very different. It 
had been felt that the borderline of disaster had almost been reached and that 
next time it might be crossed. A rapid completion of the clean-up operation 
at TMI would mitigate the fears that had been aroused, and, even more 
importantly, a continuing good safety record in the industry at large would 
lead to greater acceptance of nuclear power. 
16. The Statute authorized the Agency to establish standards of safety. That 
had been done and continued to be done with the emphasis now shifting from the 
development of norms to their implementation. One of the foundations of 
nuclear safety was the regular inspection of nuclear plants by national 
regulatory authorities. Should the Agency's nuclear safety missions be 
increased and operational safety review teams be offered as a regular service 
to States which so requested? That was already provided for in Agencyassisted 
operations, and was foreseen as a possibility in Article III.A.6 
of the Statute. 


17. A recent step which the Agency had taken, and one which had been 
recognized by the Nuclear Power Experience Conference as being very useful, 
was the organization of a world-wide system for reporting abnormal 
occurrences. The aim was to provide information about the causes of accidents 
and to arrange for international reviews of ways of avoiding them. That was 
an important project and he urged all concerned to assist in making it a 
success. One of the best ways of preventing accidents or of mitigating their 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 6 


consequences was to make operators aware of incidents that had occurred at 
other facilities. 


18. Co-operation could also be of great value in the area of safety research, 
and emergency planning was another area where new initiatives for international 
co-operation were being discussed within the Agency. A group of experts had 
recently submitted suggestions as to how emergency assistance between countries 
could be facilitated, one proposal being that a draft agreement might be 
developed which countries could utilize as a model for negotiating bilateral 
or regional agreements. 


19. There was thus much to be done in pursuing the various safety initiatives 
already launched. Such an effort, leading to rigidly defined, internationally 
adopted standards and to advisory services in the relevant fields would 
in all likelihood increase public confidence in and acceptance of nuclear 
power. They might also facilitate international trade in nuclear installations 
and materials. There could, however, be certain drawbacks associated with 
rigid standards. For one thing it might be more difficult to agree on such 
standards than on mere recommendations, and for another there might be a risk 
that they would lag behind the progressing state of the art. Governments 
might wish to examine that approach to safety matters and the Secretariat 
would be ready to facilitate such an examination. 
20. Hardly any aspect of nuclear power generation engaged the concern of the 
public more than waste disposal. It was understandable that waste products 
which would remain radioactive for thousands of years should evoke concern, 
even though they were isolated from the environment. But it was sometimes 
forgotten that most forms of energy generation produced wastes; nuclear 
waste was highly toxic, but was small in volume and could be contained; 
fossil fuels and wastes from them were today major pollutants of the 
atmosphere, the land and the seas. 
21. In his view, public concern with radioactive waste had had the healthy 
effect of intensifying research and prompting a scientific response of very 
high quality. There was a broad consensus in the nuclear science and 
engineering community that adequate technical solutions were available today, 
so much so that nuclear energy should have a great environmental advantage 
over energy generated by coal and oil. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 7 


22. It was natural that the Agency should have been very much involved in the 
management of nuclear wastes. Through the pooling and exchange of information 
under Agency auspices broad agreement was being reached and guidelines on 
technical requirements regarding site selection, suitability of waste forms and 
so on would be published. The first phase of a programme on underground 
disposal would be completed by the end of 1984. 
23. Regarding the interim storage of spent fuel, some valuable suggestions 
were contained in a report recently submitted to him by an expert group. 
If the industrial authorities responsible for spent fuel management and the 
Governments of Member States found merit in the ideas advanced by the 
experts for co-operation on a national or international basis in matters of 
storage of spent fuel, they might wish to work out practical arrangements for 
that purpose. The Agency, could, if so desired, serve as the venue for the 
necessary contacts. 
24. Turning to the subject of the exchange of nuclear technology, he 
observed that the search for an international consensus was still in progress. 
That matter was now before the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), and 
he hoped very much that CAS would be able to chart a course out of the 
present impasse. The issue tended to look like a North/South one, but in 
reality it was not thus limited. The question of the assurance of supply had 
arisen among industrially advanced countries as well. 
25. That issue was not only a question of concern to the IAEA, but had also 
been raised at the NPT Review Conference in 1980 and at the General Assembly 
of the United Nations, which had decided to convene, at Geneva in 1983, a 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Development. 
26. In his view that Conference could be of great interest to many countries 
as offering an opportunity to assess realistically both the advantages and the 
problems associated with the introduction of nuclear power, and the relevance 
to them of a wide variety of other applications of nuclear science, e.g. in 
agriculture, medicine and industry. The main consideration having prompted 
the convening of the Conference, however, was undoubtedly how to achieve 
adequate assurance of supply with appropriate non-proliferation guarantees. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 8 


27. A full answer to that question had not yet been found by CAS, although 
some progress had been made. It had been said with some justification that 
for many States already having or planning small nuclear energy programmes 
it could hardly be economically sound to develop their own enrichment and 
reprocessing facilities. If that argument were advanced, however, logic would 
seem to require that equal emphasis be laid on the fact that building 
facilities to store and finally dispose of highly radioactive waste was, 
likewise, a very expensive undertaking for the operators of small nuclear 
programmes. What was really needed, therefore, for a small programme was 
guaranteed access to the whole gamut of fuel cycle services, including waste 
disposal. 
28. With mountains of nuclear weapons in the hands of the great Powers, and 
conflicts xn many places, the world was a very dangerous place. There was a 
growing feeling that nuclear disarmament measures were desperately needed 
and that vertical proliferation must not only be checked but reversed. There 
was also an awareness that the world would become even more dangerous than it 
was today if nuclear weapons spread further. A great many countries had 
concluded that it was in the interest of their security not to acquire nuclear 
weapons, and a large majority of them had given evidence of that conviction 
by committing themselves to a non-proliferation regime, the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) or the Tlatelolco Treaty or both. 


29. The Agency was categorically committed, through decisions by its policymaking 
organs in conformity with its Statute, to assist in the effort to 
prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. There was moreover a link 
between that role and the task of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear power, 
in the sense that any further spread of nuclear weapons or explosive capacity 
and a continued failure to take steps to reduce or freeze present nuclear 
arsenals would help to turn large segments of world public opinion against 
nuclear power. 
30. Regrettably no headway had yet been made towards nuclear disarmament; 
yet, even so, non-proliferation efforts had been remarkably successful. 
Fundamental in that regard was the continued political determination of States, 
but the safeguards regime operated by the Agency contributed in a very 
important way by verifying compliance with the commitments made, thereby 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 9 


creating a much-needed climate of confidence. Those operations might - indeed 


should - discourage possible violations by making the risk of detection too 
great. It was important, he felt, to put the purposes of safeguards in that 
order. States did not invite safeguards or accept them in order to be deterred 


from some possible inclination to divert fissionable material: they invited 
and accepted them because they wanted to create confidence. They thus had an 


interest in safeguards being sufficiently comprehensive to be fully credible. 
Merely cosmetic operations or rubber-stamping would not only discredit the 
Agency but would also fail to serve the interests of the State concerned namely 
the establishment of confidence. 


31. The world might well have arrived at a critical juncture for both nuclear 
disarmament and non-proliferation. In the latter, progress had recently been 
made through the important accession to NPT of Egypt and Vietnam. The concept 
of nuclear-free zones on the Latin American model was also being discussed for 
other areas of the world, for example the Middle East. However, the commitment 
to non-proliferation and the acceptance of full-scope safeguards to verify 
such a commitment was still not universal. Safeguards were not without 
problems, but the more serious problems, which lay outside the Agency's 
competence, began where safeguards ended. 
32. There were, however, problems which were the Agency's own, problems it 
had to cope with. In the past year safeguards operations had come in for a good 
deal of criticism - though mostly not from Member Governments. The irrelevance 
or exaggeration of many of the points made must not lead anyone to discard the 
comments wholesale. Safeguards operations had only existed on a substantial 
scale for some ten years and had expanded very fast during that period. It 
would be unreasonable to expect them to be perfect. It would also be most 
unwise to try to ascribe to them qualities which they were inherently incapable 
of having. They could not forecast the future policies of States, but only 
help to verify present activities. They could not physically prevent anything, 
only provide reports. Yet, they were a unique institution. For the first time 
in history sovereign States had invited an international organization to 
perform inspections on important installations in their territories. That 
task must be exercised with tact, but also with a thoroughness which would 
guarantee the requisite assurance. 

GC(XXV1)/OR.239 
page 10 


33. Constructive criticism of safeguards must be welcomed, and the Agency 
itself was the first to examine the shortcomings and to suggest improvements. 
More manpower and more equipment were needed to handle the growing volume of 
work. One must also recognize that with the organization's growth it would 
have to be modified in order to cope most effectively with the tasks before it. 
Some proposals to that effect were already in the budget document, and more 
would be worked out in the coming year. 
34. The Board of Governors had decided in February to undertake a review of 
various important aspects of the safeguards system. That was to be welcomed. 
So far, verification approaches had been developed for nuclear facility types 
and for individual facilities. However, as safeguards were concerned with the 
possibility of diversion by States rather than operators, it might be reasonable 
to put greater emphasis on the relationship between all the facilities of the 
entire fuel cycle m a given State. How to handle the safeguarding of large 
reprocessing and enrichment plants most satisfactorily was also a matter still 
awaiting solution. 
35. Another issue to which the Board would wish to address itself was the 
transparency of safeguards operations. A balance must be found between the 
requirements of protecting commercial secrets and other confidential information 
and the benefits of responding to the interest of legislators, the media and 
other groups by pursuing an open information policy. 
36. As safeguards techniques evolved and better equipment and methods became 
available, arrangements made between the Agency and the States concerned would 
need updating. Provided the proposed new techniques did not infringe 
commercial secrets or operational convenience, there should not be any conflict 
between the wishes of the Agency and the interests of States. Both would 
wish to have the most cost-effective modern methods available to achieve the 
purpose, namely, to provide confidence. 
37. It was sometimes asked if the Agency's safeguards system could serve as a 
model in the broader field of arms control. A point to be noted, in that 
regard, was that safeguards were applied to peaceful installations - not arms and 
that they were confined to identified installations and material. Those 
were limitations. Even so, they constituted very important evidence that 
verification in loco was a politically acceptable and viable method of creating 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 11 


confidence. Furthermore, acceptability was not confined to non-nuclearweapon 
States: three nuclear-weapon States were currently accepting the 
application of Agency safeguards to some of their facilities, and he had 
had the honour, in speaking for the Agency at the recent United Nations 
Special Session on Disarmament, to welcome the invitation of the Soviet 
Union to the Agency to apply safeguards to some peaceful Soviet nuclear 
installations. It was hoped that talks on those operations could start soon. 


38. The Agency had no mandate to participate in negotiations regarding 
global or regional nuclear arms control. However, it did have a long tradition 
of readiness to provide services within its experience and competence in the 
context of international agreements. It had by now considerable technical 
experience in the operation of safeguards and could assist, if requested, when 
such operations were needed - for instance in the context of regional military 
denuclearization, or of a cut-off of the production of fissionable material 
for weapons use. 


39. The Agency was categorically committed under its Statute to assist the 
developing countries, and the attention given to those activities had increased 
over the past year. The question was whether they could be further expanded 
and improved. 
40. The important role played by the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste deserved special mention: the fact that the Centre had 
recently received significantly increased financial and other support by the 
Italian Government gave cause for satisfaction. 
41. Basic scientific training remained an important area of Agency assistance, 
and there was a broad spectrum of applications which had great 
usefulness for developing countries. A few concrete examples would suffice. 
First, electric power generation: for those developing countries which were 
seriously considering the introduction of nuclear power as a viable option, 
the Agency offered assistance and guidance in energy planning, site selection, 
safety regulations and manpower development. Food and agriculture was another 
sector in which a large part - some 20 per cent - of the Agency's assistance 
was given. Examples of that aid were to be found in isotope- and radiationassisted 
work to maximize the biological fixation of atmospheric nitrogen in 
field crops. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 12 


42. Health and medicine accounted for another large part of the Agency's 
co-operation with developing countries. Nuclear techniques for the investigation 
and prevention of parasitic diseases prevalent in the developing world and 
for promoting and improving the treatment of cancer by radiation were still of 
primary importance. 
43. The technical co-operation programme with developing countries had grown 
rapidly, particularly in the last five years. From what had been basically a 
training programme with a budget of little more than $100 000 in 1958, the 
programme had now evolved into an operation for which some $20-30 million a 
year were allocated, counting all sources of funds. 
44. One could only welcome the fact that the Board of Governors had 
unanimously recommended the 1983 budget for technical co-operation and 
indicative figures for ensuing years. 
45. As of 31 July 1982, over 90 per cent of the target for 1981 had been met. 
For the current 1982 programme, only about 50 per cent of the pledges have been 
paid as of 31 July, and the total amount of pledges fell short of the 1982 
target. He accordingly felt bound to utter an appeal for the payment of 
pledges made, and for the making of pledges which would enable the targets 
to be reached. An appeal was due not only to donor countries but also to 
recipient countries; as of 31 July 1982 more than $1 million had been 
outstanding in their national currencies as assessed programme costs. 


46. All Governments that had given extra-budgetary support to various projects 
deserved thanks. Since there was no longer a surplus of non-convertible 
currencies, it might also be in order to appeal to Members contributing such 
currencies to make additional contributions for extrabudgetary activities. 
47. The technical co-operation programme was thus experiencing rapid growth, 
and the levels attained made a continuous examination of quality and orientation 
necessary. Better utilization of resources was in fact the aim of the 
Evaluation Unit to be established in 1983. 
48. More joint discussion of the general orientation of the programme would 
be valuable. At its meetings in June the Board had expressed interest in a 
review of policies in the field of technical co-operation, That was a welcome 
initiative to keep a growing programme responsive to the interests of 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 13 


recipients and donors. Even now, during the current session of the Conference, 
a seminar was to be arranged where ideas, comments and criticism could be 
advanced. As a basis for the discussion a Secretariat paper had been prepared 
pointing to significant policy questions - for example what the proportions 
of resources devoted respectively to expert services, manpower training and 
equipment should be, what balance should be sought between multi-year 
programmes and short-term activities, and whether a larger share of available 
resources should go to the least developed countries. 


49. The Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA), which was celebrating its tenth 
anniversary in 1982, had been very successful, for instance in disseminating 
knowledge aoout industrial applications of radiation and isotope technology 
and about food irradiation. Should that pattern be emulated? The possibility 
of a second regional agreement was currently being discussed among some Latin 
American States. In a policy review, some thought might also be devoted to 
the idea of possibly "packaging projects" that could be preformulated or 
modularized to meet certain recurrent needs in developing countries. 
50. Conference resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 called for a substantial increase 
in the number of staff members drawn from developing areas at all levels, and 
particularly at the senior and policy-making levels. The reason for recruiting 
on as wide a geographical basis as possible, as demanded by the Statute, was, 
of course, to ensure that the Secretariat was enriched by the experience and 
knowledge that each Member State could offer. 
51. There was a report before the Conference on the practical steps that had 
been taken to implement that resolution. It would be seen that, in the past 
year, three out of the four Directors appointed came from developing countries. 
One year was obviously not long enough for the results of the efforts undertaken 
to make themselves felt. What he had in mind in particular was a training 
programme for young graduates from developing countries as well as more 
thorough advertising of posts, especially in developing countries, in an effort 
to bring more candidates to the fore. 
52. The Agency's staff was its most valuable asset. To maintain the high 
quality of staff which had contributed so much to the good reputation which 
the Agency generally enjoyed, he would continue to give paramount consideration 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 14 


as prescribed by the Statute - to professional excellence, trusting that Member 
States would continue to make available to the Agency the best of their 
qualified specialists. 


53. The Agency had a vital role to play in connection with most of the major 
issues of current international importance: food and health, energy and 
disarmament. Inevitably, as it confronted some of those issues, the values 
and interests of Member States would sometimes differ and some controversy was 
accordingly to be expected. In a world where clashes and conflicts, 
exacerbated by deteriorating economic conditions, were unfortunately legion, 
it would be too much to expect no spill-over at all into the Agency's field 
of technical competence. 


54. There was, however, no reason to regret that the Agency was deeply 
engaged in such matters. On the contrary, one should be gratified that in the 
Agency an instrument had been provided that could be used to tackle them. On 
the occasion of the Agency's 25th anniversary it was fitting to remember that 
it had taken a long time to build up that instrument. The best possible 
birthday present to the Agency - and the best tribute to those dedicated 
individuals who had participated in its founding, nurtured it in its beginnings 
and never lost their enthusiasm for its objectives - would be to preserve its 
reputation as a technical, objective body, to exercise patience and prudence 
in dealing with difficult issues, and to concentrate on those areas where the 
greatest contribution could be made. 


55. In closing, he wished to pay tribute to the Austrian Government and to 
the City of Vienna for a quarter of a century of steadfast support for the 
Agency. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1981 (GC(XXVI)/664) 


56. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) said he wished to read a 
message from the President of the United States: 
"The people of the United States join me in extending sincere 
congratulations on the occasion of the celebration of the 25th 
anniversary of the founding of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
The IAEA's record of achievements during its first quarter century 
stands as a model for other international organizations. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 15 


"Since the dawn of the nuclear age, the international community has 
faced the critical task of controlling the dangers of the atom while 
realizing its peaceful promise. The IAEA has played a vital part in 
this endeavour. Under its auspices, a growing number of countries have 
embarked on the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in generating 
electricity, in medicine, in agriculture, and in other fields. Its 
safeguards system serves us all, allowing nations to demonstrate their 
commitment to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and helping to prevent 
the further spread of nuclear explosives. 


"A strong, effective Agency will be even more necessary to meet the 
challenges ahead. The United States is determined to work with other 
countries to assure that the Agency can successfully meet those challenges 
from strengthening technical co-operation for sharing the benefits of 
nuclear energy to improving and strengthening the technical and institutional 
safeguards against its misuse. It is our profound hope that others 
will share this determination. 


"It would be a tragedy for succeeding generations if we permit this 
organization to be weakened or undermined by political issues and concerns 
which are extraneous to the technical purposes for which the Agency was 
founded. It is essential that this organization continue to pursue its 
central purposes, and as long as it does, it will have the full support 
of the United States. 


"As the Agency begins its second quarter century, it is time to 
rededicate ourselves to the goals set forth in the Agency Statute. This 
generation needs to ensure that the General Conference in the year 2007 
will be able to look back with pride and satisfaction on the accomplishments 
of the IAEA as we are doing today." 


57. The 80 founding members of the Agency had recognized that nuclear power posed 
special problems for Governments - problems which could only be tackled 


successfully within the framework of a unique international institution. The 


overwhelming power of nuclear energy had led them to devise novel approaches for 


bringing the world's nations together to seek agreement on the best and safest 


ways of developing the new energy source. They had envisaged an organization 


with a technical mission. Moreover, they ha~ recognized that to exclude 


nations which met the Agency's rules for reasons not germane to the Agency's 


mission would seriously reduce the chances of achieving the important goals 


they envisaged. It was hoped that highly charged disputes over policy differ


ences between Governments could be limited to within the framework of the 


Agency so that full attention could be given to the complex issues of science, 


technology, economics, and the international controls that arose in the appli


cation of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. They believed also that 


managing the new technology effectively would be a global issue, and that all 



GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 16 


nations engaged in nuclear activities would participate in the work of the 


A'gency. 


58. In that regard, he welcomed and strongly supported the Director General's 
call to Member States to preserve its reputation as a technical and objective 
body and to concentrate on those areas where it could make the greatest contribution. 
59. It was fitting that the 110 current Members should look back with pride 
and satisfaction on the unprecedented contributions that nuclear energy had 
made under the Agency. It had been a quarter century of impressive achievement, 
during which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had developed from infancy to 
a mature industry making a significant contribution to energy supplies, 
economic well-being and human progress. Nuclear generated electricity scarcely 
more than an idealistic dream 25 years before - now served millions 
of people, and research reactors were contributing to medicine, agriculture, 
industry and the growth of scientific knowledge. 


60. He was especially proud of the technical and institutional contributions 
the United States had made. It had worked with other nations to establish 
the Agency and had been at the forefront of nuclear energy development. Since 
the Atoms for Peace programme had been established in 1954, more than 150 billion 
dollars has been invested in manufacturing facilities and power plants. The 
United States had been extensively involved in all aspects of the nuclear fuel 
cycle and related technologies - enrichment, reprocessing, waste management, 
spent fuel handling and recovery, reactor safety, safeguards, and the research 
supporting those activities. Nearly 75 per cent of the nuclear reactors 
operating in 1982 either used United States equipment directly, or were based 
on United States supplied technology. His country had contracted to supply 
enrichment services to 137 power reactors in foreign countries and had provided 
training for thousands of nuclear scientists from around the world. 


61. In 1983, the United States would host the International Conference on 
Waste Management. Many of the participants would have the opportunity to 
visit waste management research facilities and potential disposal sites under 
consideration by the United States. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 17 


62. The purposes of the Agency could be stated quite simply, in terms of the 
straightforward yet indispensable notion that the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful uses and the undertaking of verifiable and good faith commitments to 
respect such uses were inseparable. It was from that idea that the Agency's 
objectives logically followed - to promote the use of nuclear energy for the 
benefit of mankind while providing the maximum possible assurance, through 
safeguards and other means, against the diversion of nuclear material and equipment 
to non-peaceful uses. The simplicity of that central idea was the Agency's 
greatest strength. It was a tribute to the wisdom and vision of the founders 
of the Agency that their initial ideas had survived and remained the bedrock 
upon which the organization was built. 


63. The twofold purpose remained the only basis on which Governments could 
proceed in order to achieve the twin objectives of peaceful nuclear energy 
development and non-proliferation. That was true notwithstanding the very 
real strains that over the years had challenged their collective will and 
ability to implement the basic concept of the Agency. 
64. It would have been surprising if all strains had been avoided. The 
world had not stood still. Given the political, economic and technological 
changes that had occurred, differences between Governments on questions relating 
to the central idea of an international agency, the interpretation of its 
obligations and the mechanisms by which they would be carried out had been 
inevitable. 
65. Both supplier States and their customers had sometimes taken actions or 
adopted positions that had aggravated those strains. Thus, on the issue of 
access to nuclear energy, there had been disagreements over the export policies 
of the supplier States. Changes in those policies had created anxieties about 
the assurance of supply. 
66. At the same time, apprehensions had also arisen about increasing 
proliferation risks associated with some nuclear exports or with some 
indigenous nuclear programmes. Such concerns had been inspired by the 
existence of significant unsafeguarded activities in some countries and by the 
presence of facilities and materials with weapons potential in regions of 
international tension. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 18 


67. In an organization as diverse as the Agency, and in an environment as 
dynamic as the nuclear energy field, Member States had to learn to cope with 
change and manage their differences without losing sight of the larger purposes 
that united them. 
68. The various problems had occurred against the background of another 
unfavourable trend. There had been a decline of public confidence in nuclear 
energy and a dramatic slowdown in the growth of nuclear power. While the role 
of nuclear power was impressive compared to what it had been 25 years before, 
it was disappointing compared to expectations. Governments needed to reflect 
on the reasons for that trend and to consider its implications. 
69. Despite those facts, it was clear that the opportunities for the use of 
nuclear energy for the benefit of mankind were greater than ever. The 
long-term energy requirements of the world demanded the successful use of 
nuclear energy. At the same time it was essential that there be adequate 
world-wide safeguards and controls. 
70. The essential task before them was to breathe new life into the basic 
objective of the Agency - the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
within the framework of adequate safeguards and non-proliferation assurances not 
by futilely attempting to ignore recent difficulties but by learning 
from history. 
71. There were no easy solutions to their problems, but the United States 
Government would be an active and constructive participant in a collective 
Agency effort to reach a consensus on how to proceed. 
72. Firstly, they must squarely face the fact that a public perception of 
weaknesses in the safeguards system, coupled with scepticism about the 
response by States if safeguards agreements were violated, would be disastrous 
for the expansion and development of international nuclear co-operation and 
for nuclear non-proliferation. 
73. Secondly, they must commit themselves to continued improvements and 
reforms in the safeguards system. The United States supported the Director 
General's interest in the question of the transparency of the safeguards 
operation and encouraged increased transparency to the extent that it did not 
compromise the legitimate right to have commercial information protected. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 19 


Strengthening technical safeguards, however, was only part of the task. The 
political and institutional framework that supported safeguards was vital if 
public confidence was to be restored. 


74. As President Reagan had stated, the United States would view any material 
violation of international safeguards agreements as having profound consequences 
for international order and bilateral relations. It was to be hoped that all 
nations with commitments to non-proliferation would also view such a violation 
as a matter of the greatest seriousness and would be willing to work with 
the United States in developing appropriate measures to ensure compliance. 


75. Thirdly, the coverage of safeguards should be broadened, to include, for 
example, the acceptance of full-scope safeguards by those States that had not 
yet done so. 
76. Fourthly, public understanding of what the safeguards system could and 
could not do must be improved. Exaggerated expectations as much as actual 
weaknesses of the system itself had contributed to public questioning of the 
Agency. 
77. Fifthly, they must continue to strive for universal adherence to NPT, 
while recognizing possible regional solutions, such as the Tlatelolco Treaty, 
under which countries might be better able on their own to foster nuclear 
restraints. 
78. Finally, to realize the peaceful benefits of nuclear energy while assuring 
that non-proliferation concerns were met, they must strive to reduce the 
motivations for acquiring nuclear weapons by improving regional and global 
security. 
79. The importance of the Agency had never been more evident. As world 
events had reminded them only too often, the peaceful resolution of international 
conflicts sometimes remained more a hope than a reality. They had 
to master their differences and to address themselves urgently to the real 
task, namely, to take advantage of the promise of nuclear power for solving 
the world's energy problems within a framework that ensured its use for 
peaceful purposes alone. Only then would public acceptance be won - and 
justified. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 20 


80. It would indeed be a tragedy if, instead of addressing the great challenges 
before them, the Agency were to succumb to the extraneous pressures being 
brought to bear upon it. They must keep their eyes firmly fixed on the 
purposes that had brought them together and reject the temptation to inject 
into their proceedings unrelated issues and objectives. Nothing would more 
discredit the Agency and erode its essential support than for it to surrender 
to a spiraling process of politicization and to turn its back on its original 
ideals and principles. Among the most vital of those wa* the principle of 
universality of membership. 


81. They were at a turning point. Either they would rededicate themselves 
to the vision of twenty-five years before and find the means to continue the 
success they had enjoyed or they would impose upon the Agency burdens that it 
could not bear. They should resolve now to take the first path and thus 
preserve the possibility of meeting again in another twenty-five years to 
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of a strong, vital and respected 
International Atomic Energy Agency. They must succeed for they were not 
likely to have a second chance. 
82. Mr. HERVE (France) recalled that the Agency had been set up 25 years 
earlier with two closely related objectives - to promote the development of 
atomic energy as a contribution to world progress and to ensure that the 
purposes of that development were exclusively peaceful. With the world 
economic crisis becoming more serious and the international community having 
to face an energy challenge, his Government wished to speak out in favour 
of a balanced yet resolute development of nuclear energy in the world, and 
at the same time to bear witness to the fact that the Agency had not failed 


in its mission of ensuring the peaceful use of facilities and material. 


83. The solution of the energy crisis which the world had been facing for some 
ten years called for voluntary, coherent measures at the national and international 
levels involving strict control over consumption and appropriate 
utilization of all available energy sources. 
84. The uncertainties in oil production and the sharp fluctuations of oil 
prices had brought home to the world the fact that fossil fuel resources would 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 21 


not last forever. Temporary slippage of prices associated with business 
conjuncture should not be allowed to hide the fact that the reasons for tension 
would remain long in the market. It was well-known that unemployment could be 
overcome only by a return to faster growth, which depended on the availability 
of sufficient and diversified energy sources at acceptable prices with security 
of supply. The developing countries confronted a difficult energy situation. 
The essential improvement in their living standards inevitably required greater 
energy consumption and thus increased access to the most flexible energy source, 
namely oil. In an interdependent world, the developed countries thus had 
the duty to control their own demand and to reduce as much as possible their 
use of imported oil, an objective which had been adopted by the heads of the 
most highly industrialized States at their summit meeting in Ottawa in 1981. 
In that spirit they had expressed the hope that the delay in nuclear energy 
development in their own countries would be rapidly overcome. 


85. Nuclear energy in fact had a vital role to play because, together with 
coal, it represented a substitute for oil for large-scale needs. However, 
except in France, Japan and the USSR, the development of nuclear power 
programmes had slowed down a great deal; that had occurred, indeed, in 
many countries. Apart from the slowing down of growth in relation to the 
predictions made in the early 1970s, the reasons for the fate of nuclear 
power programmes were more political and emotional than technical or economic. 
86. Nuclear power was an industrial fact: it was available. The reactors 
in operation accounted for about 10 per cent of the world's electricity 
production, which represented the equivalent of 180 million tons of oil; in 
1981 they had accordingly saved that much oil. Around the year 2000 nuclear 
power could well account for a third of electricity production and thus 
meet 10 per cent of the world's primary energy demand. 
87. The world had a vital need for stable and adequate energy sources. 
Those energy sources would have to cover a substantially increasing demand, 
if only because of population growth in the Third World and the essential rise 
in the standard of living there - even if the most favoured countries were 
reasonable enough to control their own consumption. 
88. A solution could be found only if everyone made an effort. As for nuclear 
energy, he wished to appeal to the will of those who held political responsibility 
by citing the experience of France. 

GC(XXVI)/OE.239 
page 22 


89. In order to meet its needs, France had to rely exclusively on its own 
efforts and its own technological resources. It had adopted, democratically 
but resolutely, a balanced energy programme supported by a long-term policy, 
according nuclear energy its due place. 
90. That nuclear energy was safe, reliable and economical was borne out by 
the experience of operation of 272 reactors over more than 30 years, during 
which period there had been no accidents for nuclear reasons which had had 
deleterious effects on the environment. 
91. In France, the existence of a standardized industrial programme permitted 
a number of positive assessments: 
(a) 
Nuclear power stations had a very satisfactory load factor of the 
order of two thirds; 
(b) 
With a relatively limited organizational and storage effort, France 
had been able to ensure five years of nuclear power plant operation 
without any uranium supply from outside; 
(c) 
It had therefore been able to rely on nuclear power to supply 
two fifths of its current electricity needs, and would cover about 
three quarters of its requirements with nuclear power at the end of 
the decade when the reactors under construction or planned were 
commissioned; 
(d) 
Thanks to that investment effort, and thanks also to advanced 
standardization and adherence to construction schedules, the cost of 
the kilowatt-hour supplied by Electricite de France to private 
individuals and industry was at present the cheapest in Europe, as 
had been emphasized by the International Union of Producers and 
Distributors of Electrical Energy (UNIPEDE). 
92. Being aware that the use of nuclear power met with psychological hurdles, 
his country had decided on a series of measures designed to inform the public, 
to gain its confidence and to ensure responsible opinion. 
93. It had to be admitted that the world economic situation was hardly 
favourable and that the electricity companies in many countries faced the 
prospect of limited consumption in economies beset with crisis; that 
situation offered little inducement to investment. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 23 


94. He felt bound to stress once again that the developed countries possessing 
nuclear technology should make up for the delay they had experienced and 
reflect the need for world solidarity in their own efforts. World solidarity 
meant among other things that nuclear power must have its due share in their 
long-term investment plans; and their efforts should be geared to the long 
term, for undue delay would mean that ten years or more would be required 
before the necessary facilities could be sited, built and commissioned. 
95. Although nuclear power was already a source of energy in developing 
countries, the pace of development was moderate, in keeping with their technical 
and financial requirements. However, it was necessary even now to prepare for 
the future, and in that context the development of medium-size units for 
limited electricity distribution networks should not be neglected. 
96. Referring to the Agency's role in limiting the risks of nuclear weapons 
proliferation, he pointed out that the use of nuclear power in industrialized 
countries and its appearance in developing countries necessarily entailed a 
wealth of commerce, including the export of reactors, the sale of materials, 
fuel and services, transfers of technology and training programmes. However, 
those exchanges could take place only if the international community was 
assured -hat there would be no diversion for military purposes. That was one 
of the reasons why the Agency had been established, and there should be no 
ambiguity regarding the Agency's role. The Agency's safeguards system was a 
unique example of a verification system under which Member States opened 
installations on their territory for inspection. The aim of the system was 
essentially to build confidence. However, the Agency was not an international 
police force, but rendered a service to the world community through the 
acceptance of safeguards by its Member States. 
97. The purposes of safeguards were threefold: firstly, to detect rapidly 
the diversion of nuclear materials for non-peaceful purposes; secondly, to 
dissuade Member States from engaging in diversion by virtue of the risk of 
detection; thirdly, to provide an alarm system in the event that a Member 
State violated its commitment to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The 
dissuasive power and, in sum, the efficiency of the system were directly 
proportional to the credibility of safeguards and the degree of assurance, 
and the Agency was duty-bound to demonstrate that credibility. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 24 


98. Agency safeguards had so far fully met their objectives and were proving 
reliable. There was, however, also room for improvement since safeguards had 
to be constantly adjusted to advances in technology and applied to a growing 
number and variety of installations. His delegation therefore welcomed the 
detailed discussion of safeguards which had been scheduled for the series of 
Board meetings in February 1983. The time had come to ponder over the very 
concept of the safeguards strategy which should keep pace with the technical 
development of the countries concerned and not consist merely in applying 
mathematical criteria to each installation. Similarly, the scope of safeguards 
could be usefully enlarged in some cases, technical resources improved, full use 
made of the inspection procedures provided for in the relevant agreements and 
a greater degree of transparency introduced into safeguards activities and 
reports. 


99. The work of the Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage (IPS) should 
be considered in the same context. The development of techniques for 
reprocessing spent fuel highlighted the obvious need to introduce a scheme for 
the international storage of excess plutonluri under the control of the Agency. 
The practical means of implementing the relevant provisions of the Statute 
should be considered at an early date. 
100. The recent history of international nuclear relations, marked as it had 
been by confrontation, had highlighted the degree to which stability or at least 
predictability in the conditions imposed by suppliers was essential to the 
development of nuclear power. That development required large-scale investment 
and involved long periods of time. Calling into question the political rules 
and conditions originally laid down could only disrupt the normal course of 
events and might drive certain nations to undertake costly attempts at 
self-sufficiency. Stability or predictability in supplier conditions was thus 
an important factor from the point of view of non-proliferation, too. The 
Agency had an important role to play in that area and was in fact conducting 
discussions on those topics. 
101. The Agency had helped to open up nuclear development in the Third World 
through its excellent technical assistance and co-operation policies. That 
programme had gradually grown, the funds available for it having quadrupled 
in the last decade. The Agency's work in that field was particularly 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 25 


important and should be constantly promoted, especially the aspect of manpower 
training. 


102. There were, however, other areas which the Agency could usefully explore, 
namely non-energy-related uses of nuclear techniques. Those could substantially 
benefit the poorest developing countries. Initiatives aimed at promoting the 
use of food irradiation in the most deprived regions would be particularly 
useful in helping to overcome problems of storage and distribution. The Agency 
might consider conducting experimental projects in that field and might also 
attempt to encourage the large-scale use of radioisotopes in agriculture.-' 
103. The Agency had fulfilled well its role as an effective controlling body 
which was essential to substantial international nuclear trade. The Agency 
was in a position to adapt to increasing trade, and to the growing number and 
diversity of nuclear facilities. The credibility acquired by the Agency was 
one of the guarantees of and conditions for an expansion of nuclear trade 
and must be preserved. It was therefore essential that the politicization 
which had occasionally marked the work of the Board of Governors in recent 
years should now give way to a more relaxed climate which would be more likely 
to assure the international community that the Agency would always continue 
to fulfil its tasks effectively. 


104. Mr. PESIC (Yugoslavia) said that he took great pleasure in welcoming 
to the Conference the new Member of the Agency - Namibia, represented by the 
United Nations Council for Namibia. 
105. Twenty-five years had passed since the establishment of the IAEA. Since 
then there had been many opportunities of reviewing its activities. Both 
praise of the Agency's achievements and criticism of particular aspects of its 
programmes and organization had been motivated by the desire to improve the 
Agency's work so that it might be more successful in rising to the challenges 
posed by current developments and carrying out the tasks entrusted to it by the 
international community. 
106. On the whole, the Agency had not always been sufficiently prompt and 
effective in adjusting itself to the changing times, with unfavourable effects, 
primarily for the developing countries. Nevertheless, its performance had been 
as successful as the often opposing interests of Member States permitted, and 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 26 


there were ample reasons for satisfaction with what the Agency had achieved in 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


107. The current session of the General Conference and the Agency's 
twenty-fifth anniversary were taking place in an extremely unfavourable 
international situation which was adversely affecting the developing countries 
in particular. It was the task of Member States and of the Agency to make 
decisive efforts to remedy that situation, the effects of which were 
unfortunately strongly felt in the specific field of international co-operation 
because of the numerous contradictions inherent in that field. Those contradictions 
were, at present, as serious as they could possibly be. The prospects 
of resolving many important issues and problems which should have been dealt 
with long ago were dim. But it was precisely in such unfavourable international 
conditions that the Agency should play a responsible and appropriate role in 
promoting and stimulating co-operation and in establishing mutual trust and 
confidence in the possibility of safe application of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes, all of which was in the interest of both developed and 
developing countries. Both groups of countries should therefore work together 
towards establishing mutual confidence and enabling the Agency to discharge its 
tasks in a more equitable and balanced manner in the future for the benefit of 
all concerned. 
108. It was disturbing that optimism and pessimism should alternate so 
frequently in the important field of international relations and co-operation. 
It was highly important to achieve stable relations and co-operation because 
of many basically long-term implications inherent in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. The availability of conventional energy sources was such as 
to leave no room for hesitation. In spite of everything, nuclear energy 
was the only reliable energy alternative for many countries, a fact that should 
be understood both within the Agency and outside it. 
109. The current session of the General Conference was the last before the 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, the preparations for which had not been 
progressing satisfactorily. The failure of the second meeting of the 
Preparatory Committee for the Conference had shown that States did not all 
aspire to the same objectives. As a result, special responsibility devolved 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 27 


upon the participants in the forthcoming third meeting of the Preparatory 
Committee, which was to take place in Vienna in late October and e'arly 
November 1982. All States members of the Preparatory Committee should invest 
maximum efforts to make up for lost time so that the Conference itself was not 


jeopardized. Obviously the Conference was not being convened for its own sake, 
but with a view to finding solutions and possible ways and means for promoting 


international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Agency 
should contribute both directly and indirectly to the Conference and to the 
preparations for it; the Agency's role was clearly defined by the relevant 
United Nations resolutions, and the Preparatory Committee was responsible for 
the implementation of that role. However, it was worth considering what the 
Agency's role in the development and promotion of international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would be after the Conference, since it was 
impossible to discuss the peaceful uses of nuclear energy without, at the same 
time, examining the activities and role of the Agency. 


110. The Agency's annual report for 1981 indicated that only one country had joined 
the countries having operating nuclear power plants in 1981. On the other hand, 18 new 
reactors had been put into operation in countries already possessing nuclear 
capacities. That was not in line with the optimistic forecasts made at previous 
times, but the reasons for the temporary slowing-down in the construction of 
new nuclear power plants were well known. The report, however, emphasized that 
a further steady and accelerated increase in the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes was indispensable for the future economic and social wellbeing 
of countries. 
111. The report also showed that the number of countries which had accepted NPT 
and Agency safeguards had increased. That was a good sign, but it should be 
remembered that the developing countries could not merely assume obligations; 
they had a right to expect a more equitable share in the development and use of 
nuclear energy. It was a cause for concern that significant nuclear installations 
remained outside the Agency's system and free of any other form of 
international control in Israel and South Africa, whose regimes were characterized 
by an unprecedented aggressiveness. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 28 


112. The agenda for the present session also included other major issues, some of 
which had unfortunately been on the agenda for a long time, hampering the General 
Conference's work and forcing it constantly to seek fresh arguments. Those 
issues included the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, the financing of 
technical assistance, the inadequate balance between promotional and regulatory 
activities, and the inadequate staffing structure of the Agency. Since the 
reasons why those issues had not been solved were not misunderstanding or lack of 
arguments on the part of the developing countries, there was no need to repeat 
the old arguments or to present new ones in support of the developing countries' 
demands. It was in the interest of the Agency and all its Member States to find 
solutions to those problems as soon as possible. 
113. Like many other countries, Yugoslavia was forced to turn to nuclear energy, 
and therefore attached exceptional importance to all questions related to the 
development and peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to the elimination of the 
problems standing in the way of the development of international co-operation 
in that field. Yugoslavia pledged its full support for the Agency's activities, 
and in particular for those aimed at assisting the developing countries to 
accelerate their development programmes and the use of nuclear energy in meeting 
acute and urgent energy needs. Co-operation between the Agency and Yugoslavia 
in the past had been diverse, fruitful and mutually beneficial, and efforts 
would be continued to ensure that that co-operation was enriched and further 
developed in the future. 


114. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) noted that the twenty-fifth 
anniversary of the Agency was being celebrated that year. Those 25 years 
embraced practically the whole development of the peaceful use of the atom from 
the early beginnings to the present situation where there were more than 
500 power reactors in operation or under construction. It was probably the 
first time in history that a new energy source had been introduced on such a 
wide scale in such a short time and it was certainly the first time that an 
international organization had accompanied, helped and monitored the utilization 
of a new energy source with the wide backing of the international community. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 29 


The Agency had played an essential role in the introduction of nuclear energy 
by facilitating the exchange of scientific and technical expertise, by implementing 
a dynamic technical co-operation programme, and by administering a 
safeguards system recognized as a decisive element in the international nonproliferation 
effort. He thanked the Agency and its dedicated staff for their 
great efforts over the years and their achievements. 


115. Since national nuclear programmes had been widely discussed at the 
International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience held in Vienna the previous 
week, he could restrict himself to a brief description of the situation in his 
country. Generally speaking, nuclear energy had regained momentum, In the past 
ten years, nuclear power capacity had grown steadily, albeit less rapidly than 
expected, up to the present level of 10 000 MW(e). In 1981, 14.3% of electricity 
was generated by nuclear means. After several years of delays, two nuclear 
power plants had received construction licences in 1982. They were the first 
of a series of technically identical plants of 1300 MW(e) which would be 
licensed under a streamlined convoy concept. The installed capacity was to rise 
to approximately 23 000 MW(e) in 1990 and about 37 000 MW(e) in the year 2000. 
Progress had also been recorded in all areas of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
Construction work had started on the first enrichment plant at a German site in 
co-operation with the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The construction of 
a first intermediate storage facility for spent fuel had also begun. The 
licensing procedures for the construction of two reprocessing plants at different 
sites were under way. The first steps had also been taken to license a repository 
for low- and medium-level radioactive wastes in a former iron ore mine. 
Good progress had been made in the investigation of the Gorleben salt dome for 
the storage of all classes of waste, particularly high-level wastes. 


116. In the 1980s, industry was expected to assume greater responsibility, 
including financial responsibility, for fuel cycle services and the development 
of advanced reactors. Indeed, earlier that year, 12 major utilities had agreed 
to contribute a sum of DM 1 billion to meet the rising costs of the country's 
prototype fast breeder reactor. Other countries might also be interested to 
know that a new law required utilities to pay the investment costs of waste disposal 
facilities in advance. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 30 


117. Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was one of the fundamental principles 
of his country's policy. It had renounced the possession of nuclear arms nearly 
30 years previously, had joined EURATOM with the first full-scope safeguards 
regime, and was one of the original Members of the Agency. It had vigorously 
and continuously supported the Agency's contribution to international nonproliferation 
efforts, the global Non-Proliferation Treaty and the regional 
systems of Tlatelolco and EURATOM. Ninety-eight per cent of the nuclear 
facilities in non-nuclear-weapon States were now covered by Agency safeguards. 
Further political effort was called for, however, to make the system fully comprehensive 
both in scope and in time. 
118. In order to be acceptable, safeguards should be applied without discrimination. 
Accordingly, his Government had always stressed the desirability of 
nuclear-weapon States accepting safeguards in respect of their civilian nuclear 
activities. The recent announcement that the Soviet Union was prepared to put 
part of its nuclear installations under Agency safeguards was, therefore, a 
positive development following the example set by the United Kingdom, the United 
States and France, and he looked forward to the early conclusion of an 
agreement. He trusted that the practical experience of safeguards gained by all 
parties in connection with his country's verification system would help to 
increase the political acceptability, technical development and efficiency of 
safeguards. 
119. Since 1981, the Agency's safeguards system had been at the centre of a 
lively international discussion in which some parties had questioned its 
effectiveness and credibility. His Government did not share those doubts and 
felt that the safeguards system had performed well. Adverse criticism was, to 
a large extent, the result of misconceptions. The objective of safeguards was 
not physically to prevent the diversion of nuclear material, but rather to 
detect and deter it. The system assumed that States declared their installations 
and materials, and therefore did not permit searches for undeclared 
activities. It provided assurance that States were complying with their 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 31 


international obligations, assumed voluntarily, but could not indicate the 
future intentions of Governments. Despite its inherent limitations, the system 
performed an indispensable function in the world-wide non-proliferation regime. 
It was without precedent that international inspections were admitted by 
sovereign States. 


120. His Government also supported the technical improvement of the system and 
had therefore arranged for a safeguards support programme. The reliability 
of and confidence in safeguards could and must be improved, as must the 
cost/benefit ratio. He hoped that the Board would be able to reach early 
agreement on those questions. 
121. Nineteen eighty-two had seen further progress in the work of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply (CAS). He welcomed the fact that a consensus was 
within sight on the question of the principles of nuclear supplies and the 
corresponding non-proliferation commitments. It was to be hoped that CAS would 
provide useful input for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy to be held 
in Geneva the following year. 


122. The Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage (IPS) would soon be 
bringing its deliberations to a close. While there was general agreement that 
IPS might improve the non-proliferation system, differences still remained on 
basic issues. IPS would only make a meaningful contribution to the nonproliferation 
system if it were generally accepted. Rights and obligations 
under IPS must thus be balanced and take into account the other non-proliferation 
undertakings of the participating States. 
123. The Agency's efforts in the field of nuclear safety were one of its 
essential tasks. A good safety record was of primary importance to the preservation 
of the political and social basis required for the full utilization 
of nuclear energy. The Agency had played a very constructive role by fostering 
the international exchange of expertise and experience and by providing expert 
advice to Member States. In that connection, he welcomed the recent meetings 
on safety research in Moscow and Prague which had provided an excellent 
opportunity for a first discussion of national programmes. His delegation also 
welcomed the first annual report on nuclear safety. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 32 


124. His Government fully recognized the value of the technical co-operation 
programme and welcomed the increase of about 25% in its funding between 1981 
and 1982. The programme deserved its good reputation. Individual projects 
were generally well planned, thoroughly discussed with the States concerned and 
well executed. It was on those grounds alone that the considerable increases in 
the target for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund could be defended 
and indicative planning figures introduced, despite severe budgetary constraints 
both at home and internationally. The basic structure and the methods of financ 
ing the programme were satisfactory. As in past years, his Government was prepared 
to pledge its full share of the target for voluntary contributions and to 
provide additional resources for fellowships, experts and equipment, scientific 
meetings and co-ordinated research programmes. Subject to parliamentary appropriations, 
his country's total voluntary contributions in 1983 would amount to 
about US $2.8 million. Of special note among the new projects was a hydrology 
programme in Latin America for which his Government would make available 
DM 1 million. 


125. Mr. ALWAN (Iraq) welcomed Namibia, represented by the United Nations 
Council for Namibia, as a Member of the Agency. The decision made by the 
Conference that same morning would contribute to the struggle of the Namibian 
people to attain freedom and independence. It would also be seen by other 
oppressed peoples, notably the Arab people of Palestine, as a sign of hope that 
the world community was coming to recognize their right to self-determination 
and independence. As far as the Agency's work was concerned, the admission of 
Namibia was another reminder of the continuously increasing majority of Members 
from the developing world and highlighted the need to increase the representation 
of those Member States on the Board of Governors. Expressing his strong 
support for the proposal to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, he urged the 
General Conference to take positive action on that issue which had been much 
delayed. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 33 


126. While the needs of developing countries in respect of various peaceful 
applications of atomic energy were increasing, so were the obstacles hindering 
the transfer of nuclear technology. Besides the distinction already being made 
between nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States, equally clear distinctions 
were being made between non-nuclear-weapon States themselves. Those distinctions 
were not related to NPT, but were rather the results of basically 
discriminatory policies. Attempts were being made to show that the transfer of 
peaceful nuclear technology to developing non-aligned countries represented the 
only real threat to the non-proliferation regime. That disturbing development 
was already resulting in increasing difficulties for the work of the Agency, for 
example in the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply and in that of the 
Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage. It was his view that it was 
up to each State to decide on the scope of its own peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy under internationally agreed safeguards. 


127. Although concern over the issue of proliferation was shared by all, it 
should not be translated into a policy of denial and discrimination, especially 
when such a policy was directed against developing countries committed to nonproliferation 
through NPT or equivalent measures. At the same time, the dangers 
of proliferation were being overlooked where aggressive racist regimes such as 
those of Israel and South Africa were involved, in spite of the increasing body 
of evidence that those two States had already developed nuclear capabilities. 
It was a matter of regret that the repeated calls by the UN General Assembly, 
the Security Council and the General Conference to all States to cease 
co-operating with those two regimes in any way that would encourage their 
aggressiveness and increase their nuclear capabilities were not being complied 
with by all States. It was all the more regrettable that the United States, 
which professed such concern over human rights and nuclear proliferation, was 
emerging as the sole defender of Israel's criminal acts. The barbarous slaughter 
of thousands of Arab people in Lebanon had been caused by the Israelis using 
American-made weapons. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 34 


128. There was an urgent need for building mutual confidence with a view 
to establishing an internationally accepted safeguards system effective enough 
to ensure the peaceful development of nuclear energy. Certain practical steps 
in that direction were not unfeasible. Such steps were: first, for the 
nuclear-weapon States to make some tangible progress with the cessation of the 
arms race through more intensive efforts, since the world was waiting to be convinced 
that nuclear disarmament was not merely a conventional provision of 
international treaties, but rather a goal attainable within a defined period; 
secondly, until that goal was attained, for the non-nuclear-weapon States to 
receive positive assurances in respect of nuclear attack, or nuclear blackmail; 
thirdly, an immediate halt to all types of assistance to and co-operation in 
the nuclear field with the regimes of Israel and South Africa, a move which 
could be further enhanced if certain States were to release all information in 
their possession regarding the nuclear armaments of those two countries; and 
fourthly, more willingness on the part of the Agency and other international 
organizations concerned to defend the right of all nations to the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy. 
129. On 7 June 1981, the Iraqi nuclear research centre had been attacked by 
Israeli planes. The Tamuz research reactor had been destroyed and several 
civilians killed and injured. That military attack had been condemned as an 
act of aggression which had threatened international peace and security. It 
had also been condemned as a brutal infringement of the right of peoples to 
develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Moreover, it had been considered 
an attack on the Agency and its safeguards system which had greatly harmed confidence 
in that system. Those conclusions had been reached by individuals, 
Governments and international organizations after careful consideration of the 
aggression, invarious resolutions and statements by the Board of Governors, the 
General Conference, the Director General of the Agency, the United Nations 
Security Council, the Secretary-General, the General Assembly, the Commission on 
Human Rights and Committee on Human Rights, the Movement of Non-Aligned 
Countries and the Organization of the Islamic Conference. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 35 


130. On 26 September 1981 the General Conference had decided, in 
resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381, that the Israeli act of aggression against the 
safeguarded Iraqi nuclear installations constituted an attack against the Agency 
and its safeguards regime, which was the foundation of NPT. It had further 
decided to consider, at its twenty-sixth regular session, the suspension of 
Israel from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership if by that 
time Israel had not complied with the provisions of Security Council 
resolution 487. Although resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 reflected the conviction 
of the great majority of Member States that Israel had sought through its 
military aggression to destroy the Agency, its Statute and its safeguards 
regime, the General Conference had decided to give Israel another year in which 
to comply with Security Council resolution 487. It was, however, instructive 
to examine resolution 487 and to see what steps had been taken by Israel to comply 
with it. 


131. First, operative paragraph 2 called upon Israel to refrain in the future 
from any such acts or threats thereof. Israel had not complied with that call, 
nor had it withdrawn its threat to destroy the Iraqi reactor if it were rebuilt. 
Moreover, Israel had continued its policy of aggression and arrogance. It had 
sponsored the.publication of several documents, books and articles depicting 
its criminal aggression as an act of self-defence which would strengthen peace 
and security in the region and enhance the safeguards regime of the Agency in 
spite of the fact that such hypocritical contentions had been rejected by all 
international organizations concerned. In addition, during the past 12 months, 
the Israeli aggressor had committed very serious crimes, including the following: 
the annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights; the occupation of vast territories 
in Lebanon and the massacre of tens of thousands of Arab civilians there; the 
destruction of the cities of Beirut, Sidon and Tyre; the murder of Palestinian 
leaders in some European countries; the destruction of United Nations Relief and 
Works Agency (UNRWA) camps sheltering tens of thousands of Palestinian refugees; 
continued threats against those co-operating with Iraq; and now further criminal 
acts in Lebanon. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 36 


132. Operative paragraph 5 of the same resolution called upon Israel urgently to 
place its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. No such development had 
taken place. Instead, Israel continued to intensify its clandestine activities 
with a view to extending its nuclear capabilities even further. 
133. According to operative paragraph 6, Iraq was entitled to appropriate redress 
for the destruction it had suffered, responsibility for which had been acknowledged 
by Israel. Israel had, however, blatantly refused all redress. The 
list of Israel's criminal acts was growing longer every day, and it had acted 
deliberately to undermine the Agency and the very principles on which the Agency 
was founded. In his view any country which was considered by the United Nations 
General Assembly not to be a peace-loving State and which acted wilfully against 
the Statute of the Agency could not be qualified as a Member of the Agency. 
Such a country did not comply with the requirements for membership as set forth 
in Article IV.C of the Statute. 


134. Mr. SETHNA (India) declared that he wished to extend a warm welcome to 
the Namibian delegation represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia. 
He noted that the IAEA had thus brought its practice into line with that of the 
rest of the United Nations system. India had co-sponsored the resolution in the 
United Nations General Assembly which had specifically requested the IAEA to 
grant full membership to Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for 
Namibia. 
135. The admission of Namibia strenthened the proposal before the present session 
of the General Conference for amending Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. Each year 
the General Conference adopted a resolution on the subject, and each year the 
Board of Governors failed to achieve a consensus. The amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 implied an expansion of the Board, and there was a lack of consensus 
on the ways and means of attaining that objective rather than on the 
basic objective of the resolution itself. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.239page 
37 


136. An important item for consideration at the present session related to the 
unprovoked Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear facilities at Tamuz. 
His country's unambiguous and total condemnation of that attack had been clearly 
expressed at various international gatherings and meetings. He regretted that 
some had attempted to question the efficacy of IAEA safeguards and sought to 
divert attention from the aggression by introducing extraneous proposals for 
so-called full-scope safeguards, the NPT, and so forth. 


137. The present session of the General Conference marked the twenty-fifth anniversary 
of the IAEA. It was a fitting occasion for all Member States to reaffirm 
their faith in the Agency and its objectives. Unfortunately, in recent years 
attempts had been made to undermine those objectives by introducing certain 
concepts and issues that were, and must always remain, extraneous to the Statute. 
Recent developments had made it abundantly clear that, in more ways than one, 
the IAEA stood at a crossroads. 


138. As a founding Member of the Agency, India had always maintained that the 
primary function of the Agency was to promote the utilization of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes, and that the regulatory role it had assumed was only of 
a secondary nature. It was appropriate for the Agency to pause and reflect on 
how it should again give primacy to its first responsibility and not be misled 
into attaching exaggerated importance to its regulatory responsibility. At the 
previous session of the General Conference there had been a glimmer of hope 
with the adoption by consensus of certain resolutions on basic issues, such as 
correcting the imbalance between the promotional and regulatory functions of the 
IAEA and changing the composition of the Board. All those attending the present 
session must ensure that those resolutions were implemented faithfully and 
expeditiously. 
139. His country had consistently expressed its dismay at the lack of progress 
in checking the nuclear arms race. While the goal of general and complete 
nuclear disarmament continued to elude the international community, fresh 
efforts were being made to impede the development of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 38 


140. It was generally realized that the Second Special United Nations Session 
on Disarmament had failed. Nevertheless, it was still hoped that all forms of 
nuclear weapons would one day be removed from the face of the earth. In her 
message to the Second Special Session on Disarmament, the Indian Prime Minister 
had enunciated a five-point concrete programme of action. The second point, 
which had special relevance to the Agency, was that, as a first step towards the 
eventual cutting of existing stockpiles, there must be a freeze on nuclear 
weapons, providing for the total stoppage of any further production of nuclear 
weapons, combined with a cut-off in the production of fissionable material for 
weapons purposes. 
141. A freeze on nuclear weapons must necessarily consist of two inseparable 
elements, namely a complete cessation of manufacture of nuclear weapons and a 
cut-off in the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes. Such 
combined action would mean that all nuclear facilities in all countries would 
become peaceful, and in that event nuclear-weapon States could have no pretext 
for excluding their nuclear installations from the international safeguards 
which they were presently asking the non-nuclear-weapon States to accept in the 
name of so-called full-scope safeguards. Only in that event could an effective 
and economical IAEA safeguards system be devised on the basis of objective, 
scientific and non-discriminatory criteria. 
142. He had been pleased to note from the statement by the Director General 
that the IAEA could exercise its verification capability to ensure a cut-off in 
the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes. He hoped that the 
forthcoming review of safeguards would be firmly based on the Statute and would 
not be influenced by any extraneous elements. 
143. His Government had always attached special importance to the technical 
assistance programme. However, his country had been obliged not to avail 
itself of its undoubted benefits in view of the extraneous and inequitable conditions 
of the Revised Guiding Principles. As a demonstration of his country's 
continuing assistance toother developing countries, his Government had pledged its 
share, amounting to $115 900, of the target for voluntary contributions in 1983. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 39 


In addition, India would continue to make 12 fellowships available to developing 
countries. Pending a consensus on the financing of technical assistance from 
the Regular Budget, he supported the target of US $19 million for 1983. 


144. He noted that the portion of the annual report dealing with safeguards 
tended to present a discriminatory picture in its treatment of certain Member 
States not party to the NPT. His delegation had voiced its concern even while 
the report was in preparation, and some portions had been amended to a certain 
extent. Nevertheless, distortions remained, particularly in the presentation of 
safeguarded and unsafeguarded facilities in nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclea 
weapon States. His Government had repeatedly pointed out that the application 
of safeguards only to certain pre-selected facilities in the nuclear-weapon 
States served no purpose and was a total waste of the Agency's meagre resources. 
As long as nuclear weapon activities in nuclear-weapon States continued unabated 
and unchecked, such formal offers for the application of safeguards could have 
little or no meaning. On the contrary, by permitting the removal of safeguarded 
material, such arrangements tended to legitimize the non-peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy in those nuclear-weapon States. 
145. With regard to the international plutonium storage (IPS) study, his 
authorities had consistently maintained that fissionable material produced in a 
country should be at the disposal of that country, which alone had the right to 
decide whether it wished to go ahead with a particular use of that material or 
not. That was an important point since no external agency could be given 
authority or powers to interfere in the economic development and life of a Member 
State. The objective of the IPS scheme should be to discourage States from 
stock-piling plutonium in excess of their needs. The provisions of the proposed 
voluntary scheme should be made attractive enough for States to be encouraged 
to participate in it, and they should be applied equally and without discrimination. 
The application of present safeguards procedures should ensure that 
plutonium was not diverted from peaceful uses. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 40 


146. The IAEA International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience and similar 
activities provided the necessary impetus for the promotion of, and co-operation 
in, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He hoped that the Agency would continue 
to convene appropriate conferences at regular intervals, so that all Member 
States were given the opportunity to exchange experience in the primary use of 
nuclear energy. 
147. He wished to commend the Agency's efforts with regard to manpower development 
in countries embarking on nuclear power programmes and hoped that the 
Agency would expand its efforts to assist Member States in running their power 
stations in a safe and efficient manner. 
148. The Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) could also contribute significantly 
to the ability of developing countries in his region to utilize atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes. His authorities reiterated their commitment to 
the goals of the RCA and would continue to participate with vigour and enthusiasm. 


149. The coming year might see the convening of the United Nations Conference 
for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy. Given the objectives of that conference, the Agency must make an important 
and significant contribution towards its success. Equally, the holding of 
such a conference should provide an opportunity for an appraisal and for specific 
measures to improve the role of the United Nations system as a whole, and of 
the IAEA in particular, in fostering international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 


150. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina), after welcoming Namibia as a Member of 
the Agency, said that he would continue with the custom of informing the General 
Conference about developments in the Argentine nuclear programme over the last 
year. 
151. Where nuclear power generation was concerned, the Atucha I power station 
had in the first half of 1982 produced one million five hundred thousand MWh 
with a load factor reaching 97.7% of its rated capacity. The load factor during 
1981 had been 90.2%. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 41 


152. Present world economic and financial difficulties had also affected the 
Argentine nuclear programme, the rate of expansion of which had had to be reduced 
although the objectives remained the same. Nevertheless, assembly of the 
Embalse nuclear power station had been finished and 90% of the commissioning 
work on the conventional part and 20% of such work on the nuclear part had been 
completed. The reactor was to go critical in early 1983. 
153. Construction work was continuing on the third Argentine nuclear power station, 
the entry into service of which had been postponed by approximately one year. 
Contracting for that Argentine power station represented a departure from the 
traditional turnkey approach since only part of the services and supplies had 
been contracted abroad; the architect-engineer work and the contracting of 
services and supplies of national origin were the responsibility of the 
National Atomic Energy Commission (CNEA) through the Argentine Nuclear Power 
Station Company (ENACE S.A.). 
154. With the participation of national engineering and other industrial companies 
the CNEA had begun a feasibility study for a fourth Argentine nuclear 
power station, the first stage of which was to be completed by the second half 
of 1983. 
155. The entry into operation of the industrial heavy-water plant with a rated 
capacity of 250 tonnes per year, for which 50% of the civil engineering work 
had been completed, had been postponed by one year and was scheduled for 
late 1984. , 


156. With regard to the fuel cycle, during the current year work on two facilities 
had begun, namely the fuel element fabrication plant, which was to have sufficient 
capacity to meet the needs of Argentina's first three nuclear power 
stations and the experimental high-pressure loop, constructed with the valuable 
co-operation of the Federal Republic of Germany, for testing fuel elements in 
temperature, pressure and flow conditions similar to operating conditions in a 
nuclear power station, which would in the future be extended for testing 
different primary-circuit components. In addition, at the end of the present 
year a production plant for sinterable uranium dioxide of nuclear purity was 
to be put into operation. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 42 


157. Where the back end of the fuel cycle was concerned, construction work was 
continuing - albeit at a slower rate for the reasons mentioned - on a reprocessing 
plant, and a study had begun on the site selected araong 200 others for the 
construction of a high-level waste repository. 
158. The CNEA was also continuing with its various research and development 
activities including the installation of a. 20-MeV heavy-ion tandem accelerator, 
which could begin operation during the next year, and the construction of an 
RA-6 research and teaching reactor, which was to begin in the next few days at 
the Eariloche Atomic Centre. 
159. Moreover, mining of the Los Gigantes uranium deposit in the province of 
Cordoba had begun and the corresponding concentrate production plant had been 
finished. Together with the two existing plants it would supply the nuclear 
programme with approximately 250 tonnes of Uo^c, per year. 
160. Since the previous Conference session Argentina had been very active with 
regard to international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Where multilateral co-operation was concerned, in particular within the framework 
of the IAEA, his Government had intensified its involvement with the 
technical assistance and co-operation programme. Aware of the insufficiency of 
the funds available for that programme, it had increased to the maximum possible 
extent its contribution in terms of fellowships, places on training courses 
and missions of Argentine experts upon request by the Agency, in all cases 
without any political conditions or discrimination. 
161. Particular mention should be made in that context of the holding each year 
in Spanish of a regular nine-month course in co-operation with the Agency on 
radiation protection and nuclear safety, designed for the Latin American region 
but open to candidates from all countries. 
162. Argentina had continued to comply with the undertakings arising out of the 
offers made in 1979, 1980 and 1981 to take on the cost of implementing seven 
projects requested by Latin American countries for which no funds had been 
available from the Agency. Moreover, he pledged a voluntary contribution in 
national currency amounting to Argentina's assessed share to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1983. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 43 


163. His Government had continued to provide active support to the Inter-
American Nuclear Energy Commission and had implemented the offers it had made 
during the Commission's Xllth ordinary meeting held at La Paz in September 1981. 
He also wished to mention Argentina's active participation in the meeting held in 
Havana in March 1982 by the group of non-aligned co-ordinating countries in 
the sphere of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


164. Turning to bilateral co-operation, he emphasized the beneficial results of 
joint activities with various countries in the Latin American region, in 
particular Brazil, Colombia, Peru and Uruguay, with which co-operation continued 
to intensify. It was producing the expected benefits owing to mutual confidence 
and common objectives in respect of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Welcome developments in that connection had been the progress made in the construction 
of the Huarangal nuclear research centre, which was being carried out 
with the Republic of Peru, and the exchange of goods and services agreed with 
Brazil. 
165. He announced with satisfaction the signature in Vienna, during the present 
session of the General Conference, of a co-operation agreement with Yugoslavia, 
a country with which Argentina had many common interests in the nuclear field. 
166. In view of the magnificent display of solidarity by the Latin American 
community in connection with Argentina's sovereign rights over the Falkland 
Islands, his Government would continue to put special emphasis on co-operation 
with the Latin American region. It remained prepared, hoWever to co-operate 
closely with all other well-disposed nations throughout the world which were 
also prepared to co-operate on the basis of equality and mutual respect. 
167. In line with its principles in respect of the transfer of nuclear materials 
and technology, Argentina had signed a further safeguards agreement with the 
Agency, whereby it was voluntarily submitting to safeguards nuclear materials 
to be supplied from the Soviet Union. That agreement, when considered together 
with the eleven others in force with the Agency, represented yet another link 
in the network of undertakings that Argentina had made, thereby reaffirming its 
adherence to the cause of both horizontal and vertical non-proliferation. 



GG(XXVI)/OR.239 
page 44 


168. Nevertheless It was to be regretted that apparently it was only non-nuclearweapon 
States which were complying with such undertakings, since certain nuclearweapon 
States, which had arrogated the role of champions of non-proliferation, 
did not baulk at the military use of nuclear energy in order to defend their 
interests - and that with the acquiescence of other nuclear Powers. They 
appeared not to be concerned about the negative consequences which that would 
have for non-proliferation nor that such action would undermine the very basis 
of the Agency. The recent use of nuclear submarines in the conflict m the 
south Atlantic had demonstrated that lack of concern. In his view, non-nuclearweapon 
States could only conclude that policies supposedly designed to prevent 
proliferation were in fact only aimed at maintaining in perpetuity the political, 
military and economic supremacy of a few to the detriment of the many. 


169. At the meetings of the Board in June, Argentina had asked the Agency to 
express its opinion on the use of nuclear submarines by a nuclear Power against 
a country which had voluntarily espoused the cause of non-proliferation. The 
Agency could not remain indifferent to that action if it did not wish to 
encourage its repetition against all countries - especially developing ones which 
had decided to use nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful purposes, and 
if it was not to condone a morally unacceptable situation. 
170. His Government wished - and its wish had been acceded to in the Board by 
consensus - a study to be made which would have not only moral but also legal 
implications. That study related to the determination of the degree of compatibility 
between certain safeguards agreements concluded by the Agency and 
its own Statute. The Statute laid down that materials, equipment and facilities 
subjected to safeguards should not be used in such a way as to contribute 
to military purposes. Agreements drawn up on the basis of the Agency's safeguards 
system, in accordance with document INFCIRC/66/Rev.2, also contained 
that undertaking. However, agreements concluded between Member States and the 
Agency m connection with NPT on the basis of document INFCIRC/153 contained an 
undertaking in that regard only to the effect that such materials should not be 
diverted to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. The use of 
such materials for certain military purposes would thus theoretically be permitted 
under such agreements. 
GC(XXV1)/OR.239 
page 45 


171. The situation in relation to undertakings made in agreements based on 
voluntary offers was even worse since in those cases certain States were in 
effect permitted to take nuclear materials out of safeguards in order to use 
them in military activities supposedly for reasons of national security. 
172. The Statue did not distinguish between different types of military use but 
simply proscribed the use of materials, equipment or facilities under safeguards 
for any military purpose. 
173. The Argentine Government hoped that the Agency would make a statement in 
that connection and would in the near future take appropriate action to rule out 
any breach of its Statute. Meanwhile it reserved certain rights for the future 
in relation to military uses deemed to be non-proscribed - in no sense did it 
reserve rights in respect of nuclear weapons, however, since Argentina had 
espoused the cause of their total and permanent banning under effective international 
control. Nor did its reservations affect compliance with undertakings 
made in the context of the IAEA, which the Argentine Government would continue 
to comply with strictly. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
May 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 21 September 1982, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 
later: Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda** 


7 General debate and annual report 


for 1981 (continued) 1-80 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Finland 1 - 11 
Pakistan 12 - 26 
Japan 27 - 38 
Peru 39 - 42 
Canada 43 - 53 
Holy See 54 - 57 
Brazil 58 - 63 
Italy 64 - 69 
Belgium 70 - 76 
German Democratic Republic 77 - 80 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 8 October 1982. 


**/ GC(XXVI)/674. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVI)/INF/208/Rev.4. 

83-745 


GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1981 (GC(XXVI)/664 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. OLLILA (Finland) conveyed his Government's congratulations to the 
Agency on the occasion of its twenty-fifth anniversary. In accordance with its 
Statute, the Agency was playing a vital role for. peace and prosperity throughout 
the world. Finland was firmly convinced that the Agency would be able to 
continue its work with success in the future and gave the assurance of its full 
support. 
2. The Conference on Nuclear Power Experience had proved a great success and 
had made a very useful contribution to the discussions within the Agency by 
Member States. 
3. Owing to climatic conditions and the fact that Finnish industry was highly 
energy-intensive, energy consumption in Finland per unit of production was one 
of the highest amongst the OECD countries. Seventy per cent of the energy consumed 
came from abroad. The share of nuclear energy in electricity production 
was very high, accounting for more than one third of the total. Since the 
principal components of nuclear power stations and all the fuel and fuel services 
such as conversion, enrichment and reprocessing had to be imported, Finland 
attached crucial importance to the stability and predictability of world markets. 
The same also applied to the political arrangements which accompanied international 
supply agreements. In that connection, it was worth noting the 
effectiveness and reliability of the Agency's safeguards system, the availability 
of sufficient resources for which was necessary in order to guarantee the prompt 
functioning of world markets. 
4. Nuclear safety and nuclear waste management were among the foremost issues 
being discussed in Finland. The Government was seeking solutions to the 
problem of waste in terms of new legislation on the use of nuclear energy, now 
in the course of preparation. One of the new principles envisaged was that 
owners of nuclear power stations would be obliged to set aside each year part 
of the estimated cost of waste management. The Finnish Government was convinced 
that in the fields of nuclear safety and waste management it was 
essential to encourage extensive international co-operation and believed that 
that could only be achieved with the support of all Member States. A great deal 
had been done in the field of nuclear safety but efforts would have to be continued 
and the Finnish delegation welcomed the fact that the Agency had devoted 
so much of its effort to the management and final disposal of waste. Those 
activities should continue. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 3 


5. The Finnish delegation noted with satisfaction that, in carrying out its 
safeguards programme, the Secretariat had once again detected no anomaly which 
might have indicated a diversion of a significant amount of nuclear material 
under safeguards to the manufacture of any nuclear weapon, the furtherance of 
any other military purpose or the production of any other nuclear explosive 
device. Nevertheless, apart from the nuclear-weapon States, there were still 
four States in which certain facilities were not subject to safeguards and they 
included facilities in operation or under construction capable of producing 
weapons-grade material. That situation was a matter of some gravity for the 
Finnish Government, which was convinced that conditions for the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy would be significantly improved if those facilities were 
placed under safeguards. A similar improvement might ensue if the leading 
Powers made significant and rapid progress in their talks on nuclear 
disarmament. 
6. The Finnish Government was also concerned to learn that the Agency had been 
compelled for the first time in its history to acknowledge that in certain 
cases the safeguards it was applying were not such that it could carry out fully 
its verification responsibilities. It was absolutely essential for Member 
States to accord the Director General their full political and moral support 
to enable him to remedy that situation. 
7. Finland welcomed the fact that in 1981 the accession of three additional 
countries to NPT and the ratification by the United States of Additional 
Protocol I to the Tlatelolco Treaty had helped to strengthen the nonproliferation 
regime. With regard to the efforts made to facilitate and promote 
nuclear trade and co-operation, it was worth noting that certain major 
suppliers had declared their readiness to simplify the terms they imposed on 
their exports. 
8. Technical co-operation remained one of the three main objectives of the 
Agency. He was gratified to see that the Agency had rapidly increased its 
programme of technical co-operation with the developing countries, particularly, 
in the course of the preceding few years. For its part, Finland had contributed 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 4 


to technical assistance and was prepared to increase its contribution in the 
future. It was also ready to share with the developing countries the experience 
it had gained in the use of nuclear technology, ranging from preliminary 
studies to the construction of power stations, and including the acquisition of 
the necessary theoretical knowledge. 


9. Finland believed that the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS) lay at the core of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Working Group 1 had already arrived at a preliminary consensus 
on the principles of international co-operation involved and the Agency's role 
in relation to that co-operation. It was of paramount importance, however, for 
the Working Group and the Committee itself to make rapid progress and finish 
their work by the beginning of 1983. It was also to be hoped that the results 
so far obtained would assist the work of the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. 
The Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage (IPS) had also made some headway 
in 1981, but it was regrettable to note that differences of opinion on certain 
fundamentals had recently become very pronounced. In fact, the whole of the 
international plutonium storage scheme seemed to be in jeopardy. His delegation 
believed that political consultations were called for at the present 
stage. 
10. Finland was taking an active part in the preparations for the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. The Conference should refrain from 
discussing issues which were currently being examined by Agency committees 
or expert groups and the principle of consensus, which had so far been 
applied in all discussions on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, should 
also logically apply to the Conference. 
11. The problems which currently prevailed in the use of nuclear energy were 
complex. Apart from anything else, the growth rates in electricity consumption 
had been lower than predicted, as a result of which an identical situation had 
emerged in the growth rates of the world's nuclear generating capacity. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240page 
5 


The reasons were manifold: general economic recession, successful energy 
economy measures, the adoption of new technologies and public concern regarding 
nuclear safety and waste management. The Finnish delegation believed that the 
current doubts could only be dispelled if the public was given complete and 
objective information. At the same time, efforts should be stepped up to 
improve still further the operational safety and reliability of nuclear power 
stations, reduce deadlines for construction and find solutions to the problem 
of waste disposal. It was only by making full use of available resources, and 
particularly the possibilities offered by nuclear energy, that it would be 
possible to meet the immense energy needs of humanity in the coming decades. 


12. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that the current session of the General 
Conference, which marked the Agency's twenty-fifth anniversary, was a milestone 
in the history of the organization. It was equally an occasion for 
appraising the successes and setbacks. The Agency had done a remarkable job 
in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the elaboration of 
a reliable system of safeguards. The technical assistance activities had been 
a success and had served to stimulate the nuclear power programmes of many 
developing countries. The Trieste International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
could be seen as one of the most successful activities. Even so, the first 
25 years had also been marked by disappointments. The development of nuclear 
power had not been as rapid as initially predicted, the potential role of the 
Agency as a supplier of nuclear fuel had not materialized and the Agency had 
not been able to aid Member States in concluding arrangements for the financing 
of nuclear projects, as provided for in Article XI of the Statute. 


13. The Pakistan delegation considered that the Agency's future would be 
strongly influenced by three factors: the prospects for a more rapid growth in 
nuclear power, which called upon the Agency to play a vital role in the development, 
safety and safeguarding of nuclear facilities; the increasing role of 
developing countries in shaping the policies of the Agency; and non-proliferation 
issues. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 6 


14. The Conference on Nuclear Power Experience had clearly indicated that 
nuclear power had emerged as a reliable and economical alternative and an 
almost inexhaustible source for meeting future energy needs in an efficient 
and environmentally safe manner. In his opinion, the period of stagnation in 
nuclear power growth was about to end and a new era of steady growth would soon 
be starting in most countries. There was no doubt that nuclear energy was 
essential not only for ensuring the economic stability of the industrialized 
countries but also for satisfying the needs of developing countries with an 
energy deficit, many of which were spending the bulk of their limited foreign 
exchange earnings on oil imports. It was anticipated that by the end of the 
present decade more than 15 developing countries would have introduced nuclear 
power into their grid systems. It was therefore vital for the Agency to prepare 
itself for that period of reversal in trend so as to provide the necessary 
technical support for power plant safety, waste management and the development 
of advanced reactors with more efficient fuel utilization. 
15. If nuclear energy was to play a constructive role, it was essential to 
contain, reduce and eliminate the threat of proliferation on both the horizontal 
and the vertical plane. Emphasis was sometimes placed on horizontal proliferation 
while the fact that the immediate threat to world peace came from the 
uncontrolled escalation of the atomic arsenals of the nuclear-weapon States was 
ignored. Progress towards nuclear disarmament was dangerously slow. Yet horizontal 
proliferation was also a source of serious concern. His Government 
considered that nuclear weapons did not enhance the security of the small or 
less developed countries and might even add to their security problems. For 
that reason, it was firmly committed to the policy of non-proliferation and 
advocated the creation of a nuclear-free zone in South Asia. 
16. He wished to emphasize that the cause of non-proliferation could not be 
advanced by denying or imposing restrictions on the transfer of peaceful 
technology. It had to be recognized that basic nuclear technology had already 
become widespread and that what had been learned could not be unlearned through 
unilateral legislative measures. The restrictive policies of the advanced 
countries had fostered doubts in many countries as to the long-term reliability 
of their supplies. Those policies were bound to be counter-productive because 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 7 


they encouraged the affected countries to develop their own fuel cycles and 
other facilities, which might be less economical and more difficult to regulate. 
Hence it was necessary to adopt a realistic approach to the transfer of technology 
and to bear it in mind that proliferation was essentially a political 
problem, which could be contained only by creating a climate of confidence and 
security. All countries should share the advantages of nuclear energy and the 
obligations imposed by it. The supplier States did not enhance their credibility 
or influence, nor promote the cause of non-proliferation, by unilaterally 
abrogating international treaties and solemn undertakings relating to supply. 
Irrevocable safeguards commitments had to be matched by irrevocable supply 
guarantees. 


17. The unfortunate policy of unilateralism was also casting a shadow on the 
Agency. Pakistan, which had noted a growing tendency in the Agency to depart, 
gradually but perceptibly, from the provisions of the Statute, strongly believed 
in upholding the letter and the spirit of the Statute, which did not permit 
discrimination between Member States, whether or not they were parties to a 
particular treaty. He noted with regret that there was a tendency to discriminate 
between Member States in the provision of technical assistance, 
training and equipment. It had to be stressed that the Agency's own 
safeguards system, which was based on a consensus, was above the safeguards 
system applied to States party to a multilateral treaty and that the two systems 
could not be merged. He was opposed to any attempt to extend safeguards to 
associated facilities when a specific project or plan had been placed under 
Agency safeguards. Any attempt to modify or alter the Agency's safeguards 
system without prior consultation with and the approval of the overwhelming 
majority of Member States would be contrary to the Statute. 
18. Another factor of importance for the Agency's future was that many developing 
countries whose nuclear programmes had made considerable progress were now 
anxious to participate more effectively in the various activities of the Agency. 
Their views should be duly taken into account. At the preceding session of the 
General Conference the developing countries had expressed their opinions on a 
number of major issues, which had resulted in the adoption of certain important resolutions 
concerning the staffing of the Agency, expanded membership of the Board 
and increased technical assistance. It was therefore time that the Agency became 
more responsive to the needs and aspirations of a great majority of Member States. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 8 


19. Resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, adopted at the twenty-fifth regular session of 
the General Conference, had stressed the need to increase the representation of 
developing countries on the Secretariat staff, especially at the senior and 
policy-making levels, in order to rectify the existing imbalance. It was satisfying 
to note that the Director General had already taken steps in that 
direction; however, the imbalance was such that greater efforts were necessary. 
20. Over the past few years the General Conference had discussed the need to 
increase the Board's membership and to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute with 
a view to improving the representation on the Board of the areas of Africa and 
the Middle East and South Asia, which were under-represented on it. It was 
essential to deal with that matter without further delay, and to that end his 
delegation had, at the twenty-second regular session of the Conference, submitted 
a compromise proposal for an increase of one seat for each of those two 
areas; that proposal had been accepted by the majority of Member States. 
Although other, more complex, solutions involving a much larger increase in the 
Board's membership had been proposed, his delegation considered that its own 
compromise formula deserved more serious consideration as it had the best chance 
of being adopted with the necessary two-thirds majority. 
21. His delegation was seriously perturbed by the continuing inadequacy of the 
technical assistance resources and by the increasing imbalance between the 
technical assistance and safeguards budgets. While fully recognizing the importance 
of the Agency's safeguards system, safeguards should not, in his opinion, 
develop at the expense of promotional activities. Since 1970 safeguards allocations 
had increased by a factor of 25, whereas the resources of the Technical 
Assistance Fund had risen only by a factor of seven. Pakistan was not opposed 
to a justifiable growth in the safeguards budget but it failed to understand 
why the legitimate and pressing requests for technical assistance from developing 
countries should be denied year after year for lack of funds, while the 
resources for safeguards increased. He wished to appeal to the Director General 
to persuade the donor countries to be more generous in their contributions to 
the Technical Assistance Fund. In the long term the technical assistance programmes 
could not be solely contingent on voluntary contributions, but rather 
should be financed from predictable and assured sources, such as the Regular 
Budget. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 9 


22. The premeditated Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre in 
June 1981 was a blatant violation of the sovereignty of an independent State. 
It was an event with far-reaching implications which called into question the 
very foundation of the non-proliferation system. That attack was a challenge 
to the fundamental right of every country to use nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. Israel had since been pursuing its policy of total defiance of all 
principles of international conduct as embodied in the Charter of the United 
Nations. Emboldened by the lack of firm international action in the preceding 
year, Israel had perpetrated further aggression, now against Lebanon, which had 
resulted in the massacre of thousands of civilians. It was high time that the 
international community took concerted action against Israel. 
23. It should be recalled that at its twenty-fifth session the Conference had 
strongly condemned the unjustified Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre and had decided to suspend the provision of any assistance to Israel 
under the technical assistance programme. The Conference had also called upon 
all Member States of the Agency to suspend the transfer to Israel of fissionable 
material and technology which could be used for the production of nuclear 
weapons and had decided to consider the suspension of Israel from the exercise 
of the privileges and rights of membership if, by the time of the twenty-sixth 
regular session, it had not complied with Security Council resolution 487. 
24. The work of the Conference on Nuclear Power Experience would provide very 
valuable input for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and 
Social Development. His delegation attached particular importance to the latter 
conference, which was to debate the matter of strengthening co-operation between 
supplier and recipient States. It also hoped that the Committee on Assurances 
of Supply, which was conducting an important dialogue between suppliers and 
recipients, would be able to submit its report before the start of that conference 
. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 10 


25. It was only after carefully assessing its short- and long-term energy 
requirements and its indigenous conventional energy resources that Pakistan had 
decided to introduce nuclear power to meet the country's growing energy needs. 
Its nuclear power programme had begun ten years previously with the construction 
of a power reactor, which had provided the country with useful operating 
and development experience, particularly since it had been deprived of outside 
assistance for the past six years and had been obliged to manufacture spare 
parts and fuel elements itself. His Government had officially approved the 
construction of a 900-MW light-water power reactor, which was due to be commissioned 
in 1989. That reactor would be placed under Agency safeguards. In 
addition to the development of a nuclear power programme his Government also 
attached particular importance to the application of nuclear energy in agriculture 
and medicine. 
26. Lastly, his delegation fully supported the statement made by the Director 
General at the previous meeting to the effect that the Agency must preserve its 
reputation as an objective technical body. To achieve that end, the Statute 
would have to be strictly applied. 
Mr. Davis (United States of America) took the Chair. 


27. Mr. YAMATQ (Japan) said that the question of compatibility between 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and non-proliferation had been a major 
international issue for many years. The role which the Agency played in 
seeking a solution to problems of that nature would certainly continue to 
increase. In recent years, the Agency had been confronted with various difficulties. 
The credibility of its safeguards had been challenged, there had been 
discussions on the nature of its technical co-operation activities and their 
financing, and in connection with the administration of the Agency deliberations 
were continuing on the issues of the membership of the Board of Governors and 
staff recruitment policy. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 11 


28. The Agency's annual report for 1981 clearly demonstrated once again that 
in the long term the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as the most promising of 
the alternative energy sources, would become more and more important. Japan, 
which had no energy resources of its own, was striving hard in that respect. 
Nuclear plants now accounted for roughly 12.5% of its electricity generating 
capacity, and its installed nuclear capacity was expected to rise to 46 million kW 
by 1990. His country had also been very active in the fields of spent fuel 
reprocessing, uranium enrichment and research on the treatment and storage of 
radioactive wastes. 
29. National experience such as that which Japan had acquired in promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be properly shared. In that context, he 
particularly welcomed the valuable exchange of information and opinions at the 
International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience, held the previous week. 
30. The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) was an extremely important legal framework 
for international co-operation aimed at ensuring compatibility between the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and non-proliferation. The accession of Egypt 
and Antigua and Barbuda to NPT in 1981 and Papua New Guinea and Viet Nam in the 
current year was commendable. He called on all those countries which had not yet 
done so to sign NPT without delay. The unequal treatment given to nuclearweapon 
States and non-nuclear-weapon States in the Treaty had to be rectified 
if it was to be effective. That was why Japan had strongly urged all nuclearweapon 
States to conclude the "voluntary offer agreements" with the Agency by 
which they accepted the application of Agency safeguards to their peaceful 
nuclear facilities. 
31. The Agency's safeguards should be constantly upgraded by improving the 
technology used in safeguards procedures so as to keep them in line with technical 
progress in safeguarded nuclear activities. His delegation accordingly 

GC(XXVI)/OR.24O 
page 12 


welcomed the decision that the Board of Governors should review the safeguards 
system and its implementation in the coming year. It was to be hoped that the 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) would make recommendations 
which would facilitate the discussions. With regard to instances 
where the credibility of Agency safeguards had been challenged, it was particularly 
disconcerting to see that there was one country where it had been 
impossible to obtain the full assurances of verification of non-proliferation 
required. He sincerely hoped that the uncertainty would be dispelled as soon 
as possible. It would be lamentable if outside observers, after expecting so 
much from the safeguards system because of their misconception of its purpose, 
then became disillusioned with the system, or even with the Agency itself. The 
Secretariat was doing its utmost to improve the situation and all Member States 
should support those efforts. For its part, Japan was co-operating fully 
with the Agency in the promotion of safeguards research and development, particularly 
for sensitive facilities such as reprocessing and enrichment plants. 
His country had agreed in November 1980 to extend the stay of Agency inspectors, 
and the system adopted had operated smoothly since then. 


32. With regard to the non-proliferation regime, it was necessary to avoid 
introducing measures which unduly restricted the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. In that context, his delegation welcomed the meetings held recently 
for the purpose of making the issue of "prior consent rights" more predictable 
and comprehensive. Japan had recently concluded a new nuclear co-operation 
agreement with Australia along those lines and was continuing to hold talks with 
the United States and Canada to the same end. 
33. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), whose work was also connected 
with the question of compatibility between the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and non-proliferation, had made substantial headway, which would certainly be 
welcomed by the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social 
Development, to beheld in 1983. In that context, it was important to recognize, 
as INFCE had already done, that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear 
non-proliferation were two sides of the same coin and that the problem was a 
very complex one. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 13 


34. Nuclear safety was important for two reasons: first, because it was an 
essential factor in obtaining public acceptance, and second, because it was a 
basic prerequisite for the promotion of nuclear power. The Agency played an 
important role in that area and the publication of an annual report on safety 
would be valuable both for the development of nuclear power and for public 
acceptance. 
35. Japan considered that methods for formulating and implementing more 
effectively the Agency's activities in the field of technical co-operation with 
developing countries should be reviewed in the light of the co-operation activities 
of the United Nations system as a whole. His Government had always given 
full support to that programme and had paid in full the assessed share of its 
voluntary contributions, as well as making additional contributions. 
36. Activities under the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA), to 
which Japan had become a party in 1978, were being carried out enthusiastically 
and would be extended for a further five years following the entry into force 
of the second RCA in June. To develop those activities further it was 
important to select projects which met the needs of the participating countries 
most adequately. Regional co-operation arrangements similar to the RCA should 
be set up in other developing regions, particularly in Latin America, where a 
co-operation scheme of that type was currently being planned. 
37. Unfortunately, because of the gravity of the world economic situation 
there would be limits to the personnel and financial resources made available 
to the Agency. His delegation urged the Agency to spare no effort in 
reducing its budget to the maximum extent and wished to encourage the 
Secretariat to redouble its efforts to achieve a balanced allocation and 
maximum effective utilization of the available resources. At the same time, 
basic research work, which to a certain extent underpinned the three main 
activities of the Agency - technical co-operation, safeguards and safety should 
not be neglected. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 14 


38. Finally, on the occasion of the Agency's twenty-fifth anniversary and 
despite the numerous problems facing it, Member States should never forget 
their obligation to work together so that the Agency could forge ahead as an 
international organization contributing to the welfare and prosperity of 
mankind. 
39. Mr. BARREDA (Peru) said that although, as the Director General had 
noted, the first 25 years of the Agency had been extremely fruitful, nonetheless 
a number of problems still existed, the most serious of which was undoubtedly 
the need to utilize nuclear energy more effectively in order to meet the needs 
of the economic and social development of the developing countries. The Agency 
had a vital role to play in that area while, for its part, the international 
community should endeavour in every way to achieve nuclear disarmament. 
40. The activities carried out since 1976 under the Peruvian Nuclear Plan had 
made satisfactory progress, had achieved a positive cost/benefit ratio and had 
demonstrated the increasing importance of nuclear energy to the national 
economy. In the field of public health, Peru had succeeded in introducing and 
developing nuclear medicine in accordance with standards and criteria laid down 
by the Agency and the World Health Organization (WHO), and was attempting to allocate 
equitably the services available to the most needy sections of the population. 
Demand for radioactive materials used in nuclear medicine had risen from 
12 000 mCi in 1978 to 28 000 mCi in 1980, and would probably reach 80 000 mCi 
in 1982. In agriculture, research on genetic improvements induced by gamma 
radiation had made it possible, particularly in the high Andes, to develop 
improved varieties of cereal and leguminous plants which could increase their 
yield by 100%. Success had also been achieved in improving the reproductive 
capacity of South American Camelidae, such as the alpaca and llama, which were 
the principal source of revenue in Andean valleys. Attempts were being made in 
the radioisotope laboratory of the National Agricultural University to optimize 
the utilization of agro-industrial by-products and to improve fodder in the 
high Andes by means of an extensive supplement system on the basis of radioisotope 
techniques. Such techniques were also being applied in fertilizer and 


GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 15 


irrigation studies. In the field of nuclear power, Peru was striving, with the 
aid of the Agency, to acquire the necessary competence in science, technology, 
planning and organization required for the introduction of nuclear power. His 
Government hoped to be in a position to take an official decision whether or not 
to embark upon a nuclear power project in 1985 or 1986. With regard to uranium 
ore mining and the evaluation and exploitation of uranium resources, Peru had 
succeeded in improving its infrastructure as well as its technical and personnel 
resources. It had thus been possible accurately to identify favourable uraniumbearing 
sectors. 


41. Briefly summarizing the history of the co-operation agreement project for 
the Andean sub-region, he wished to thank the Agency for its support, and also 
the authorities of the RCA Member States visited by the heads of the nuclear 
commissions of the Andean countries in connection with the project. 
42. Referring to the unfavourable impression and adverse climate that had been 
created by the behaviour of the nuclear-weapon States, he felt that the nuclear 
Powers which were parties to NPT had not honoured their two most important 
undertakings under the Treaty, namely to attempt to achieve nuclear disarmament 
and to allow those countries which had renounced the possession of nuclear 
weapons access to nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. In that connection, 
recent action in the South Atlantic by a nuclear Power which had made use of a 
nuclear technique (propulsion) to military advantage against a country with no 
nuclear weapons had further aggravated the situation. The Agency should make a 
pronouncement in the near future on that point, which was a challenge not only 
to its prestige and credibility, but also to the existing non-proliferation 
regime. 
43. Mr. C0PITH0RNE (Canada) recalled that, as had been pointed out by the 
Director General, the international nuclear community was at present in a difficult 
position. It was necessary that the Agency should nevertheless continue to 
serve its Member States and the noble cause of non-proliferation. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 16 


44. During the past year the Canadian nuclear industry had continued to grow. 
The first two 600-MW(e) CANDU reactors had gone critical and their commercial 
operation was to begin in the near future. The commissioning of the Pickering, 
Bruce and Darlington power stations would result in a doubling of Canada's 
present installed nuclear capacity. However, despite the excellent performance 
of CANDU reactors in terms of safety and economy and the support of the Canadian 
Government, the short-term prospects for that reactor system were bleak. A 
Canadian study showed that the long-term prospects for the nuclear industry 
were favourable and that the competitiveness of nuclear power should increase. 
The study concluded, however, that the short-term economic prospects were not 
bright. Exports could offer a solution, although the international market was 
uncertain and competition was becoming more and more lively. 
45. Other problems were posed in connection with the opposition of the public 
to nuclear energy. In order to alter that state of affairs it was necessary 
both to improve yet further the operating safety of power stations and also to 
find ways of dealing with the disposal of 'radioactive wastes. Canada supported 
the Agency's efforts in that direction. 
46. The Agency's role with regard to nuclear safety was particularly important 
in view of the diversity which would continue to be a feature of the advances 
in nuclear technology in different countries. The negotiation of multilateral 
agreements, the formation of a body of specialized inspectors and the formulation 
of universal standards would, however, present the Agency and all its 
Member States with delicate problems. 
47. The treatment of high-level wastes was causing a number of countries, 
including Canada, considerable concern, and the Agency should be praised for 
its efforts in that regard. Canada believed that that problem, although it 
had technical aspects, was really a political one. Early in the same month an 
international conference on radioactive waste management had been held in 
Canada, attended by over 300 scientists and engineers. 
48. Canada kept an open mind on the reprocessing option and, as one of the 
world's main uranium suppliers, accepted that reprocessing could provide a 
solution for waste management in the context of sizable nuclear power programmes 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 17 


It did not believe, however, that that approach should be encouraged for the 
moment. There were various technically feasible and safe solutions for interim 
storage and the choice should be based on economic criteria. The CANDU programme 
provided for safe, cheap and effective storage on the sites of reactors 
and the steps that had been taken would cover the next 35 or 40 years. 


49. With regard to the transfer of technology, he believed that, if the world 
economic situation did not improve, more countries could be expected to postpone 
their nuclear power programmes indefinitely. Not only would that have an 
adverse effect on nuclear trade; the fragile balance between the Agency's 
promotional activities and safeguards also risked being upset. Because of the 
threat hanging over national industries, non-proliferation measures would perhaps 
be subject to the demands of an increasingly competitive export market. In 
future the Agency might also be confronted with a trading environment in which 
there would no longer be any commercial incentives in non-proliferation commitments. 
Like the Director General, the Canadian delegation hoped that the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply and the coming United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
for Economic and Social Development could develop new approaches in that sphere. 
Canada had recognized very early that nuclear co-operation was fundamentally a 
question of relationships between governments and that the commercial dimension 
was only one aspect of the matter. For that reason it wished to enable its 
nuclear partners to benefit from its experience and, in particular, to help them 
reach a stage of development at which they would be able to choose their own 
fuel cycles. Canada was more than ever convinced of the value of a fuel cycle 
without reprocessing and of an integrated nuclear development approach closely 
linked to national energy objectives. Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. was at 
present studying with a number of countries the joint development of a 20-MW(th) 
research reactor. The Canadian company's partners would in that way gain 
valuable experience and would be able to participate actively in the development 
of technology instead of benefiting from it passively. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 18 


50. Turning to the question of the Agency's budget he said that, in conformity 
with the policy of restraint that his Government was itself pursuing in the 
light of the general financial situation, it was imperative that the Agency 
demonstrate the greatest possible restraint if it wished to continue to benefit 
from the support of the Canadian Government. 
51. The Canadian Government had again paid its contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund in full and had joined the consensus in 
relation to the target for 1983 and the indicative planning figures up to 
1986. The Agency was fulfilling its statutory obligations and, in particular, 
was complying with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388. However, he urged the Agency to 
examine its co-operation programmes critically in order to ensure that they 
were indeed in conformity with its general objectives and that they genuinely 
responded to the needs of Member States. Canada would assist the Agency in 
that enterprise and hoped that the Evaluation Unit would be called upon to play 
an ever more important role. 
52. With regard to non-proliferation, the harsh reality with which suppliers 
and consumers were faced was such that the public would not accept nuclear 
power unless it was convinced that the technology could be controlled and that 
its transfer would not aggravate proliferation. For that to happen, it was 
necessary to convince the public that the technology itself was not a cause of 
proliferation; in that connection it should be pointed out that in the general 
apprehension regarding the risks of nuclear power no discrimination was made 
between vertical and horizontal proliferation. The international nonproliferation 
regime should not be static, but rather based on a dynamic equilibrium. 
Canada was not involved in a conspiracy of suppliers that was using 
culturally biased strategies to restrict access to nuclear technology. Experience 
had taught that proliferation was basically a question of political decision and 
national will. 
53. Canada was aware of the need for a stable and predictable regime of international 
exchanges with due respect for non-proliferation requirements. It was 
now turning attention to the front end of the fuel cycle, believing it to be a 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 19 


sphere in which there could be a certain linkage between non-proliferation concerns 
and the assurance of supplies. Future progress would take place mainly 
in the context of multilateral agreements under the auspices of the United 
Nations and the Agency. The moment had come to develop institutional approaches 
and collective policies in order to attain the common objectives of nonproliferation. 
If Member States did not respond to that challenge in a way 
which was imaginative and just, the development of nuclear power would remain 
more of a threat than an opportunity for increased international co-operation. 
While waiting for nuclear power to make its full contribution to the satisfaction 
of world energy needs, great difficulties would have to be surmounted 
and, if confidence was to be maintained and the international regime was to 
keep its promises, it was necessary for the Agency to point the way. He was 
convinced that it would be able to do so. 


54. Mgr. PERESSIN (Holy See) believed that after 25 years had elapsed it 
was appropriate to reflect on the aims of the Agency, on its past results and on 
its future tasks. Having taken note of the Director General's report to the 
General Conference and of the complex problems which the Agency had to face, the 
delegation of the Holy See wished to dwell on a number of problems which concerned 
nuclear energy today and were related to progress, security and peace. 
55. The peaceful uses of nuclear energy had both advantages and disadvantages. 
The advantages of the very many applications of nuclear energy, whether in 
agriculture, food preservation, medicine or hydrology, were widely recognized. 
The most important sector, however, was that of energy production for industrial 
and domestic use at a time when energy sources were becoming increasingly rare 
and when energy production costs were rising. Nuclear power could contribute 
to the economic development of third-world countries and could help to prevent 
the dangerous phenomena of deforestation and desertification due to excessively 
intensive exploitation of non-renewable energy sources. The benefits of 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy should thus be extended to all countries, in particular 
to developing countries. Nuclear programmes should always be linked to 
other, complementary energy programmes, and co-operation between the industrialized 
and developing countries should be encouraged in order to ensure the 
progress of all States and increased understanding between peoples. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 20 


56. The use of nuclear power did, however, involve risks, associated either 
with accidents which might arise at nuclear power stations or with the storage 
of radioactive wastes. Certain groups of naive idealists and even certain 
personalities from the scientific, political, cultural or religious worlds 
condemned the use of nuclear power simply for that reason. It seemed more 
realistic not to overlook any effort to guarantee the safe operation of power 
stations and safe disposal of wastes and to minimize thereby the risks 
incurred on the understanding that, as with ax\y human enterprise, it was 
impossible to eliminate them totally. His delegation therefore welcomed the 
expansion of the Agency's nuclear safety programme; thanks to the efforts 
which had been made in that regard no fatal radiation accident had occurred 


at any nuclear facilities operated for non-military purposes. Those efforts 
should be pursued, especially as far as the long-term storage of radioactive 
wastes was concerned, and information of the public should be more extensive 
and more complete with a view to preventing the creation of an atmosphere of 
fear and distrust. 


57. There was also need to mention the problem of military applications of 
nuclear energy and the manufacture in increasing numbers of sophisticated 
nuclear weapons, which were a source of fear and anguish. In the address 
delivered on 30 May 1982 during his visit to the United Kingdom, Pope John 
Paul II had expressly referred to that dangerous situation by saying that: 
"Our world is disfigured by war and violence". Noting that the capacity for 
the destruction of present society was greater than ever before, he had 
pointed out that modern warfare, whether nuclear or not, was an absolutely 
unacceptable means of resolving differences between countries and had no 
place in the future history of humanity. The IAEA had an important role to 
play in the context of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The nuclear-weapon 
States should do all they could to apply Article VI of the Treaty. The 
results of the Second Special Session on Disarmament of the United Nations 
General Assembly had unfortunately been disappointing and a threat of nuclear 
war continued to hang over the world today. A comprehensive nuclear test ban 
treaty was absolutely vital if that threat was to be eliminated. In the 
message which he had addressed to the Second Special Session on Disaramament, 
John Paul II had reaffirmed chat the Holy See supported all efforts aimed at 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 21 


eliminating the risk of nuclear conflict; those efforts included the reduction 
by States of their arms in a progressive and equal way, and also in the 
waging of a patient but necessary campaign to make peoples aware of their 
responsibilities in the face of the insecurity and violence now reigning in 
the world. Appealing to all men to join their intellectual and spiritual 
forces, the Holy Father had stated: "Peace is not a Utopia nor an inaccessible 
ideal nor an unreasonable dream. War is not an inevitable calamity. Peace 
is possible. And because it is possible, peace is our duty - our grave duty, 
our supreme responsibility". 


58. Mr. do NASCIMENTO e SILVA (Brazil) said that 1982 was an important 
year for the Brazilian nuclear industry: the first nuclear power station, 
Angra-I, had gone critical in March and was soon to be in operation, with a 
load factor of up to 50%; moreover, it had been found that Brazilian uranium 
reserves amounted to over 300 000 tonnes equivalent of yellow cake, of which 
192 000 were measured and assured and 109 000 were estimated, or in other 
words Brazil had one fifth of the world reserves. One of the mines that had 
begun operation at the beginning of the year would be producing 500 tonnes of 
yellow cake per year. Brazil was making steady progress in the assimilation 
of all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
59. On the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, he felt it might be opportune to make a critical analysis 
of the Agency's achievements. With regard to technical assistance, Brazil's 
views of the Agency's activities, although positive as a whole, were somewhat 
mixed. The Agency's efforts to increase its capacity for technical assistance 
to developing countries were to be welcomed. On the other hand, his delegation 
deplored the fact that the Agency had adopted criteria which were not consistent 
with the relevant provisions of the Statute. In particular, it was regrettable 
that the Agency made use of expressions such as "nuclear explosive devices", 
which did not appear in the Statute but were employed in the context of the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, to which the Agency was not a party. The universal 
application of such expressions by the Agency was contrary to its Statute. 
Those expressions, in fact, normally served to describe inoffensive projects 
which had nothing to do at all with the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
Brazil had always defended the inalienable right of all States to have access 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 


page 22 


to all aspects of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy without commitments 
other than those which appeared in the Agency's Statute or which had been 
negotiated, accepted and applied on a universal basis and without discrimination 


60. The mechanism envisaged for international plutonium storage, though 
supplementing Agency safeguards, would introduce a new problem into the 
application of them. Hence its aim should be to avoid any unnecessary expenditure 
and duplication of effort and to respect the provisions of Article XII.A.5 
of the Statute. 
61. The Brazilian delegation, while recognizing the merits of the Agency's 
programme for 1983-88 and budget for 1983, was deeply perturbed by certain 
expenditure which, in its opinion, should be postponed at a time when almost 
all countries in the world were obliged to adopt stringent economy measures. 
It was not logical that the Agency should at the present stage abandon its 
policy of zero growth, and it was definitely not the right time to replace 
much of the existing standard equipment by second-generation equipment designed 
specifically for safeguards purposes. He was also worried by the cost of the 
safeguards programme: if the Agency increased the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme in the same proportion, the Member States would be faced 
with a very heavy burden which most of them would be unable to bear. 
62. His delegation welcomed the training programme for young graduates from 
developing countries. That programme would unquestionably be a very great 
asset: it would enable trainees to compete more strongly for Professional 
posts in the Agency and enhance their usefulness to their home countries. 
63. He welcomed the position adopted by the Director General with regard to 
nuclear disarmament and his reference to vertical proliferation. There was 
need, however, for clarification of the comment that, although no headway had 
yet been made towards nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation efforts had been 
remarkably successful. Such language was unintelligible to the layman, and 
it should perhaps be said that the nuclear-weapon States pursued their 
proliferation efforts undeterred and refused to submit to any control, whereas 
most of the non-nuclear-weapon States accepted Agency safeguards and had not 
shown the intention of acquiring nuclear weapons. One of the Agency's 
fundamental tasks was to prove to the public that nuclear energy did not pose 
GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 23 


a threat and that its risks were minimal. Such phraseology was detrimental 
to the Agency's image, and its credibility could be impaired. 


64. Mr. BACCHETTI (Italy) stated that it was necessary to ensure that 
the efficiency and credibility of the Agency were consistent with the extreme 
importance of its functions and with the expectations of the international 
community. To achieve that end, the tendency to base the Agency's budget on 
the principle of zero growth should be accompanied by a careful choice of 
objectives. The international community expected the Agency to perform its 
tasks of promotion, mediation and objective control with increasing efficiency. 
65. Within the Agency, the North-South relationship had not been improved by 
the concern of the developing countries for the tendency in developed countries 
to place increasing and often unilateral restrictions on the transfer of 
nuclear technology and materials. The developing countries rejected the 
idea that the growing restrictions imposed on such transfers had reduced 
non-proliferation to a political concern and to a matter of technical 
capacity exclusively vested in the developed countries. The nuclear-weapon 
countries were in fact making no parallel efforts to limit or reverse the 
trend towards vertical nuclear proliferation. 
66. There was no doubt that those factors had largely conditioned the 
fundamental role of the Agency, which was to promote and guarantee the 
progressive expansion of international trade in nuclear technology and 
materials with a view to developing the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
That process, however, should take place in conditions of absolute security 
through the strengthening of the Agency's effectiveness. As a party to NPT, 
his country recognized the need to implement that basic international treaty 
in the hope that it would become universal. Italy had always asserted that 
a system of full-scope safeguards should be established through persuasion 
rather than imposition. An approach of that kind would strengthen the Agency's 
credibility and efficiency and lead to a "new international consensus" on the 
harmonious development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, whilst providing 
an effective safeguard against the risks of proliferation. Despite the 
capital importance of Agency safeguards, his country could not help being 
alarmed by the level of expenditure committed to that programme, which 
accounted for one third of the total budget. The Agency also had a mandate 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 24 


to make a decisive contribution to economic and social growth, especially in 
the least developed countries, while ensuring that atomic energy was not 
diverted towards non-peaceful purposes. 


67. His country was firmly convinced of the usefulness of the technical 
assistance and co-operation programme and had decided to finance an important 
project for the eradication of the Mediterranean fruit fly in Egypt. Furthermore, 
Italy had recently concluded an agreement with the Agency and UNESCO 
concerning the financing of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
in Trieste, an institution which itself helped to promote a particularly 
important form of international co-operation. 
68. The acceleration of the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
gave grounds for hoping that progress would be made towards the broad 
international consensus which ought to be the aim of all co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The present discussions should lead 
to conclusions which could largely contribute to the success of the forthcoming 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Development. His 
country believed the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to be 
one of the key areas of international co-operation where progress was least 
possible as long as there were discriminatory relationships between countries 
or groups of countries, be they ones of superiority or inferiority. The 
Conference would have genuine chances of success and of contributing to man's 
economic and social progress only if there was a search for a consensus. 


69. He welcomed the successful conclusion of the International Spent Fuel 
Management exercise. The Expert Group had recognized that the management of 
spent fuel should be conducted on a national basis but had noted that greater 
international co-operation was necessary and that the Agency should play a 
fundamental role as point of reference and promoter. The Italian energy plan 
provided for a reduction in oil consumption and the widest possible use of 
alternative energy sources. Nuclear power plants were scheduled to generate 
8 million tonnes of oil equivalent of electrical energy in 1990. Furthermore, 
the option to run fast breeder reactors in Italy remained open. 


70. Mr. ERNEMANN (Belgium) declared that he was concerned by item 8 of 
the agenda} relating to consideration of the suspension of Israel from the 
GC(XXI)/OR.240 
page 25 


exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. If a decision to suspend 
Israel was taken, it could jeopardize the very existence of the Agency. He 
recognized the legitimate grievances of Iraq following the Israeli attack on 
the Tamuz nuclear centre, grievances which had understandably been sharpened by 
the Israeli aggression in Lebanon and the recent, horrible massacres in Beirut. 
He hoped, however, that a mortal blow would not be dealt to the Agency by 
again distorting the principle of universality and the provisions of the 
Statute, particularly Article XIX.B. 


71. It might be asked whether the Agency, in the 25 years of its existence, 
had fulfilled one of its main tasks, namely to ensure "so far as it is able, 
that assistance provided by it or at its request or under its supervision or 
control is not used in such a way as to further any military purpose". There 
was certainly discrimination between the recognized military nuclear States 
and the others. However, it could be asked whether some States had refused to 
place all their facilities under Agency safeguards because they somewhat 
cherished the desire to build nuclear weapons or explosives or because they 
wanted to keep all their options open. It was paradoxical that the Agency had 
succeeded in safeguarding, and even, in the case of Belgium, over-safeguarding, 
only those States which were dedicated to the cause of non-proliferation. As 
long as all facilities in all States were not subject to Agency safeguards, one 
of the Agency's primary aims - to contribute to peace - would not have been 
achieved since confidence between States would not have been assured. 


72. The problem of military nuclear Powers could be solved only through 
general and complete nuclear disarmament, which was unfortunately a Utopian 
ideal at present. The only possibility was that those Powers should place 
their civil facilities under Agency safeguards, so that they did not enjoy too 
privileged a position. Some countries had made a gesture by opening a few 
such facilities for inspection, but that gesture was so limited at present that 
it seemed only symbolic. 
73. His own country submitted its nuclear industry as a matter of priority to 
EURATOM safeguards. Those safeguards, the purpose of which was to ensure that 
nuclear ores, nuclear raw materials and special fissionable materials were not 
diverted from the uses which their users stated that they were intended for, 
were stricter than Agency safeguards. Despite the duplication, Belgium had 

GC(XXVI)0R.240 
page 26 


also accepted Agency safeguards under NPT as proof of its commitment to the 
cause of non-proliferation. Nevertheless, co-ordination between the Agency 
and EURATOM could still be improved considerably. He hoped the Agency would 
take more account of EURATOM inspections, as was stipulated, moreover, under 
Article 3 of the Verification Agreement. 


74. The document containing the Agency's programme for 1983-88 and the budget 
for 1983 was an excellent one and constituted a source of reference. Owing to 
its current economic problems, however, his country could not endorse the 
draft 1983 budget, which reflected a real growth rate of 2% compared to 1982; 
nor could it approve the preliminary estimates for 1984 and 1985, which were 
14% and 26% higher than the draft 1983 budget. In the present difficult 
period, the Agency, like all United Nations organizations, should keep as 
closely as possible to the target of zero real growth. Furthermore, his 
country very much regretted that it could not pay the recommended - if not 
demanded - voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund. His country's global effort in terms of development aid would be kept 
at a high level, but it would itself determine, within the current economic 
context, the amount of its voluntary contribution according to its established 
priorities, which did not always correspond to the objectives set through a 
consensus which it had not shared in reaching. 
75. Soon 40% of the electricity generated in his country would be accounted 
for by nuclear power plants, so that Belgium would be one of the most advanced 
countries, if not the most advanced country, in the world in that respect. 
Within two years, the figure would exceed 55%. Belgium had built up an 
exceptional store of experience in the field of nuclear power plants. At the 
International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience, Belgian PWRs had accordingly 
been reported as being among the most efficient PWRs in the world. 
Concurrently, his country was pursuing its activities in a very large number of 
fields relating to the fuel cycle. 
76. As a result of the development of its nuclear industry, his country 
considered that it could again lay claim to a permanent seat on the Board. It 
was a matter of concern to his delegation that the Board did not designate 
periodically the nine Members that were actually the "most advanced in the 
technology of atomic energy including the production of source materials". 
. GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 27 


Although he appreciated the strong feelings of some delegations, he did not 
wish to see a revision of the Statute. However, if some did request a revision, 
his country would give the matter due consideration, provided certain essential 
features of the Statute and, at all events, the efficiency of the Agency and 
its Board, were safeguarded. 


77. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) said it was disconcerting 
to note that because of the policy of confrontation and the arms race pursued 
by certain imperialist Powers, the international situation was marked at the 
present time by growing tensions and the threat of nuclear war. Consequently, 
the Soviet Union's unilateral commitment not to be the first to use nuclear 
weapons, which it had assumed at the Second Special Session of the United 
Nations General Assembly on Disarmament, was to be welcomed. That decisive 
step accorded with the vital interests of all peoples and was an example to 
the other nuclear-weapon States. 
78. Nuclear power was the main source available for bridging the energy gap 
that was likely to develop. That had also been the conclusion of the 
International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience. Through its efforts, the 
Agency had substantially contributed to the excellent safety record achieved 
in nuclear activities throughout the world. 
79. His delegation strongly endorsed the safeguards programme because of its 
close links with international security. The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) 
was an effective instrument, but it was a matter of urgency to make the Treaty 
universal by increasing the number of signatory States and submitting all 
nuclear activities in non-nuclear-weapon States to international safeguards. 
Every effort should be made to ensure that the Agency's annual safeguards 
statement in the Safeguards Implementation Report could be made with everincreasing 
objectivity and reliability. He therefore welcomed the significant 
progress in the inspection effort and in the attainment of safeguards goals, 
and he supported the Agency's endeavours to overcome existing difficulties. 
The planned restructuring of the Department of Safeguards would help to enhance 
the effectiveness of safeguards. 


80. Technical assistance and co-operation had always been among the Agency's 
main activities. The Agency should be commended on its efforts to increase the 
effectiveness of that programme. Several substantial improvements had recently 

GC(XXVI)/OR.240 
page 28 


been made; the problems arising from the use of various types of currency had 
been solved, the proportion of footnote-a/ projects made operational and the 
number of multi-year project commitments had increased, and a start had been 
made to post-project evaluation. His country would contribute its share of 
the target for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund and was particularly 
anxious to provide training in its institutes for scientists from 
developing countries. He wished to reaffirm, however, his repeated reservations 
concerning technical co-operation with certain countries in the light of recent 
developments. In the provision of technical assistance preference should be 
given to the least developed countries. 


The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
March 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 22 September 1982, at 10.10 a.m. 


President: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 
later: Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal 
Republic of Germany) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
Paragraphs 
agenda** 
7 General debate and annual report for 1981 
(continued) 1 - 150 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1 - 25 
Saudi Arabia 26 - 33 
Netherlands 34 - 43 
Tunisia 44 - 56 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and 


Northern Ireland 57 - 72 
Australia 73 - 100 
Indonesia 101 - 106 
Bangladesh 107 - 114 
Poland 115 - 126 
Mexico 127 - 141 
Czechoslovakia 142 - 151 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 30 September 1982, 
**/ GC(XXVI)/674. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVI)/INF/208/Rev.4. 


83-268 



GC(XXVI)/OR.241 


page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1981 (GC(XXVI)/664) (continued) 


1. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
entire 25-year history of the IAEA represented an example of successful cooperation 
between countries having differing social structures. He then 
re-quoted the fourth and fifth paragraphs of the message which the General 
Secretary of"the Central Committee of the Communist Party and President of the 
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, had addressed to the 
Conference participants and which had been read at the opening meeting.— 
2. It was essential to achieve an immediate reversal in the present international 
situation, namely a change from confrontation and the arms race 
to arms limitation and reduction, and to further development of co-operation 
between States. It was essential to place a barrier in the way of those circles 
which were seeking to cast the world back into the dangerous era of the "cold 
war". The Agency was one of the institutions which had its part to play in 
that noble aim. 
3. In line with its overriding peace-loving policy, the Soviet Union was 
countering those dangers through application of the Programme of Peace for the 
19d0s adopted at the XXVIth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. 
That programme envisaged a broad range of specific measures aimed at strengthening 
peace and international security, preventing nuclear war, promoting detente 
and finding ways of settling conflicts. 
4. The Soviet Union was currently undertaking a whole series of fresh initiatives 
in the interests of peace. Guided by the desire to do everything in its 
power to divert the threat of nuclear war and indeed to exclude any possibility 
thereof from the life of man, the Soviet Union had taken a new step forward of 
exceptional importance - it had unilaterally declared that it would never be 
the first to use nuclear weapons. The USSR was counting on other nuclearweapon 
States to follow that example. 
5. Many non-nuclear-weapon States were urging that, under the non-proliferation 
regime, not only they but also nuclear-weapon States should place their 
peaceful nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. In a desire to meet the 
wishes of those countries, the USSR delegation had stated at the Second Special 
1/ See GC(XXVI)/OR.238, para. 51. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 3 


Session of the United Nations General Assembly on Disarmament that it was prepared, 
as an act of good will, to place a part of its peaceful nuclear activities 
under Agency control. The USSR was ready to initiate negotiations with 
the IAEA with a view to concluding the appropriate agreements. 


6. His country was convinced that strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation 
regime was in the interests equally of nuclear-weapon and of non-nuclear-weapon 
States, promoting - as such action did - the perservation of international peace 
and security. The non-proliferation regime was making a contribution to stabilizing 
contemporary international relations. It had created favourable conditions 
for broad international co-operation in the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy, including under the auspices of the IAEA. The USSR was in 
favour of the further expansion of the Agency's role in that field. 
7. His delegation noted with satisfaction the further strengthening of the 
non-proliferation regime based on NPT. The accession of Viet Nam to the Treaty 
was a matter of great importance. His delegation trusted that other States would 
follow the example of Viet Nam and likewise accede. 
8. It had to be remembered that at present there were about 50 States which had 
not acceded to NPT, including two nuclear-weapon States and several near-nuclear 
States. Great concern was evoked by the non-participation of countries located 
in crisis zones. Those countries included primarily Israel and the Republic of 
South Africa, which made no secret of their nuclear ambitions and were pursuing 
an aggressive, expansionist policy, terrible witness to which was in particular 
being borne by the present action of Israel in Lebanon. 
9. One of the most important spheres of the IAEA's activities in ensuring the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was the application of the safeguards 
envisaged under the Statute, under NPT and under other international instruments. 
The Soviet delegation noted with satisfaction that in 1981, as previously, the 
Agency's Secretariat had found no indication of any diversion of nuclear materials 
or facilities placed under its control to the production of nuclear weapons, 
to other military purposes or to the fabrication of other nuclear explosive 
devices. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 4 


10. However, as before, the IAEA was faced with important tasks as regards 
increasing still further the effectiveness of safeguards. Work must continue 
uninterruptedly on optimizing the Agency's safeguards sytem, making wider use 
of up-to-date computerized methods of safeguards data processing, particularly 
data obtained from inspectors, and better co-ordinating the scientific and 
technical programme of safeguards development. It was important for the Agency 
to concentrate its efforts on nuclear materials and facilities constituting the 
greatest threat as regards the capacity to manufacture nuclear explosive 
devices. 
11. Increasing the effectiveness of safeguards was substantially dependent on 
the support which the Agency received from its Member States. The Soviet 
Union was actively participating in scientific and technical development work 
in connection with safeguards, and in the present USSR programme of scientific 
and technical support for IAEA safeguards more than ten leading research 
institutes all over the country were playing a leading role. 
12. Ascribing as it did great importance to the further development of the 
safeguards system, the Soviet Union wished to announce the allocation of 
supplementary funds amounting to 2 million roubles in national currency, which 
were to be made available during the period 1983-1985 under the USSR's scientific 
and technical support programme for IAEA safeguards. In addition, 450 000 
roubles were to be made available during the same period for the conduct of 
training courses and study tours for the benefit of staff working in the field 
of safeguards and control. 
13. The technical co-operation programme occupied a special place in the 
IAEA s activities. His delegation was pleased to note that considerable progress 
had been made in furnishing technical assistance to developing countries, 
particularly during the last three years. The resources made available to the 
Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in the form of voluntary 
and special contributions were increasing each year. The practice of giving 
indicative figures for the Fund had become established and was ensuring the 
necessary stability and predictability in an important branch of the Agency's 
activities. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 5 


14. Guided by its policy of technical co-operation with developing Member 
States, the Soviet Union had decided to increase its voluntary contribution to 
1 700 000 roubles in national currency in 1983. The money would be used for 
training Agency fellows (mainly from the developing countries) in the USSR, 
making available the services of Soviet experts and providing for the purchase 
of Soviet equipment. Additional funds would be made available each year to 
Agency schemes for training nationals from developing countries. 
15. The measures currently being undertaken by the Secretariat to evaluate the 
effectiveness of technical assistance were of great importance in the attempt 
further to improve efficiency. 
16. Considerable attention was currently being given to the work of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply, which was concerned with developing recommendations 
for the possible establishment of an international system of assured 
nuclear supplies - a question to which many Member States attached great 
importance. Such a system could only be set up within the framework of a nonproliferation 
regime and should lead to a strengthening of that regime. 
17. The Soviet Union consistently supported the Agency's scientific and 
technical programmes related to nuclear power and its fuel cycle, INIS, and the 
use of radioactive isotopes and radiation in industry, agriculture, science and 
medicine. Of particular importance was the work on nuclear and radiation 
safety. 
18. The Soviet Union welcomed the Agency's work related to fusion. The 
successful activities of the INTOR group had led to the development of a conceptual 
design. The Soviet Union had taken the initiative in suggesting the 
development of a tokamak reactor on an international basis and believed that 
with the experience the working group had acquired it would be possible, as 
planned, to proceed to the technical design stage in 1983. Before that time, it 
would be necessary to have developed the organizational, legal and other bases 
for implementing the project. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 


page 6 


19. Considerable importance had been attached in the Soviet Union to the 
Agency's Conference on Nuclear Power Experience. The Conference had acted as a 
forum for an exchange of information on operating experience and for demonstrating 
the positive effects of the application of Agency safeguards. The Agency 
should make an extensive analysis of the results of the Conference and take 
them into account in its programme. 
20. The large number of papers by Soviet participants at the Conference had 
presented a comprehensive and detailed analysis of nuclear power experience 
in the Soviet Union and had described the Soviet development programme in the 
nuclear power field. The total installed nuclear power in the USSR at the 
beginning of 1982 was about 16 000 000 kW(e) and the production of electrical 
energy in 1981 had reached 86 thousand million kilowatt-hours. 
21. The nuclear power programme in the USSR involved the development of 
different types of power station in order to ensure the necessary reliability 
and stability. Particular attention was being given to the further development 
of fast reactors, which had been in operation for some time in the Soviet Union. 
The principal aim was to develop a standard breeder unit and to put it into mass 
production. The main efforts in that direction were concentrated on the solution 
of the complex problems of increasing the rate of production of plutonium and 
returning it to the fuel cycle so that it would eventually be possible to set 
up a nuclear power production scheme which was self-sufficient in fuel and would 
maintain the necessary rate of growth in generating capacity. 


22. Nuclear power was also to be used for district heating purposes. A nuclear 
plant supplying heat and electrical energy to the residential area of Bilibino 
had been functioning since 1973. District heating stations were being built 
near Gorky and Voronezh. Similar stations were planned in the Kharkov, 
Volgograd and Minsk regions. Construction of the first large-scale nuclear 
district heating and electricity generating station using a WW(E)R-1000 reactor 
had started near Odessa. 
GC(XXV1)/OR.241 
page 7 


23. The increasingly widespread distribution of nuclear power stations, the rate 
of their development, the increase in the power of individual units, the practice 
of siting nuclear power plants near regions of high population density - all 
those were factors which required special attention to be given to safety, to 
the disposal of high-level waste, to protection of the environment, to the 
problems of incorporating nuclear stations into grid systems and so on. 
24. In terms of world history, 25 years was a short period of time but the 
Agency had already achieved considerable success. It had a high reputation 
throughout the world, as was evidenced, for example, by the constant increase 
in the number of Member States. 
25. The main lines of the Agency's activities had now been established. As could 
be seen from the Director General's report and from the Agency's programme for 
1983-88, those activities were concerned mainly with ensuring non-proliferation, 
providing technical assistance and carrying out programmes on nuclear and 
radiation safety. The Soviet Union was convinced that those areas would continue 
in the future to occupy a central place in the Agency's activities. 
26. Mr. AL-KABBANI (Saudi Arabia) said that there was cause for satisfaction 
with the Agency's achievements over the preceding 25 years; since its 
Statute had entered into force, in July 1957, considerable progress had been 
made in a very wide range of promotional and regulatory activities. During that 
period its membership had grown from 54 in October 1957 to 110 in 1982. The 
size of the Board of Governors had also increased, from 23 in 1957 to 34 at 
present, and would increase further if the proposed amendment to Article VI of 
the Statute was approved. He emphasized that such an amendment was overdue, for 
it would ensure just and equitable representation of two regions, Africa and 
the Middle East and South Asia. 
27. The Agency's draft Regular Budget for 1983 was US $92 821 000, as compared 
to about US $4 million in 1958. However, it was a matter of some concern that 
safeguards accounted for about 33.3% of the total resources of the Agency. 
Although his delegation supported safeguards and endorsed all measures designed 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 8 


to consolidate non-proliferation it attached great importance to the promotional 
activities of the Agency for the benefit and welfare of the developing countries, 
and felt that there must be a balance between the promotional and regulatory 
activities. It was especially interested in expansion in the areas of nuclear 
power and technical assistance. 


28. Nuclear power was one of the main and reliable sources for electricity 
production at present. As had been pointed out at the Conference on Nuclear 
Power Experience the preceding week, the current nuclear power capacity in the 
world was 200 000 MW(e), while more than 250 000 MW(e) would be added when the 
plants under construction were completed. 
29. In spite of its rich oil resources Saudi Arabia was keenly interested in 
nuclear power as an alternate energy source, which could save precious and 
limited oil resources and make them available for more efficient and productive 
uses in fields such as petro-chemical industries and transport. 
30. Although his country's policy in the field of energy was to meet the world's 
oil needs, it was of utmost importance that the industrialized countries should 
rationalize their oil consumption and develop alternative sources of energy. 
31. The other area to which his delegation attached great importance was 
technical assistance. It was a matter of some satisfaction that the Board had 
two years ago decided to establish indicative planning figures for the target 
of voluntary contributions for three successive years. While that was a step 
in the right direction, it must be borne in mind that the sums available for 
technical assistance covered only a part of the technically sound projects 
submitted to the Agency by developing countries and that many projects - the socalled 
footnote-a/ projects - were left to be financed by additional donor 
countries. He recalled that, in keeping with its consistent policy of support 
for technical assistance, his country had donated US $50 000 for such projects 
under the 1982 programme, in addition to the assessed amount of its voluntary 
contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for that year. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 9 


32. Turning to an extremely serious event, and one unprecedented in the history 
of the Agency, he said that the criminal attack by Israel on the Iraqi research 
reactor had been condemned by the Agency's Member States, the Board of Governors, 
the Director General and the United Nations and the Security Council. In spite 
of the lenient compromise resolution adopted at the preceding session of the 
General Conference (GC(XXV)/RES/381), Israel was still refusing to comply with 
the provisions of that resolution and challenging the international community. 
The General Conference had generously granted it an opportunity to comply. 
The time limit having expired, it was necessary that the General Conference 
take strong and appropriate action so as to deter and prevent such criminal 
acts and suspend Israel from membership of the Agency. 


33. In conclusion, he expressed, on behalf of his delegation, the sincere 
hope that the coming years in the life of the Agency would enlarge and enhance 
the contribution of the use of the atom for peace to the prosperity and 
progress of all countries throughout the world. 
34. Mr. VAN BARNEVELD KOOY (Netherlands), congratulating the Agency on its 
25th anniversary, said that in the quarter of a century since its establishment 
the world had become aware not only of the advantages but also of the problems 
- and the dangers - of nuclear energy. As a result, there had been a considerable 
proliferation in the Agency's tasks. In that connection, he wished to 
pay a tribute to the Director General and the staff, who had inspired a sense of 
purpose both in the Agency itself and in its Member States. In particular, he 
commended the manner in which the new Director General had grasped the Agency's 
problems and introduced new ideas and fresh policies so that the Conference 
session could offer an opportunity for a genuine exchange of ideas. 


35. The Conference on Nuclear Power Experience had provided important facts and 
figures about the possibilities and limitations of the use of nuclear energy in 


the years to come. It was hoped that the results would be of help to all those 


who were responsible for the continuous supply of energy in the world. His 


Government attached especial importance to the conditions under which nuclear 


energy was being used throughout the world. 



GC(XXV1)/OR.241 


page 10 


36. Welcoming the results of the work of the Group of Experts on Nuclear 
Safety Co-operation and Mutual Emergency Assistance in Connection with Nuclear 
Accidents, he considered it important that attention should be given to the 
effects of such accidents across national boundaries. During discussion of the 
Group's report in the Board of Governors, the Netherlands had supported the idea 
of preparing, an information circular containing guidelines for bilateral or 
regional agreements on the subject and stressed the need for practical implementation 
of such agreements. It would be in favour of a study of the feasibility 
of an international convention on the matter, including its legal and 
practical aspects. 
37. He approved the Agency's initiative in organizing a world-wide system for 
reporting abnormal occurrences. It would certainly be valuable to learn from 
the experience of others so that mistakes could be avoided. Since the success 
of the system depended on how many Member States would be willing to participate, 
he hoped that all countries with operating nuclear facilities would 
respond. 
38. It was advisable to implement a nuclear programme in close co-operation 
with other countries, as his country knew from its own experience of both 
international and multinational co-operation - for example, its participation 
in the URENCO project with the United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of 
Germany and in international meetings on waste management. He was gratified 
to note that the Director General was advocating a similar approach. 
39. As regards technical assistance, the implementation of the technical and 
co-operation programme was satisfactory. 
The modified outline of the annual 
2/ 


report on technical assistance- had greatly contributed to the clarity of 
that document. His delegation also welcomed the greater attention being paid 
to the evaluation of projects. 


40. The safeguards system had performed satisfactorily in spite of some 
regrettable cases. That served to show that, in order to be able to function, 
the safeguards system needed the strong support of all Member States. 
2/ GC(XXVI)/INF/206. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 11 


41. His Government wished to reaffirm its warm endorsement of the efforts of 
the Director General to find satisfactory solutions to problems which were a 
source of grave concern and agreed with the latter that it was vital for the 
safeguards system to enjoy universal support. In that context, he welcomed the 
offer made by the Soviet Union at the United Nations General Assembly's second 
special session on disarmament to place a number of its nuclear facilities 
under IAEA safeguards. 
42. The Netherlands was satisfied with the progress, albeit slow, of the negotiations 
in the Committee on Assurances of Supply, which was the appropriate forum 
where the respective parties could discuss their interests, and hoped that the 
Committee would successfully accomplish its task. 
43. Lastly, he expressed confidence that a common understanding would soon be 
reached in the Preparatory Committee of the Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy to be held in 
August-September 1983. 
44. Mr• GHEZAL (Tunisia) said that, in his opening statement, the Director 
General had summarized the situation of nuclear power in the world, had described 
the technical, political and psychological difficulties that it was encountering 
and had expressed his views on the means of overcoming the obstacles on the 
basis of the experience accumulated by the Agency during the 25 years of its 
existence. 
45. Tunisia had noted with satisfaction and supported the enlargement of the 
Agency's responsibilities relating to the nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear safety, 
emergency assistance, plutoniutn storage and the assurance of supplies. 
46. Nuclear power had long ceased to be a luxury: it was a condition of 
economic and social development which no country could overlook. However, as 
the Director General had rightly pointed out, the nature of the problems involved 
differed depending on whether they related to the industrialized or the developing 
countries. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 12 


47. The energy needs of the developing countries would continue to grow in 
parallel with their economic development but only a small number of those 
countries had the industrial, financial and technological capacity to consider 
trying t.o use nuclear power. It was up to the industrialized countries to 
develop nuclear power so as to release part of the oil they consumed for the 
benefit of developing countries. 
48. Every effort should be made to ensure to all countries access to nuclear 
technology, the certainty of contractual obligations being fulfilled and the 
guarantee of assured supplies of materials, equipment and services. 
49. Tunisia attached a growing importance to the development of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear technology in agriculture, hydrology, industry and medicine. 
It was satisfied with the co-operation it maintained with the Agency in those 
fields. It had been happy to receive, in 1982, an important technical cooperation 
programming mission from the Agency. 
50. Tunisia noted with satisfaction the growing interest of the Secretariat and 
Member States in studying the problems of evaluating technical co-operation and 
making the Agency's technical co-operation policies more transparent. It shared 
the feeling that it would be wise to strengthen the administrative and technical 
procedures used in evaluation and to try to make the Agency's basic promotional 
work altogether more coherent. A point to be stressed, however, was that that 
exercise must not lead to the application of new conditions to, or additional 
constraints on, technical assistance. 
51. The admission of Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for 
Namibia, to membership of the Agency was a source of deep satisfaction for 
Tunisia, which hoped in the near future to be able to welcome delegates of an 
independent Namibia and an independent Palestinian State as fully-fledged 
Members. 
52. The entry of a new African country into the Agency's fold provided an 
occasion to stress the urgency of removing the injustice inherent in the inequit 
able representation of Africa on the Board of Governors. No doubt other African 
countries would be joining the Agency in the future, and the solution proposed 
GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 13 


now in the draft amendment to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, aimed at alleviating 
the serious under-representation of the areas of Africa and of the Middle East 
and South Asia, would logically cease to be a sufficient solution. 


53. Tunisia had noted the effort made over the last few months to recruit 
more nationals of developing countries for responsible posts in the Secretariat. 
It hoped that the rate of recruitment would be accelerated so that the balance 
between North and South could be adjusted within the time-scale established by 
Conference resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, adopted at the Conference's twenty-fifth 
session, on the basis of objective criteria regarding competence and equitable 
geographical distribution between the different regions. 
54. In June 1981, Israeli military aircraft had bombed the Tamuz reactor in 
Iraq, a Member State of the Agency and a party to NPT, all of whose nuclear 
facilities and equipment were subject to Agency safeguards. The fallacious and 
arrogant allegations Israel had used in trying to justify that senseless and 
unprecedented act, which endangered the security and peace of the whole region, 
were familiar to all. The former Director General, Sigvard Eklund.had declared 
at the time that the Agency had not, since its founding, known such a serious 
problem as the one presented by the consequences of that event, adding that it 
was really the Agency's safeguards system that was under attack - a system 
which had never before been faulted. The fact was that Israel, on the pretext 
of warding off a potential danger, simply wished to establish itself as a 
gendarme for the region, arrogating to itself the right to deny to others all 
access to scientific and technological development and progress. Yet everyone 
knew it was Israel, not Iraq, that had developed a military nuclear capacity. 
55. The Israeli attack had been condemned by the international community, and 
also, notably, by the Board of Governors and by the Conference, which had 
decided in resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 to review at its twenty-sixth session 
the question of suspending Israel's rights and privileges of membership unless 
it complied with Security Council resolution 487 of 19 June 1981. However, as 
was its custom, Israel had ignored the Security Council resolution and the 
resolution of the General Conference. Accordingly, by deciding at its present 
session to suspend Israel's rights and privileges the General Conference would 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 


page 14 


be doing no more than acting in defence of the Agency and its credibility. 


Tunisia respected the principle of universality, but should that principle be 


extended to those who made a regular habit of trampling on the principles and 


objectives not only of the Agency but of the United Nations Charter? 


56. The absence of any sanctions after Israel's aggression of 7 June 1981 
had no doubt encouraged it to mark the anniversary by invading the Lebanon, 
there sowing systematic destruction and massacring tens of thousands of 
Lebanese and Palestinians. Sanctions in response to the terrible slaughter in 
West Beiruit were the responsibility of the Security Council, whereas defence 
of the Statute and credibility of the Agency fell within the General 
Conference's sphere of competence. 
57. Mr. KELLY (United Kingdom) said he would start by responding to some 
of the points in the Director General's statement. 
58. Firstly, on safety. Anyone who built and operated a nuclear installation 
was assuming responsibilities of world-wide import, whether he liked to acknowledge 
it or not. If there was an accident, it could have direct physical 
consequences in other countries. But even if the accident led to no casualties, 
the psychological consequences could be world-wide. Three Mile Island had 
caused delays and difficulties to nuclear power projects in a number of 
countries even though they were situated far from Pennsylvania and even though 
the reactors were of another design. 
59. It was possible therefore to sympathize with the global approach that 
Dr. Blix took to safety questions and with his suggestion that there should be 
world-wide safety standards. In the last resort, each country would doubtless 
want to establish its own safety standards reflecting its own philosophy. 
Even so, it should be possible for the Agency to establish minimum standards or 
guidelines. Each country would then be able to claim, and hopefully would 
claim, that in establishing its national standards it had taken full account of 
the recommendations or minimal code established by the Agency. If such codes or 


GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 15 


recommendations were to play a big part, they would need to be more specific 
than those so far adopted by the Agency and to be bought in large numbers by 
design organizations and regulatory bodies, which was not the case at present. 


60. The Director General should be encouraged to develop his idea, and to put 
to the Board proposals for developing the Agency's standards and improving their 
distribution. The Agency should also provide a safety-mission service, though 
the budgetary implications would need to be referred to the Board. 
61. On the questions of fuel services and waste management the Director General 
had shown a logical and comprehensive approach. If a world State had existed, 
it would certainly have made sense to centralize fuel services. Again, since 
the amount of long-lived waste so far produced was no more than some hundreds 
of cubic metres, there must be remote areas where such a volume could be buried 
without causing any danger or impeding any economic activity. However, it was 
impossible to name such areas because the Governments concerned objected. Populations 
were unwilling to accept atomic waste from another country in their 
territory, though their attitude about other types of waste was more relaxed. 
So, each individual country might have to establish national waste storage for 
some time to come. 
62. However, fuel enrichment and reprocessing could be done internationally, 
and in the United Kingdom construction would shortly start on a new reprocessing 
plant with a capacity of 600 tonnes a year, of which a substantial portion 
would be available for foreign fuel. 
63. As regards waste management, a step forward had been made in the United 
Kingdom. A body involving private industry, the publicly owned nuclear industry 
and the Government had been established to develop, build and manage disposal 
facilities for intermediate-level waste, and later to take over responsibility 
for marine disposal of low-level waste. 
64. Safeguards represented another area of global responsibility. The efficient 
functioning of the safeguards system would help to divorce the concept of nuclear 
power from that of nuclear weapons. Conversely, there were few things which 
would damage the prospects for nuclear power more than a breakdown of the safeguards 
system, or the diversion to military ends of nuclear material committed 
to peaceful use. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.241 


page 16 


65. In safeguards, as in the areas of reactor design and safety, it was important 
to move with the times - to utilize up-to-date equipment and a sophisticated 
approach to the strategy of monitoring. It was no good adopting a mechanical 
.approach. The Agency should be in a position to make the most confident possible 
assessment, based not only on inspections but also on the deployment of modern 
equipment, as to whether diversion had taken place. It needed the means to 
develop modern monitoring techniques and Member States should be ready to allow 
such techniques Co be deployed. 


66. There had been some improvements in the organization of the General 
Conference. For example, the President's initial address had been directed 
towards topical Agency issues. The Director General, by circulating his speech 
in advance, had sought to focus attention on points of a technical character. 
The delegates had been invited to keep their remarks short. The discussion 
between ministers had provided a top-level political view of nuclear power 
prospects; and ideas were to be invited on the further improvement of the 
technical assistance and co-operation programme. 
67. Those changes, which made for a more business-like conference, were welcome 
but it would be possible to go further in the same direction. For example, the 
rest of the Director General's speech would have been more useful if it had been 
available earlier. There was room to simplify the ritualistic, almost liturgical, 
character which sometimes marked the proceedings. Was it really necessary for 
chairmen to be thanked and praised by speakers from each of the Agency's regions? 
Would it not be possible for such statements simply to be published in the 
record? Or could not a spokesman be selected by lot to speak on behalf of all 
the regions? Perhaps something could be done about the General Debate, during 
which the room was sometimes almost empty? 
68. In the 1960s the General Conference had attracted the attention of 
numerous heads of atomic energy commissions and senior administration personnel. 
People of comparable standing had taken part in the work of the Board of 
Governors, and discussion in the General Conference and the Board had related 
occasionally to technical issues. That was less the case today because the 
Agency had taken on a more political character - which was a threat to its 
proper roleGC(
XXVI)/OR.241 
page 17 


69. Obviously, the many countries that made up the Agency had very different 
outlooks. They came from the North, the South, the East and the West; some 
supplied material and components, others bought them; and there were racial 
antagonisms. It was thus all too easy to identify topical political differences 
and to allow them to dominate the debates. Yet, in doing so, they risked 
destroying the Agency, either by tearing it apart on some particularly thorny 
issue or, perhaps more probably, by making the meetings so tedious that no-one 
with major responsibilities for atomic energy would find it worth his while 
attending. 
70. He was not the British Foreign Secretary but simply a nuclear administrator. 
If he said anything about political issues he would be speaking on advice from 


the Foreign Office or even reading out the text of a Foreign Office telegram. 


He "ould be contributing nothing from the area where he had a certain knowledge 


and enjoyed a certain authority. Many of his colleagues were in a similar 


position and it followed that at the end of the day they would not have settled 


any major political issue. That would be done elsewhere. 


71. In the Agency, Member States' representatives had their own vocation - to 
discuss and decide on atomic issues, and there was no shortage of such issues 
needing attention. Apart from the Agency, there was no organization available 
to tackle those issues on a global basis. Certainly such technical work could 
not be done in a Committee of the General Assembly. 
72. Atomic energy had arrived at just the moment when mankind needed a new 
energy source; it could bring enormous benefits. At the same time it had no 


less a potential to bring mankind untold misery. Whether it would work for good 


or evil would depend in part on how well the Agency fulfilled the task it had 


been given. 


73. Mr. GEORGE (Australia), recalling that the present session of the 
General Conference marked the 25th anniversary of the Agency read the 
following message of congratulations which the Australian Minister for Foreign 
Affairs had sent to Director General Blix: 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 18 


"On behalf of the Australian Government I extend warm congratulations 


on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the founding of the 


International Atomic Energy Agency. Australia values highly the 


important contribution which the Agency has made to international 


peace and prosperity through the promotion of the peaceful uses of 


nuclear energy within the framework of an effective international 


• non-proliferation and safeguards regime. 
In the years ahead, 
Australia will be concerned to see that the Agency maintains the 
high standards of its professional contribution in the promotional, 
technical assistance and regulatory fields. Australia has particular 
international responsibilities as a major supplier of nuclear fuel. 
We will continue to attach the greatest importance to Australia's role 
in the Agency and to making constructive contributions to the discharge 
by the Agency of its responsibilities". 
74. Data provided by representatives .of the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency at the 
very recent Conference on Nuclear Power Experience underlined Australia's place 
as a major source of uranium. According to the latest OECD statistics, 
Australia possessed approximately 17% of the Western world's low-cost reasonably 
assured resources of uranium recoverable at costs below US $80/kg U,0_. 
However, when account was taken of the recent reduction in the figure given for 
the United States' low-cost reasonably assured resources, Australia's share 
rose to some 19%, and his country emerged as a leading world source. That 
figure did not include the resources of the deposit at Olympic Dam (Roxby 
Downs), where definite ore reserves could not be established until further 
intensive drilling was completed, but which on preliminary ore grade estimates 
might prove to be Australia's largest deposit. 


75. Progress had been made in the negotiation of bilateral nuclear safeguards 
agreements. Those with EUSATOH and Japan, which had entered into force in 
1982, were of particular significance, given the size and importance of the 
peaceful nuclear activities of the countries in question. The Australian network 
of bilateral nuclear safeguards and co-operation agreements now covered the 
major part of the international fuel cycle, and provided assurances of supply 
within an effective non-proliferation regime. Australia's bilateral agreements 
were also significant for the detail in which were delineated the conditions 
governing sensitive processes and international transfers, thereby ensuring 
predictability of operation. He believed that those agreements represented 
important general principles of international nuclear co-operation which were 
shared by other major suppliers and consumers alike. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 19 


76. In the field of environmental protection, two nuclear codes of practice 
had been drafted and were soon to be tabled in the Australian Parliament. They 
were the Code of Practice for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Substances 
(1982) and the Code of Practice on the Management of Radioactive Waste from 
the Mining and Milling of Radioactive Ores (1982). Those codes were consistent 
with guidelines developed by the IAEA, and the Australian authorities had found 
IAEA work in those areas to be of particular assistance. 


77. The pre-feasibility study report by the Uranium Enrichment Group of 
Australia (UEGA) for the establishment of a commercial uranium enrichment industry 
in Australia had been put before the Australian Parliament on 26 November 1981. 
A second report from UEGA was due to be completed later in 1982. 
78. There had also been developments in the field of nuclear research in 
Australia. The collaborative research programme conducted by the Australian 
National University (ANU) and the Australian Atomic Energy Commission (AAEC) 
on the development of SYNROC for the immobilization of high-level radioactive 
waste had continued during 1982. In addition to the funds already committed 
by the AAEC, the Government had approved during the present year the allocation 
of $230 000 for an evaluation of the containment properties of SYNROC using 
radioactive materials, and just over $1 million for assisting the AAEC in 
building a non-radioactive pilot plant to demonstrate all steps in the production 
of full-scale SYNROC-filled canisters and to commence related testing procedures. 
79. Nuclear research in Australia was focused on the uranium fuel cycle, in 
keeping with the country's position as a major producer and exporter of uranium. 
The environmental impact of the uranium mining and milling industry was also 
given special emphasis. Australia participated in international studies through 
the IAEA and the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency on the long-term management of 
uranium mill tailings. 
80. His delegation agreed with the Director General that the Conference 
on Nuclear Power Experience had proved to be a timely stock-taking exercise for 
the world nuclear industry. While the achievements of nuclear energy had been 
substantial, it had to be recognized that, world-wide, the nuclear industry was 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 20 


facing a-difficult future, at least in the short term. Apart from recessiongoverned 
economic difficulties, the problem of public acceptance of nuclear 
power and the wastes it generated, and continuing public concern about its 
safety aspects, remained major issues affecting the industry. Australia stood 
ready to assist the Agency in meeting effectively the challenges of the future. 


81. Support for the important non-proliferation role of the Agency remained a 
matter of the highest priority for Australia. The establishment of the Agency 
and the acceptance by Member States of its Statute and system of safeguards 
were milestones in the effort to contain the spread of nuclear weapons and at 
the same time to promote peaceful nuclear co-operation. The role of the Agency 
had been enhanced by the conclusion of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, 
which continued to be the major international instrument on non-proliferation 
and the peaceful application of nuclear energy. 
82. Australia welcomed the very recent offer by a fourth nuclear-weapon State 
to enter into an agreement with the Agency for the voluntary application of 
safeguards on its territory. He looked forward to the early conclusion of that 
agreement and to learning further details of the nuclear facilities to be 
covered by it. 
83. At the same time it had to be recognized that a small minority of States 
with nuclear programmes had decided to stand aside from NPT.- The Australian 
Minister of Foreign Affairs had referred to that situation in his address to 
the Second Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly on Disarmament 
84. Australia looked forward to the time when NPT would attract universal 
adherence. 
85. A change in the present situation would require a change in the way in 
which half a dozen or so countries regarded their security and other interests. 
Over the past decade a number of countries had found it possible to change their 
way of looking at things and accede to NPT. Australia hoped that the few 
countries still outside the system would come to perceive the security benefits 
and the other advantages which flowed from acceptance of NPT. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.24l 
page 21 


86. Turning to the safeguards section of the annual report for 1981, he noted 
with concern that the Agency was not in a position, pending implementation of 
certain technical measures, to discharge fully its verification responsibilities 
in respect of certain reactors where independent verification of fresh fuel 
was not possible. That was the first time that the Agency had been unable to 
give a categorical assurance about all the facilities it safeguarded. In that 
connection he endorsed the Director General's comments concerning the need to 
update safeguards arrangements so as to make the best use of cost-effective 
modern methods. 
87. In its efforts to rectify the situation described in the Annual Report 
for 1981, the Agency had the full and continuing support of Australia. His 
delegation noted with concern that unsafeguarded facilities, some of which 
involved sensitive technologies, continued to exist in a small number of nonnuclear-
weapon States. The States concerned had not yet accepted legally 
binding commitments to apply safeguards to those facilities, and their continued 
operation outside the scope of international safeguards was harmful to the role 
of the Agency and to public appreciation of the effectiveness of that role. 
A desire to assist the Agency further in ensuring the effectiveness of its safeguards 
activities had led Australia in 1980 to enter into a bilateral programme 
of assistance. That programme, involving expenditure of $541 000 in extrabudgetary 
resources over three years, was now well under way. 


88. Work being conducted under the Australian programme of assistance involved 
a number of research projects on safeguards technology and methodology for 
enrichment plants and research into field equipment for inspectors. Under the 
research projects on enrichment plant safeguards, technical material had been 
submitted to the Agency concerning possible safeguards approaches for centrifuge 
enrichment plants, and computer programs for a multi—channel analyser system 
for non-destructive assay work had been made available. The services of a 
cost-free expert were being offered to assist in the development and implementation 
of procedures to eliminate inspector error in operating measurement instruments. 
A gas-phase monitor had been developed, with encouraging results in 
field tests, for measuring levels of enrichment in centrifuge enrichment plants. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 22 


89. His Government shared the views of the Director General on the importance 
of informed, constructive criticism concerning the Agency's safeguards system, 
and had noted his comments concerning the non-secret nature of the safeguards 
operation. There was of course a correlation between an informed public, 
public confidence and constructive criticism. However it was also clear that 
certain information had to be protected if the Agency was to go on performing 
its safeguards function with the requisite thoroughness and with the full 
confidence of Member States. 
90. Concluding his remarks on safeguards, he wished to refer to suggestions 
that had been made for a thorough reappraisal of the Agency's safeguards system. 
The system was designed to be a dynamic one, capable of responding to changed 
circumstances and technological developments, and it must remain so. The Board 
of Governors would start a review of the system at its meetings in February 1983 
His delegation would have considerable reservations, however, about that review 
developing into a full reappraisal of the system itself. The overriding purpose 
of the review by the Board, so he believed, should be that the effective 
discharge by the Agency and Member States of their safeguards responsibilities 
was maintained. 
91. He had taken note of the Director General's plan to reorganize the 
Department of Safeguards. He believed that the allocation of work among three 
operational Divisions would be more equitable and would enhance confidence 
that Agency safeguards were being applied effectively within the limits of 
the resources available. 
92. Australia also attached great importance to the Agency's role in the field 
of technical assistance and co-operation, and was pleased that the technical 
assistance and co-operation programme continued to expand. The indicative 
planning figures for 1984-86 agreed on at the June 1982 Board meetings reflected 
the serious resolve of Member States to increase their contributions to that 
important area of the Agency's work. The figures represented a positive 
response to the desire of the General Conference, expressed at its previous 
session, to see technical .assistance activities financed by means of predictable 
and assured resources. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 23 


93. Australia expected to meet in full its assessed contribution to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1983. Its 1982 obligations 
thereunder had been discharged. In addition to its contribution to the Fund, 
Australia had allocated $60 000 in 1982 for use under the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement (RCA) and had continued its US $345 000 programme of bilateral 
assistance to Malaysia for the training of personnel from the Tun Ismail Atomic 
Research Centre (PUSPATI) and for the provision of consultancy services to the 
Centre. Australia's contribution to the RCA and its programme of assistance 
to PUSPATI underlined its continuing commitment to nuclear technical assistance 
in the region in question. 


94. Australia's involvement in the RCA project on isotope hydrology and 
sedimentology had continued during 1982 with positive results. A major project 
review meeting was scheduled to be held in Australia in November. Moreover, 
in March 1982 Australia had announced that it would participate in the RCA 
UNDP-asslsted project on the industrial application of isotopes and radiation 
technology. His Government would allocate $655 000 over a five-year period to 
that project. 
95. The decision by the Australian Government to support the project reflected 
the importance it attached to the RCA as an effective instrument in the social, 
technological and economic development of countries in the Asian region. During 
1982, Australia had participated in celebrating the RCA's tenth anniversary. 
Commitment to the RCA remained the main component of Australia's extrabudgetary 
contributions to the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
activities. 
96. He now wished to turn briefly to a number of other important activities 
of the Agency. His Government welcomed the work of the Agency in the field of 
nuclear safety - which was justifiably accorded priority status alongside 
safeguards and technical assistance. The IAEA was playing a vital role in 
the development of international safety standards. His Government welcomed and 
would participate in the Agency's other activities in that field, including the 
organization of a world-wide system for reporting abnormal occurrences and 



GX(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 24 


emergency planning. The suggestion made by the Director General in his 
statement concerning the Agency's contribution to the further internationali


zation of nuclear safety measures merited careful consideration. 


97". The development of multinational arrangements dealing with specific aspects 
of the nuclear fuel cycle could make a valuable contribution to both nonproliferation- 
and international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The attention given to assurances of supply, international plutonium 
storage and international spent fuel management demonstrated that the Agency 
had been prepared to address relevant issues as the nuclear industry expanded. 
It had always been an integral part of Australia's non-proliferation policy to 
contribute actively and constructively to the development of such arrangements. 


98. The Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage would shortly present 
its report, on the basis of which further action in that important domain could 
be considered. 
99. In the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), it was important that 
Member States should work together in order to develop principles and practices 
which not only satisfied sound non-proliferation standards but also encouraged 
the proper development of national nuclear programmes and promoted international 
co-operation. The work being done by CAS would also be valuable for the 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Development to be 
held in 1983. 


100. Finally, he wished to pay tribute to the work and dedication of the 
Director General who, in his first year of office, had done much to inspire 
and encourage the adoption of new approaches to the problems which confronted 
the Agency. Of particular value had been Dr. Blix's energetic promotion of the 
Agency's role and activities, largely through speaking engagements and a 
vigorous overseas travel programme. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 25 


101. Mr. NIMPUNO (Indonesia) said that in the present year the Agency was 
celebrating its twenty-fifth anniversary. During those 25 years, nuclear 
technology had made many great advances. To take the field of energy production 
as an example, while there had been only three power reactors in 1957, in 
1982 there were 277 in operation. Similar progress had also been made in 
other fields of application, although developments had been less spectacular 
and certainly less controversial.- It was disconcerting, however, that during 
the 25 years of promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the progress 
made lagged far behind the non-peaceful development. It was his opinion that 
in the coming years the IAEA, and the entire nuclear community, should make 
greater efforts to restrain the non-peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
102. More than half of the present world community consisted of developing 
countries. Those countries placed great emphasis on the social and economic 
development of their peoples. Nevertheless, not all of them had the resources 
and technology necessary to implement their development programmes. Hence, 
the developing countries were particularly interested in international cooperation 
activities, which were regarded as an indispensable contribution to 
their development endeavours. At the same time, however, the industrialized 
countries also needed to develop themselves further. Hence the present world 
was one of interdependency, a fact which even the most advanced industrialized 
countries had to admit. The IAEA was a forum where international co-operation 
and interaction could be promoted, in particular in the field of nuclear 
technology. It was that special role of the IAEA which should be expanded in 
the years to come. While admittedly much had been achieved, there was still 
much more to be done. The technical co-operation programmes required greater 
and more secure resources. The fact that the Board of Governors had recommended 
increasing indicative planning figures for the Technical Assistance and Cooperation 
Fund was a general acknowledgement that the Fund was inadequate. That 
fact was also seen from the number of technical co-operation requests which could 
not be approved by the Secretariat through lack of funds. From the various 



GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 26 


documents supplied by the Secretariat it was clear that about a quarter of the 
requests made by Member States for 1983 could not be met - a figure which was 
high and should be seriously considered by the General Conference at its 
present session. 


103. There were two Agency activities in the realm of technical assistance 
which were particularly beneficial to the developing countries. One was the 
work of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in Trieste, 
through which scientists from developing countries had received training and 
knowledge in various branches of physics; the second was the Regional Cooperative 
Agreement (RCA), through which the countries concerned received 
assistance and, more important, learned to work together in solving their 
common problems. 
104. Technical co-operation activities were interactions between States and the 
other parties involved. It was obvious that those participating in such activities 
had to show mutual trust, good faith and respect, and that the rules of 
the game governing them had to be based on that spirit. It was not proper, 
therefore, if conditions were applied solely to the recipients; the other 
parties also had a part to play in making the co-operative efforts harmonious 
and fruitful. 
105. There was another aspect of the Agency's activities that was causing great 
concern. During the past two or three years, the Agency's system of safeguards, 
its second main function, had been challenged on several occasions. During the 
previous Conference session, Member States had nevertheless restated their confidence 
in the system and it was to be hoped that at its present session the 
Conference would do the same. As stated in the Statute, safeguards were 
designed to ensure that special fissionable and other materials, services, 
equipment, facilities and information made available by the Agency or at its 
request or under its supervision or control were not used in such a way as to 
further any military purpose. Unfortunately, that objective was still overshadowed 
by the negative aspects of the utilization of nuclear energy on account 
of the inability of countries to reach agreement on how to do away with nuclear 
weapons. It was his delegation's conviction that the act of non-nuclear-weapon 
States in joining NPT should be reciprocated by nuclear-weapon States in implementing 
Article VI of NPT. The safeguards system was the only way to avert the 


GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 27 


risk of nuclear destruction. He appealed to all concerned to see to it that 
the whole world was free from nuclear fear and that nuclear energy was known 
to mankind only through its benefits. 


106. In the coming years there would be some difficult and serious problems. 
Among them were the constant demand of the developing countries for the 
transfer of nuclear technology, the storage of plutonium and radioactive waste 
management - including, in particular, spent fuel storage. He was confident 
that the burden of solving those problems could be successfully overcome by 
international co-operation based on good will and mutual trust. 
107. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh) said that in the 25 years of its existence 
the Agency had established itself as a professional international organization 


of the highest competence and as a forum for scientific co-operation between 


developed and developing countries. It was to be hoped that,with the parti


cipation and co-operation of Member States, it would be able to assume new and 


wider responsibilities in the future and to foster international co-operation 


in an effective transfer of nuclear science and technology to the developing 


countries. 


108. It was unfortunate for the developing countries that only $4.38 million 
of the $34.2 million Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund were included 
in the Regular Budget. In view of the importance of technical assistance for 
the developing countries, a greater proportion of the funds available for 
technical assistance should be placed under the Regular Budget so as to make 
them more predictable. In addition, attempts should be made to obtain 
financing for large-scale, multi-year and, perhaps, multi-country projects 
from outside sources. 
109. Bangladesh had for a long time been trying to install its first nuclear 
power plant, the need for which had been established by a number of feasibility 
studies in which the Agency had rendered valuable assistance. Unfortunately, 
those efforts had been unavailing so far, as it had not been possible to raise 
the initial capital required, although reactor manufacturers willing to sell 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 


page 28 


small and medium power reactors existed and the costs of nuclear power had been 
found-to be competitive. Perhaps confidence might be generated among financial 
entrepreneurs if the Agency were to sponsor the construction of an International 
Demonstration Reactor (IDR) in the small and medium power reactor range in a 
developing Member State. 


110. An IDR with special warranties from the supplier and with the financial 
risks distributed among a number of parties could help both to demonstrate 
reliability and to obtain financing for such a plant. That might be a joint 
venture of the IAEA, the lending agencies, the country supplying the reactor and 
the recipient Member State. It should not, however, be regarded as the Agency's 
entry into the nuclear power market, but the Agency could study issues such as 
efficient management of nuclear power projects, manpower development, etc. The 
Agency might also convene a meeting of international financing organizations, 
such as the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the OPEC Fund, and of 
interested private financing agencies and manufacturers, exporters and prospective 
buyers of small and medium power reactors. If those proposals were 
adopted, the concept and economics of an IDR could be tested under the conditions 
prevailing in developing Member States, the IAEA could act as a catalyst 
in arranging financing and management for reactors in developing Member 
States, and the North-South dialogue on the transfer of technology would be 
effectively implemented under the auspices of an international organization 
evolving mechanisms for nuclear technology transfer. 
111. If the Agency were to succeed in setting up an IDR as a model international 
venture, combining technology with trade, it would not only be paving a way 
for developing countries to counter the energy crisis with a modern and proven 


technology, it would also be bringing the developed and developing countries 


together in a joint effort to maximize the benefits of the atom. The reactor 
could be used as an experimental station for developing better safety standards 
and safeguards measures, and could thus play an important role in the advancement 
of non-proliferation, a cherished aim of the IAEA and a common goal of all 
mankind. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 29 


112. Bangladesh was willing to provide the site, manpower and other infrastructural 
facilities for such a reactor. As an oil-importing developing 
country and signatory of NPT with a certain amount of technical manpower, 
Bangladesh was eminently suitable to serve as a site for it. If the IDR were to 
be built in Bangladesh, the facility would be made available for on-the-job 
training and for the dissemination of Information to other Member States 
desiring access to the facility. 
113. The Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA) for the Far East and South 
East Asia and the Pacific had now existed for ten years, and Bangladesh had 
participated in all the RCA projects and in the recently established UNDP 
project on the industrial application of radioisotopes and radiation technology. 
Bangladesh strongly supported the continuation of those projects with increased 
contributions from the Agency and donor countries. Sufficient collaborative 
work had now taken place in the Asian region for the IAEA to consider setting 
up a regional office and a regional research centre in Asia. The latter might 
start with a programme on food preservation by radiation and a training institute 
in the field of electronics. The review meeting of the RCA co-ordinated research 
programme on the repair and maintenance of electronic equipment was to be held 
in Dacca from 29 November to 3 December 1982, and Bangladesh renewed its invitation 
to the Agency and to the RCA Governments to hold the fifth RCA Working 
Group meeting in Dacca in the first half of 1983. 


114. Bangladesh regarded the peaceful utilization of atomic energy as a stimulus 
for the economic and social development of the country, and had therefore 
signed NPT and a safeguards agreement with the IAEA. The Atomic Energy Research 
Establishment (AERE) near Dacca was progressing as scheduled. A 3-MW TRIGA 
Mark-II research reactor was under construction and was expected to be critical 
by the end of 1983. Bangladesh was grateful to the Agency for sending two staff 
members to examine the requirements for using the research reactor for purposes 
such as isotope production and hoped the Agency and other countries would 
extend all possible help to Bangladesh's atomic energy research and development 
programme. The Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission had carried out research and 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 30 


applications work in the field of atomic energy and an International Workshop 
on Monsoon Dynamics had been held at Dacca from 11 January to 19 February 1982 
under the auspices of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics, 
and the Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission, with financial support from the 
United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology Development. The 
Workshop had been attended by 90 scientists from 21 countries. 


115. Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland) said that it was a pleasure for him to welcome 
a new Member of the Agency - Namibia, represented by the United Nations 
Council for Namibia. On the occasion of the Agency's twenty-fifth anniversary, 
he also wished to extend hearty congratulations in the name of the Polish 
Government and delegation to the Director General, Dr. Hans Blix, and to the 
Director General Emeritus, Dr. Sigvard Eklund. 
116. The Polish Government attached great importance to the Agency's work in 
safeguards, nuclear safety and radiological protection and technical cooperation. 
It wished the Director General and the Secretariat further success 
in achieving the main goals of the Agency, namely to prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and to promote the safe development and expansion of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the benefit of all mankind. 
117. The realization of those lofty goals would be possible only in conditions 
of peace and detente: the arms race must be halted and the threat of nuclear 
war banished. It would be brought closer, beyond any doubt, if the familiar 
initiative of the Soviet Union at the second Special Session of the 
United Nations General Assembly on Disarmament - where the USSR had declared 
that it would not be the first to use nuclear weapons - were followed by all. 
If all nuclear Powers made a similar undertaking, the road would be clear for 
the exclusively peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
118. The Polish Government, which was vitally interested in securing a durable 
peace in Europe and the whole world, attached particular importance to the 
Agency's work in safeguards, notably the safeguards required by NPT. It noted 
with satisfaction that the Secretariat, as in past years, had detected no 
diversion of a significant quantity of nuclear material subject to safeguards 
GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 31 


for non-peaceful purposes. Poland had taken an active part in preparing NPT 
and indeed in all aspects of the Agency's work touching on the technical and 
administrative problems associated with the implementation of the Treaty. It 
approved of the steps taken so far by the Agency's Department of Safeguards and 
at the same time felt that further efforts would be necessary to ensure optimum 
utilization of the available inspectorate and other specialists so that the 


inspection programmes could be fully implemented. The Board's determination 


to perform in 1983 a detailed analysis of the organizational and technical 
aspects of safeguards as a whole - and of ways of providing fuller information 
on the aims, functions and achievements of the safeguards system - was most 
welcome. Poland hoped that the non-nuclear-weapon States which had not yet 
acceded to NPT and placed their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards 
would soon do so, thereby ensuring the universality of the safeguards system. 
In that connection the Soviet Union's willingness to submit its nuclear 


facilities to safeguards, announced at the present session of the Conference, 


deserved gratitude. 


119. Poland was keenly interested in the Agency's work in the nuclear power 
field, and especially in its achievements in the area of nuclear safety. During 
the year construction work had begun on Poland's first nuclear power station. 
The decision to build it, taken in a time of serious economic difficulties, was 
justified primarily by the prospect of basing the development of electric power 
generation during the 1990s on nuclear power plants. Given the cost of mining 
and transporting coal, and also the problems of environmental protection, 
Poland could not count on continuing to use coal-fired stations to satisfy the 
increasing demand for electric power. 
120. The basic requirements for nuclear power reactor safety elaborated under 
the NUSS programme would be extremely useful to Poland as it proceeded on the 
path of nuclear power development. The work done by the Agency to improve cooperation 
in nuclear safety matters and to arrange for mutual assistance in 
the event of nuclear accidents was also useful. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 


page 32 


121. In .the fields of radiological safety and the safe transport of radioactive 
materials, the Agency's recommendations, constantly brought up to date in 
accordance with the latest ICRP proposals, provided a basis for the development 
of national regulations. It was highly desirable that the work related to those 
fields be given wider publicity. 
122. Poland had a strong interest in the Agency's activities connected with 
international co-operation and technical assistance. It made extensive use 
itself of. nuclear methods in industry, medicine and agriculture and was grateful 
for the Agency's help in those fields. A favourable climate for co-operation 
had been created by the excellent work of the Secretariat. Poland was doing 
everything to ensure that its own experience would be transferred to the 
benefit of developing countries. It was also taking steps to see that all 
equipment it received from the Agency was put to the most effective use. 
123. In view of the considerable increase - from US $7 million in 1978 to 
$19 million in 1983 - in the funds available for technical assistance, there 


were good grounds for raising the requirements regarding the economic advisa


bility of projects. 


124. The Polish Government endorsed the Agency's report for 1981 and also the 
Agency's programme for 1983-88 and budget for 1983. It supported the idea of 
maintaining the Agency's budget at a constant level. The necessary expansion 
of some activities, especially in the safeguards area, should be achieved by 
improving administration, making more effective use of staff and introducing 
economies in administrative expenses. 
125. Poland pledged an amount of 12 million zlotys for the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund in 1983 - more than twice the sum contributed in 
national currency in 1982. It was prepared to make available an extra ten 
fellowships at Polish institutions for scientists from developing countries. 
126. He congratulated the Director General on his work during his first year of 
office. It was to be hoped that under his leadership the Agency would carry out 


its important and responsible role in a difficult period of history. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 33 


127. Mr. ROSENZWEIG-DIAZ (Mexico) said that in Mexico's view the quest 
for peace must inevitably be centred in the international organizations, particularly 
the United Nations and its specialized agencies. It believed firmly 
in the need to strengthen those organiztions and to seek within them the 
greatest possible efficiency, enhancing their prestige and ensuring that their 
principles were upheld. 
128. Mexico wished to extend a cordial welcome to Namibia, which as a producer 
of uranium was a particularly valuable addition to the membership of the Agency. 
It must be remembered that Namibia was at present under the direct tutelage of 
the United Nations, inasmuch as its territory was illegally occupied by the 
armed forces of South Africa, a country which persisted in violating the 
United Nations Charter, numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and the 
Security Council, and even the judgements of the International Court of Justice. 
129. The Agency's twenty-fifth anniversary provided a good occasion to stress 
once again the inalienable right of all Member States - a right enshrined in 
Article II of the Statute and Article IV of NPT - to pursue the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy in order to promote their scientific, economic and technological 
development. 
130. In his statement the Director General had pointed out that after the early 
years of untrammelled enthusiasm for the development of nuclear energy around 
1960, there had ensued a period of relative discouragement which had meant 
retrenchment and a certain imbalance in the process of generalizing the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Given the ambivalent character of nuclear 
energy - the destructive power of which could so easily take over from its 
peaceful uses - one had to accept that an element of good will was 
indispensable. 
131. Mexico's judgement of the Agency's first quarter of a century had two 
sides, one positive, the other marked by disappointment. On the one hand 
the Agency had achieved a great deal in the various spheres of its competence: 
technical assistance, safeguards and nuclear safety. By and large the annual 
report presented in document GC(XXVI)/664 contained proof of the Agency's 



GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 34 


accomplishments, which had been achieved in some instances despite rigorous 
budgetary limitations. Nevertheless, his delegation felt bound to make the 
observation that, 25 years after the Agency's establishment and 12 years 
after the entry into force of NPT, no efforts had succeeded in halting the 
armaments race, nor in preventing the use of nuclear energy for military 
purposes by certain industrialized countries. 


132. The Government of Mexico had strongly condemned the military attack by 
one Member State, whose nuclear facilities were not subject to Agency safeguards, 
on the nuclear research centre of another Member, whose facilities had 
always been satisfactorily safeguarded. That military action, apart from 
threatening the security and peace of the region in question, had been an unmis 
takable display of contempt for the safeguards system and for NPT, and had thus 
borne serious prejudice to progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
133. Within the Agency various matters were at present being considered which 
held particular interest for the developing countries and which would have to 
be resolved in appropriate ways if the Agency was to continue to work effectively. 
They included adequate representation of developing countries in the 
Secretariat, the definition of technical assistance objectives and the 
financing of technical assistance, a further modification of the Board's composition 
(Article VI of the Statute), the achievement of positive results in 
the Committee on Assurances of Supply, and clear definition of the Agency's 
role in the United Nations for the promotion of international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
134. The developing countries had for some time been in a position to offer 
highly qualified personnel for senior technical and administrative posts in 
the Secretariat. In that connection his delegation had taken note of the 
Director General's reports in documents GC(XXVI)/668 and 672, but it believed 
that further efforts should be made to find a solution to the problem as 
quickly as possible, due importance being accorded to the recruitment of 
staff on as broad a geographical basis as possible. 
135. There were two main questions that had to be dealt with in connection with 
technical assistance, namely the definition of objectives and the problem of 
financing. With regard to the first, it would be useful to study the priorities 
to be assigned to different sectors, the most cost-effective scale of projects, 
GC(XXV1)/OR.241 
page 35 


the balance between large and small projects, integration of otherwise 


inoperative projects into coherent project complexes,-and the possibilities 
offered by training centres. 


136. As to the financing of technical assistance, Mexico believed that the 
criterion for growth should not be based on a comparison with figures for past 
years but on the actual requirements of Member States and the availability of 
funds for financing them. If that criterion was applied, it had to be said that 
the growth of technical assistance was still inadequate. The indicative planning 
figures for 1984-86 established by the Board in June represented an absolute 
minimum, in view of the growth of activity and the introduction of new programmes 
in keeping with economic development and population growth. Those who made 
voluntary contributions would have to bear in mind certain hard facts, notably 
the static tendency of contributions in kind, the depletion of UNDP funds and the 
falling-off of promotional activities financed from the Regular Budget. 
137. Although the extrabudgetary funds used to finance "footnote-a/" projects 
had increased over the last few years, they constituted an unpredictable source 
of revenue. Mexico thought it would be better if the donor countries could 
include those amounts in their voluntary contributions right from the start so 
as to enhance the predictability of the system of indicative planning figures. 
138. The question of amending Article VI of the Statute should be given further 
consideration by the Board, with a view to increasing the size of that body in 
a reasonable and equitable manner while respecting the criterion of technological 
advancement and leaving the Board's efficiency unimpaired. 
139. Mexico was keenly interested in the work of the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply because of its profound concern regarding secure supplies of nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology and of fuel cycle services. There had 
undoubtedly been progress in the Committee, but concrete results ought to be 
achieved in the very near future. In Working Group 1, CAS had made progress 
which indicated that, given the requisite political will among the participants, 
the study of the principles of international co-operation could be completed 
in a relatively short time. Interest in non-proliferation must not be used as 
a pretext for preventing States from acquiring and developing nuclear technology, 
nor for imposing conditions on them incompatible with their independence 
and sovereign rights. 



CC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 36 


140. The Agency should have a fundamental role to play in the scientific aspects 
of the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation 
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, and the appointment of a man of the 
standing of Mr. Mehta as Secretary of the Conference was most welcome. It was 
to'be hoped that the Preparatory Committee would approve the a11-important 
agenda for the Conference in October. 
141. Finally, Mexico wished to reiterate to the Director General and the 
Secretariat its gratitude for the efforts which had led to such significant 
achievements, even in the face of severe difficulties. 
142. ' Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia) said his delegation had listened with great 
interest to the statement made the day before by the Director General and fully 
supported the measures proposed for further .improving the Agency's activities, 
particularly as related to furthering nuclear disarmament, nuclear power 
development and nuclear safety. 


143. The Agency had an exceptionally important part to play in the fundamental 
matter of reducing international tension and preserving world peace. That fact 
was all the more vital in view of the complicated international situation 
prevailing at the present time. It was essential to continue all 
efforts to solve international conflicts by peaceful means. Hence the 
initiative taken by the Soviet Union in that connection at the Second Special 
Session on Disarmement of the United Nations General Assembly, more particularly 
the statement that the Soviet Union would never be the first to use nuclear 
weapons, acquired exceptional importance. 


144. The Agency's role devolving from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons was a highly responsible one. His delegation was opposed to 
the efforts made by some of the non-nuclear-weapon countries to acquire nuclear 
weapons. All measures to strengthen the non-proliferation regime, to 
reinforce the system of safeguards and to condemn any attempts to weaken safeguards 
had the consistent support of his delegation. Like the other countries 
of the Socialist camp, Czechoslovakia firmly believed that only if the nonproliferation 
regime and the Agency safeguards system were strictly observed 
GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 37 


was it possible to further develop nuclear power production for peaceful 
purposes, and in that connection his country was devoting maximum attention to 
the provision of technical assistance to developing countries on the basis of the 
present system of voluntary contributions for the financing of the technical 
assistance and co-operation programme. He was opposed on principle to the 
tendency to free international trade in nuclear technology aimed at gaining 
access to such technology beyond the bounds of the non-proliferation regime. 


145. In view of the importance of nuclear disarmament, the aggressive policy 
being pursued by Israel, especially the recent events in Lebanon, was cause 
for major concern. 
146. While supporting all the Agency's individual specialized programmes, his 
delegation attributed particular significance to the nuclear power and nuclear 
safety programmes. Mention should be made in that connection of the Conference 
on Nuclear Power Experience, which had been held in Vienna the week before and 
had shown clearly that the present trends in the use of nuclear energy for power 
production purposes were entirely valid. 
147. The results of that conference would have a marked effect, as well, on 
the lines along which future Agency activities developed in those two spheres 
of application. A number of speakers at that conference had provided valuable 
information on the integrated programme being implemented by Member States of 
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) in the domain of nuclear 
power. Czechoslovakia, which was both a manufacturer and an exporter of WWER 
reactors, was also constructing and operating power stations of the WWER type. 
That trend, which would lead to the rational use of power resources, was an 
effective way of improving the national economy of all the countries concerned, 
while at the same time protecting the environment. In 1981, nuclear energy 
accounted for 7.17. of Czechoslovakia's electricity production. 
148. As part of the functions of the international economic association of 
Member States of CMEA, known as "Interatomenergo", important documents of a 
regulatory nature were being compiled, together with design and construction 

GC(XXVI)/OR.241 
page 38 


requirements for nuclear power stations. That work reflected the consistent 
approach adopted by the CMEA countries to dealing with problems of nuclear 
safety. Czechoslovakia had also taken part, from the very outset, in work 
relating to the Agency's nuclear safety programmes. It had to be mentioned in 
that context that, as stated during the round table discussion held on 
20 September in connection with the present Conference session, Czechoslovakia 
had had talks with Austrian representatives on the general problems of nuclear 
power stations in operation and under construction, and especially those sited 
near the frontiers of neighbouring countries. The frank and fruitful discussions 
had resulted in the drafting of agreements which, it was hoped, would be signed 
in the near future. 


149. With regard to the Agency's programme for 1983-88 and budget for 1983, 
the proposed figures were basically acceptable, and the Secretariat's proposal 
to adjust the final cost estimates during the first half of the coming year on 
the basis of the dollar/schilling exchange rate established for all 
United Nations organizations was welcome. Nevertheless, the Secretariat was 
urged to make every effort to avoid non-productive expenditure and to strive 
for maximum savings in the use of funds. 


150. Czechoslovakia attached great importance to technical co-operation and 
assistance and two particular aspects of it: the first was the use of 
multi-year large-scale projects and the second was the principle that in such 
areas as medicine, agriculture and the food industry technical assistance 
should be given predominantly to the group of economically least developed 
countries. His delegation endorsed the adoption of indicative planning 
figures for the targets for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund in 1984-86. Czechoslovakia would be paying in full its 
pledged voluntary contribution to the Fund. 
151. A number of important items on the agenda for the present session 
would be discussed in more detail by the individual committees; one such was 
the question of amending Article VI.A.2. of the Agency's Statute. In that 
connection he wished to point out that his country's stand had already been 
GC(XXV1)/OR.241 
page 39 


made clear on a number of occasions, namely that it was essential, above all, 
to preserve the existing balance in the composition of the Board of Governors 
so as not to impair its effectiveness. Furthermore, at its twenty-fifth 
session the General Conference had adopted a resolution (GC(XXV)/RES/386) on 
increasing the number of Secretariat staff members at all levels from the 
developing countries, which had been discussed in the intervening period at a 
number of meetings of the Board. The measures already adopted in that respect 
could be considered full implementation of the resolution in question. 


The meeting rose at 1.13 p.m. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
May 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 22 September 1982, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 
later: Mr. NIMPUNO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
Paragraphs 


agenda** 

7 General debate and annual report for 1981 1 - 101 

Statements by the delegates of: 1 -4 
5 -11 
Cuba 12 -16 
17 -25 

Bulgaria 
Philippines 26 -29 
Austria 30 -34 
Ecuador 35 -40 
Norway 41 -45 
Chile 46 -51 
Syrian Arab Republic 52 -58 
Hungary 59 -64 
Viet Nam 65 -73 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 74 -79 
Sweden 80 -90 
Romania 91 -95 
Mongolia 96 -101 
Islamic Republic of Iran 
Commission of the European Communities 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 12 October 1982. 
** GC(XXVI)/674. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVI)/INF/208/Rev.4. 

83-2033 


GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1981 (GC(XXVI)/664 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. CABALLERO (Cuba), welcoming Namibia as a Member of the Agency, 
said that in the 25 years of the Agency's existence its activities had developed 
in parallel with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Unfortunately, because of 
the current economic crisis the poor countries were becoming still poorer and 
more dependent. Furthermore, tensions and conflicts were continuing, as was 
shown particularly by the aggressions against Angola, Mozambique, the peoples 
of south-east Asia and especially by the Zionist invasion of Lebanon. At its 
twenty-fifth session the General Conference had had to adopt a resolution 
calling upon Israel to comply with the provisions of United Nations Security 
Council resolution 487. Unfortunately, not only had Israel done nothing of the 
sort but no effective measures had been taken against that country; accordingly, 
the General Conference should, at its current session, adopt the necessary sanctions. 
Although the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes was the 
essential and permanent objective of the Agency, the threat posed by nuclear 
weapons was regrettably becoming more acute in the world, notably because of 
continued insistence on manufacturing the neutron bomb, the installation of 
tactical nuclear weapons in Western Europe and the steps taken by countries 
like Israel and South Africa to obtain nuclear weapons. Under those conditions, 
it was difficult to expect any strengthening of the non-proliferation regime. 


2. The United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, to be held in 1983, and 
the deliberations of the Agency's Committee on Assurances of Supply would 
undoubtedly pave the way for the desired international consensus on the transfer 
of nuclear technology to developing countries. It was necessary to create a 
climate of confidence between supplier and consumer countries, and for that 
purpose the two categories of countries must reconcile their different priorities, 
namely the need for guarantees relating to the supply of technology, on 
the one hand, and the need for safeguards on the use of that technology on the 
other. 
3. Cuba lacked its own energy resources and had to increase its electricity 
generating capacity. Nuclear power should become a reality under the 1986-1990 
five-year plan. Preliminary work on construction of the country's first nuclear 
power plant was continuing and the necessary steps connected with legislation, 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 3 


regulation, radiological protection and training in various peaceful 


nuclear applications had been or would soon be taken. With regard to training, 


an evaluation had been made of the Agency's technical assistance projects 


within the framework of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Cuba 


was participating with States Members of the Council for Mutual Economic 


Assistance (CMEA) in studies on 440-MW WWER power reactors. At the same time, 


it was continuing its collaboration with the Agency, which had taken the form, 


notably, of discussions and negotiations in 1982 on the subsidiary arrangements 


for the two safeguards agreements concluded between Cuba and the Agency in 1980. 


4. His delegation wished to congratulate the Agency, on the occasion of its 
25th anniversary, on the work it had carried out in the realm of technical 
co-operation with developing countries. It welcomed the measures taken by the 
new Director General, in particular the organization of courses to train 
candidates from developing countries as safeguards inspectors. 
5. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) recalled, on the occasion of the 25th anniversary 
of the Agency, its achievements in promoting international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the very important role it was 
playing to strengthen the nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime and to 
exercise effective international control over the use of nuclear energy and 
technology. 
6. The international situation had deteriorated because of the actions of 
some Western militarist groups. The Israeli aggression against Lebanon and 
the barbarous extermination of the Palestinian people had made it all the more 
difficult to find a peaceful solution of the conflict in the Middle East and, 
in that context, the struggle for disarmament took on ever greater importance. 
His Government supported specific measures designed to reduce the threat of 
nuclear war, and in particular the undertaking given by the Soviet Union at the 
United Nations General Assembly's second Special Session on Disarmament that 
it would not be the first to use nuclear weapons. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.242 


page 4 


7. The decision by the USSR to place under Agency safeguards a part of its 
peaceful nuclear facilities contributed to the strengthening of the Agency's 
safeguards system and was accordingly conducive to the maintenance and consolidation 
of peace in the world. 
8. Bulgaria was participating in the Agency's safeguards system by helping the 
safeguards inspectors to carry out their tasks, by taking part in the improvement 
of methods and equipment used for that purpose, by making available its 
nuclear facilities to the Agency for the conduct of experiments, by providing 
training for future inspectors and so on. It firmly believed that international 
co-operation was essential in that field. 
9. Bulgaria noted with satisfaction the results obtained by the Agency in 
safeguards and technical assistance and also the work on the development of the 
nuclear power industry, on nuclear safety and on environmental protection. The 
Bulgarian delegation approved the priority accorded in the Agency's draft programme 
for 1983-88 to safeguards, nuclear safety and technical assistance, 
which were of great importance for the maintenance of peace and for the economic 
growth of nations. It endorsed the Agency's draft budget for 1983 and hoped 
that efforts would be made to reduce non-productive expenditure and administrative 
costs. His country, which regularly made a contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund, considered that such contributions should in 
future retain their voluntary character and be made in national currency. With 
regard to the question of amending Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, he was of 
the opinion that the Board of Governors, as constituted at present, was 
conducting its work with efficiency and that any change in its composition 
required more thorough consideration. 


10. Under the Bulgarian nuclear power programme, the Kozloduj nuclear power 
station was operating with four WWER-440 units with an aggregate capacity 
of 1760 MW(e) and providing 26% of the electricity generated in the country. 
It had operated satisfactorily for eight years with a high availability factor. 


A fifth unit, of 1000 MW(e),was to be commissioned in 1985 and a sixth unit of 
the same capacity in 1990, in which year the power station would be completed. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 5 


With the nuclear power station under construction on the banks of the Danube, 
which would have a capacity of 1000 MW(e), Bulgaria would by 1990 have a 
nuclear capacity of 4760 MW(e), accounting for about 407o of the country's 
electricity production. 


11. The work carried out by CMEA and the Agency in nuclear and radiological 
safety was of great help in the construction and operation of nuclear power 
plants. Moreover, thanks to its co-operation within the framework of CMEA with 
the Soviet Union and other socialist countries, Bulgaria was applying nuclear 
techniques in industry, agriculture and medicine. Co-operation with CMEA 
Member States had made it possible to develop 1000-MW(e) WWER units and large 
fast reactors. Bulgaria was actively participating in the Agency's activities, 
notably in the International Nuclear Information System, in the network of 
secondary standards dosimetry laboratories and in the Agency's research programme. 
Bulgarian experts were taking part in the meetings of working groups 
as well as in seminars and symposia organized by the Agency. 
12. Mr. BART0L0ME (Philippines) said that without the Agency's assistance 
the Philippines would possibly not have launched a nuclear power programme at 
all and would not have become one of the nine developing countries having a 
nuclear power plant under construction or in operation. Unfortunately, the 
high costs and the technical difficulties associated with the introduction of 
nuclear power had dissuaded Philippine policy-makers from considering the 
construction of a second power plant. However, the Agency could help to bring 
about a radical change in that attitude. Measures such as the establishment 
of binding international standards, providing the public with more information 
on radioactive wastes and developing more effective Agency safeguards would 
shorten licensing and construction periods and thus improve the competitiveness 
of nuclear power plants. 


13. Since it expected its first nuclear power station to go into operation 
in 1985, the Philippines attached great importance to nuclear safety. In 
that connection it would certainly benefit from the services of the Agency, 
especially from the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme, and considered 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 6 


that the Agency should intensify its work aimed at disseminating information 
about abnormal occurrences in nuclear power plants all over the world. It 
should also implement the expert group recommendations concerning an emergency 
assistance programme, with emphasis on a regional approach. 


14. The dumping of radioactive wastes in the Atlantic had recently given rise 
to reactions in Western countries which indicated that more stringent standards 
should be adopted. Under the London Dumping Convention the Agency should be 
entrusted with responsibility for verifying the environmental assessment 
reports prepared by national and regional authorities before dumping operations 
were authorized. As an archipelago with a population greatly dependent on 
marine resources, the Philippines considered that dumping in the ocean should 
be permitted only as a last resort, preference being given to permanent land 
storage with appropriate monitoring. A regional approach to radioactive 
waste management was desirable, and a regional centre would be very attractive 
to the Philippines and to other countries with small nuclear power 
programmes. In that connection, the Philippines favoured an international 
consensus on a policy of regional reprocessing rather than indefinite storage 
of spent fuel. 
15. As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
his country wished to remind the other parties of the basic trade-off in the 
Treaty, namely that in exchange for accepting full-scope safeguards all parties 
to the Treaty must have full access to nuclear material, equipment and 
technology. There was need today for a clearer definition, perhaps under an 
international agreement, of the full extent of the rights to fuel cycle 
services which had been guaranteed under NPT. At the same time, the measures 
related to the special needs of developing countries should be implemented more 
actively. 
16. The Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme was a success; 
however, the Philippines strongly believed that the Agency should concentrate 
on projects with higher multiplier effects. It was therefore in favour of a 
multi-year approach and of international projects, and welcomed the continuation 
of the multi-year financing scheme. The Regional Co-operative Agreement for 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 7 


Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
among Member States in Asia and the Pacific was an example of the multiplier 
effects which the Agency's technical co-operation could have. From the point 
of view of international co-operation, the 25 years of the Agency's existence 
gave cause for satisfaction and, m spite of the present problems, his delegation 
was optimistic that the future would be as successful as the past had 
been. In conclusion, he welcomed the admission of Namibia to the Agency. 


17. Mr. MUSSI (Austria) congratulated the delegation of Namibia on taking 
its place in the Agency and expressed his best wishes for Namibia's participation 
in the work of the organization. 
18. The global energy situation continued to be worrying and it was obvious 
that the world would have to develop all available energy sources. The difficulties 
confronting the nuclear power programmes of Member States were both 
political and technical in nature. The political difficulties were associated 
with public acceptance, which itself depended on answers to certain technical 
questions, the most important of which were safeguards, safety and waste management. 
19. As to safeguards, the military attack carried out the preceding year on a 
reactor of a Member State had created new problems. Moreover, casting doubt 
on the efficiency of Agency safeguards did not contribute to international 
security. Although Austria was opposed to any increase in the budgets of 
international organizations, it supported the restructuring of the Department 
of Safeguards even if that involved additional expenditure. Furthermore, it 
expressed the hope that a solution would soon be found to the problem of 
safeguarding reactors with on-load refuelling. The principle of nonproliferation 
had always been of primary importance in Austrian foreign policy. 
For that reason, his country appreciated the efforts made in the Agency's 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and in the Preparatory Committee for 
the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation 
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. His delegation hoped that the work 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 8 


of CAS would provide the basis for an early improvement in the supply situation; 


however, any such improvement must not be at the expense of international 


security. 


20. As regards nuclear safety, Austria had always taken a great interest in 
technical review of the Agency's safety standards, especially as that offered 
an opportunity to Austrian experts, in the absence of nuclear power in Austria, 
to keep abreast of developments in international safety standards. 
21. Waste management was at present probably the most important problem of 
nuclear power. Considering that the absence of final storage facilities was 
delaying nuclear power programmes, he wondered whether the creation of an 
international demonstration facility, as had been suggested by the Director 
General, would not be a meaningful step. With a view to reassuring public 
opinion in the country where such a facility was built, it might be necessary 
to provide an assurance that it would be used only to store waste from that 
country. The necessary international co-operation would include participation 
in the financing and in the technical study of that facility in return for 
data resulting from its operation. 
22. As for the other important task of the Agency, namely technical 
co-operation, his Government was pledging for 1983, subject to parliamentary 
approval, a voluntary contribution of US $136 800, corresponding to its base rate 
of assessment, and representing an increase of US $21 600 over the 1982 figure. 
23. Referring to item 8 of the agenda, he recalled the stand taken by his 
Government the preceding year, namely that the Israeli attack on the Iraqi 
research reactor was in itself, from the moral and political points of view, a 
sufficient reason for suspension; however, the provisions of the Agency's 
Statute and Austria's constant support for the principle of universality in 
international organizations made it hesitate. 
24. On the subject of the trans-frontier aspects of nuclear power stations, he 
recalled that at the Conference session held in New Delhi in 1979, Austria had 
made a proposal with a view to facilitating co-operation between neighbouring 
countries in that field. He had pleasure in announcing that negotiations for an 
agreement between the Republic of Austria and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic 
on questions of mutual interest in connection with nuclear facilities were nearing 
completion and that similar negotiations had been initiated with Yugoslavia. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 9 


25. As representative of the host State, he was sure that the very fruitful 
co-operation between the Agency and his country would continue. He was pleased 
to note that the basic agreement concerning the work of the Agency's laboratories 
at Seibersdorf had been signed by the Federal Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
the Director General. He congratulated the Secretariat on the Agency's achievements 
over the past 25 years. 
26. Mr. PINEIROS RIVERA (Ecuador) said that in its development policy his 
Government attached high priority to the programme for scientific and technical 
development: it was particularly interested in all applications of nuclear 
techniques, in prospecting for radioactive minerals and in the establishment of 
a nuclear research centre. The Agency had made an important contribution to 
that programme. However, it was essential to increase technical assistance to 
the third-world countries in order to provide them with the necessary base for 
the development of nuclear energy. At the same time, he was convinced that 
technical assistance and co-operation should be not only quantitative but also 
qualitative and should bring the maximum benefit to the recipient countries. 
The Agency could and should act as a catalyst and adviser in technical assistance 
matters and not merely as a go-between. Otherwise, the aid provided might not 
yield the benefits expected from it. The Agency should, therefore, strengthen 
its programming and evaluation systems and make critical analyses of the impact 
of technical assistance on the recipient countries so that it could be periodically 
adapted to their changing national and regional requirements. 
27. The developing countries were more and more convinced that the peaceful 
application of nuclear energy was essential to a more rapid development of their 
economies. The Agency thus had the historic opportunity to narrow the gap 
between the industrialized and the developing countries, and its role was 
becoming even more important as a result of the world energy crisis. It was 
necessary to strengthen research programmes dealing with the applications of 
nuclear energy, not only as a source of electricity but also in health, agriculture 
and industry. 
28. His country had the sovereign right to determine entirely independently its 
programme for the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, though it 
was aware that it had to count on international support. In that respect, 

GC(XXVI)/OR-242 
page 10 


Latin America, like the rest of the third world, had demonstrated sufficient 


international responsibility not to divert its installations and fissile 


materials to military purposes. Through the Tlatelolco Treaty, Latin America had 


set up the first, and so far the only, denuclearized zone in the world. It was 


to be regretted that, despite the continuing recommendations of the United Nations 


General Assembly, other regions had not established areas free of nuclear 
weapons. Such a move would effectively contribute to world peace and security 


since the use of atomic energy in those areas would be permitted only for 


strictly peaceful purposes. The Government of the only nuclear Power on the 
American continent had ratified Additional Protocol I of the Tlatelolco Treaty 
in November 1981. France was expected shortly to submit its territories in 
Latin America to the denuclearized regime by also ratifying that protocol-
Those nuclear-weapon States would thus have undertaken to support the decision 
of the Latin American peoples to live in peace by removing the dangers inherent 


in the use of nuclear weapons


29. Through the Agency's efforts, his country had made great progress in dosimetry 
and in the applications of nuclear energy. His authorities had launched a 
thermoluminescence dosimetry project and a multi-year project for the establishment 
of secondary standards dosimetry laboratories. Radioimmunoassay techniques were 
being applied in the medical field, and m agriculture use was being made of 
results from research into water and nutritional deficiency in crops and low 
fertility in cattle. The Agency had also assisted with applications of nondestructive 
testing in industry. At the beginning of the year, Ecuador had 
launched a uranium prospecting project with support from UNDP. It was hoped 
that his country would have a nuclear research centre in the near future. 
However, Ecuador was not confining its activities to the national plane but was 
seeking to implement regional projects for the application of nuclear techniques 
jointly with the other countries in the Andean region. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 11 


30. Mr. OFSTAD (Norway) said that his delegation endorsed the draft programme 
for 1983-88 and draft budget for 1983. Also, subject to parliamentary 
approval, it could accept the proposed target for voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1983. In general, his country 
was more interested in the Agency's regulatory activities than in its promotional 
programmes. However, the Regular Budget and the Technical Assistance and Cooperation 
Fund provided a satisfactory balance between those two types of 
activity. In view of the financial problems faced by Member States, the Agency 
should pursue its efforts towards rationalization and carefully evaluate the 
necessary expenditures. 
31. The work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply was progressing as quickly 
as possible. It was essential that the exporting and importing countries cooperate 
in defining rules to govern the export of nuclear equipment and 
materials. All nuclear exports must satisfy certain conditions. The first was 
obvious: exported items should not be used to produce nuclear explosive 
devices. If more States were able to manufacture such devices, regional and 
international destabilization and tension would ensue. The second condition 
was that all importing countries should accept full-scope Agency safeguards on 
all their present and future nuclear activities. World-wide acceptance of 
effective non-proliferation measures would increase the security of all States, 
promote the predictability of nuclear supplies and strengthen international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Once those conditions had 
been fulfilled, all States party to NPT would be obliged to participate to the 
fullest extent in the international exchange of nuclear materials and equipment. 
32. Among the industrialized countries, Norway was favourably situated in 
terms of energy resources: it was an exporter of petroleum products and could 
still increase its electricity production for many years through hydro power. 
However, the energy needs of mankind as a whole could be satisfied only by making 
greater use of nuclear energy. It should be up to each country to decide how it 
would satisfy its own energy demands. An importing country could hardly embark 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 12 


on an intensive nuclear programme without a guarantee of future supplies. There 


should be one set of irrevocable rules for safeguarded exports for all countries 
which had fulfilled the necessary conditions, and the Agency should play a key 
role in administering such a system. 


33- He had been pleased to learn that in 1981, as in previous years, the Agency 
had not detected any anomalies that would indicate diversion of a significant 
amount of nuclear materials. He had also noted with satisfaction that the 

safeguards effort had increased considerably. The safeguards system was one of 


the most important instruments of international peace and security. Viewed in 
that context, the costs of safeguards were modest. Shortcomings in safeguards 
were, to a large extent, due to neglect by the countries in which safeguards 
were being applied. If States continued to close material balances and submit 
their reports late, confidence in the safeguards system would be eroded. 
Efforts should be made to increase the efficiency of safeguards, and he supported 
the greater use of staff from the General Service category for inspection 
purposes. 


34. He had studied the arguments for and against an amendment to Article VI.A.2 
of the Statute. It was important that Member States should be satisfied that 
they could be represented on the Board. It would be desirable for the Board to 
continue considering the matter in order to reach a consensus on representation 
without the need for an amendment to Article VI. He would hesitate to support 
an increase in the Board's membership, which was already large, lest its 
efficiency be impaired. 
35. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) declared that the Agency should remain true to 
its principles and disregard political contingencies. The principle of universality 
was the only way of ensuring that the benefits of the Agency's work 
reached all the regions of the world, and that principle should be respected. 
The Agency should remain essentially a technical body, in whose activities all 
Member States participated without discrimination. 
36. It was essential that the Agency continue to ensure the strict, impartial 
and rational application of safeguards while at the same time receiving the 
closest possible co-operation from Member States, which had to provide the 
facilities needed for installing the means of verification. Chile had always 
demonstrated its confidence in the safeguards system by submitting to it voluntarily. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 13 


37. the Chilean Government believed that it was important to give some impetus 
to the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS). The Committee 
should elaborate a mechanism which would make it possible to obtain, independently 
of the interplay of political factors and mcasesof force majeure, the 
necessary fuel in the quantity and at the place desired. Chile hoped that CAS, 
by the elaboration of unambiguous methods and standards, would contribute to 
maintaining and even increasing the confidence of States in the Agency. 
38. The Agency should also examine very carefully the methods used for treatment 
and storage of radioactive wastes produced by the countries using nuclear 
power. In particular, Chile believed that a body should be entrusted with the 
administration of such wastes, not only from the verification point of view but 
also from that of the elaboration of standards for final disposal. So far, 
that problem had been left to the discretion of the countries concerned, but 
if the nuclear power industry was expected to develop apace, it would be 
necessary to begin to concentrate on the problem before it became serious and 
difficult to solve as a result of the number of interests at stake. 


39. In its work the Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission had tried to determine 
what would be the most interesting areas of nuclear science and had focused on 
problems associated with the production, transfer and transport of fertile, 
fissile and radioactive materials and, in general, on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. In particular, Chile had set up projects related to agriculture, 
mining, health and industry and, with the co-operation of the Agency, had put 
into operation a secondary standards dosimetry laboratory. In gratitude for the 
assistance provided by the Agency and donor countries, Chile had put all its 
installations and its scientists and technicians at the disposal of Member 
States wishing to avail themselves of their services. 
40. Finally, the Chilean delegation wished to comment on two further aspects 
of the functioning of the Agency. It had noted with satisfaction that the 
principle of geographical distribution had been given due weight in the recruitment 
of Agency staff during the past year- Although the desires of developing 
countries had not been totally satisfied, it should be recognized that progress 
had been made, and his delegation hoped that would continue. With regard to the 
Agency's installations, the Chilean delegation believed that it should be possible 
for representatives of all Member countries, whether they were Members of the 
Board of Governors or not, to visit them. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 


page 14 


41. Mr• HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) recalled that during its twenty-fifth 
regular session the General Conference had adopted resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 by 
which it had decided to consider at the present session the suspension of 
Israel's rights and privileges as a Member of the Agency if by then it had not 
respected the provisions of resolution 487 of the Security Council, which 
strongly condemned Israel's attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre and 
considered it a flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and of international 
norms of conduct. The same resolution required that Israel submit its 
nuclear installations to Agency safeguards. That resolution had remained a 
dead letter. 


42. Since then Israel had shown remorseless contempt for international norms 
of conduct and did not hesitate to threaten those who opposed its policy of 
aggression. At a press conference held in 1981, its Prime Minister had stated 
that Israel would destroy any atomic centre situated on an Arab territory if 
it judged it to be dangerous, and he had addressed similar declarations to 
Libya and Pakistan. Israel, the only State with a nuclear potential in the 
Middle East, cast the opinion of other States to the winds. The whole world was 
now becoming aware of the danger represented by that new type of Nazism, as 
was demonstrated by the unanimous condemnation of the barbarous invasion of 
Lebanon by Israel. The whole world had criticized the savage crimes committed 
against civilians and the total destruction of inhabited houses. Although some 
of its members maintained friendly relations with Israel, the Security Council 
had taken the steps incumbent upon it by virtue of humanitarian considerations 
and the United Nations Charter in adopting resolutions 508 and 509, which 
ordered Israel to withdraw behind the recognized borders of Lebanon. As usual, 
Israel had not responded to international demands and had denounced them. 


43. A massacre unprecedented in contemporary history was now being witnessed, 
committed solely for criminal purposes and motivated only by the desire to kill 
the innocent. That massacre was in no way justified after the departure of the 
Palestinian fighters from Beirut thanks to American mediation and under the 
safeguards of the international force which ensured that the Israeli army would 
not penetrate into West Beirut. Israel had violated that agreement without any 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 15 


respect for the countries which were contributing to its implementation, had 
occupied the west part of Beirut, had attacked Palestinian refugee camps and 
had killed thousands of innocent women, children and old people. The objectives 
of the Agency were "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy 
to peace". Consequently, the Syrian Arab Republic believed that a State based 
on aggression should no longer be one of its Members. It should penalize Israel 


in accordance with its Statute, for otherwise Article XIX would be rendered 
entirely meaningless. The General Conference should boldly assert its rights 
and, in the interests of humanity, adopt a moral resolution suspending the 
exercise by Israel of its privileges and rights as a Member of the Agency in 
order to give that State a well-deserved lesson. 


44. With regard to technical assistance, the Syrian Arab Republic believed 
that the Agency should provide more assistance to countries which were still at 
the initial stages of using atomic energy than to relatively advanced countries. 
In that way it would help to shrink the differences between developing countries. 
Moreover, it was necessary to examine urgently means of financing technical 
assistance from the Regular Budget in amounts comparable with those allocated to 
operational activities or safeguards; voluntary contributions could then be 
devoted to financing research contracts. 
45. In addition, the Syrian Arab Republic wished the composition of the Board 
of Governors to be re-examined. It considered that it would be equitable in 
respect of the under-represented groups for Governors to be elected under a 
system of proportional representation, and hoped that the General Conference 
would adopt a just resolution in that regard. 
46. Mr. OSZTROVSZKY (Hungary) said that the Agency had, in the twenty-five 
years of its existence, successfully followed the difficult path which led to 
the realization of the objectives laid down in its Statute via the development 
of nuclear energy for the benefit of mankind and the strengthening of the nuclear 
weapons non-proliferation regime. By means of its technical assistance programme 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 16 


and its system of scientific and technical documentation in particular, the 
Agency had helped many countries to set up - and others, including Hungary, to 
develop - peaceful applications of nuclear energy in different spheres, such 
as medicine, agriculture, industry and electricity production. 


47. The activities of the Agency aimed at promoting exchanges of experience in 
the construction and operation of nuclear power stations, treatment and storage 
of radioactive wastes and nuclear safety also deserved emphasis. With regard 
to non-proliferation, the Agency's safeguards system was operating satisfactorily 
despite a number of problems. In view of its experience in safeguards, Hungary 
believed that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the 
safeguards agreements concluded under that Treaty strengthened confidence 
between countries, did not in any way hamper technical progress and contributed 
to the development of international nuclear trade. 


48. The present session of the General Conference was taking place at a time 
when the international situation was deteriorating and proponents of the cold 
war were becoming active again. Policies of embargo, boycotting and discrimination 
hampered the implementation of plans for the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy. Reinforcement of the non-prolfieration regime depended on 
increasing the number of countries which had signed and ratified NPT. It was 
a cause for concern that certain countries such as Israel and South Africa, 
which were technically and economically in a position to construct nuclear 
weapons and which openly conducted a policy of aggression, remained outside the 
framework of NPT agreements. 


49. With regard to Hungary's nuclear power programme, a first 440-MW(e) unit 
had been commissioned during the current year in Hungary's first nuclear power 
station. By 1985, 13% of the country's electricity was expected to be of 
nuclear origin, and that fraction would reach 227„ in 1990. After the construction 
of four units of the WWER-440 type it was planned to construct power 
stations with WWER-1000 reactors. In 1979 a multilateral co-operation agreement 
had been concluded between the European member countries of the CMEA and 
Yugoslavia for the production and supply of equipment for nuclear power stations 
during the period 1981-1990. In the context of that agreement, Hungary was 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 17 


manufacturing items such as fuel element handling machines and special water 
purification devices. It was also participating in the work of CMEA member 
countries on internal diagnostics of WWER reactors and on the use of acoustic 


techniques for testing the containment and primary circuit. 


50. A special section of the Hungarian five7year plan concerned the safety of 
nuclear power station operation. As a result of work carried out in its 
research institutes, Hungary had fitted a monitoring and control system to a 
10-MW research reactor provided by the Soviet Union for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 
A programme involving the construction of a cyclotron designed for research m 
physics and the application of nuclear methods in medicine was currently in progress 
and was receiving technical assistance from the Agency. Satisfactory 
results had been obtained with the sterilization of foodstuffs on a semiindustrial 
scale, and during 1982 Hungary had set up a special plant concerned 
with the application of the method on the industrial scale. 
51. Over the past twenty-five years Hungary had always played an active part 
in the Agency's work; its scientists had participated in the conferences, 
seminars, courses and study tours organized by the Agency and had made 
successful use of the INIS system and of the information distributed under the 
NUSS programme. Hungary paid its contribution each year to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund, provided the Agency with instruments and 
measuring equipment used in nuclear medicine, and made available every year 
four fellowships of twelve months' duration. It also benefited from the 
Agency's technical assistance in certain fields. Hungary realized the importance 
of the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme and would in 
1983 make a contribution in national currency totalling 2 million forints. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 18 


52. Mr. NGUYEN DINH TU (Viet Nam) extended warm congratulations to 
Namibia on the occasion of its admission to the Agency. 
53. Twenty-five years earlier, at the height of the cold war, the Agency had 
been set up with the objective of accelerating and increasing the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. During 
those twenty-five years, it had obtained some remarkable results. Nevertheless, 
much remained to be done. The developing countries, which represented the 
majority of mankind and which possessed abundant but insufficiently exploited 
natural resources, urgently needed to increase their scientific and technical 
knowledge and to develop their economies in order to raise the standard of 
living of their peoples. They were all anxious to apply the results of nuclear 
research in industry and everyday life. That was a justifiable aspiration and 
the Agency should try and help put it into practice. 
54. After thirty years of continuous struggle to regain its independence and 
freedom, Viet Nam was today more anxious than anyone to live in peace m order 
to eliminate the after-effects of war, reconstruct its economy and improve the 
living conditions of its people. It was m the process of gradually introducing 
the use of radioisotopes and ionizing radiation into various branches of 
industry. It had obtained valuable help from the Soviet Union, from other 
Socialist countries, and from friendly countries throughout the world for 
training and for purchasing equipment for laboratories and research centres. 
Viet Nam greatly appreciated the aid which the Agency had provided for the 
development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and in particular for 
training and for providing expert services and equipment. 
55. It was the constant policy of Viet Nam to defend international peace and 
security, to counter the dangers of a nuclear war provoked by imperialistic and 
reactionary forces and to use the atom in the cause of peace. The Vietnamese 
Government had therefore decided on 14 June 1982 to accede to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In that connection, there were two particularly 
important points that needed to be made. Viet Nam welcomed and respected 
every effective international measure aimed at gradually eliminating the dangers 
of a nuclear war, and particularly those which guaranteed the security of 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 19 


non-nuclear-weapon countries. It believed that, m accordance with the aims and 
principles enunciated in the preamble to NPT and in the Charter of the United 
Nations, every State should have the benefit of favourable and non-discriminatory 
conditions for the furtherance of its nuclear research activities and for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


56. Viet Nam was in favour of reducing rather than creating international 
tensions, in favour of negotiation rather than confrontation. It looked forward 
to the start of serious negotiations on disarmament and welcomed with enthusiasm 
the recent statement by the Soviet Union that it undertook not to be the first 
to use nuclear weapons. 
57. The Vietnamese delegation once again asked the General Conference to take 
sanctions against Israel which, in defiance of international law, had attacked 
the Iraqi nuclear research centre and had recently again violated the Charter 
of the United Nations by waging against the Lebanon a war of aggression followed 
by massacres of the civilian Palestinian population. 
58- Viet Nam, a partisan of peace, friendship and co-operation amongst peoples, 
was trying to help establish a zone of peace, stability and co-operation in 
South-East Asia. 


59. Mr. NYEMETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
principal aims of the Agency were to combat the proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
to raise barriers against those who were tempted to make use of weapons of mass 
destruction and to do all it could to ensure that nuclear energy served peaceful 
purposes alone. The current international situation was marked by a tendency 
on the part of the United States to return to the arms race and it was essential 
that concrete measures should be taken to improve the world political climate 
and to reduce the threat of nuclear war which was hanging over all States. The 
undertaking by the Soviet Union not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and 
to place part of its peaceful nuclear installations under Agency safeguards 
represented an important historical step. The statement by the Soviet Union at 
the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on the 
prevention of a nuclear catastrophe was also of great significance. If the 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 20 page 21 


threat of nuclear war was to be removed, it was essential to halt the arms race 
and to prevent countries such as South Africa, Israel and Pakistan, which made 
no attempt to hide their ambitions, from acquiring nuclear weapons. 


60. The recent attack carried out by Israel against Lebanon had once again 
demonstrated the aggressive policy followed by Tel Aviv. At the last session 
of the General Conference, the bombardment of the Iraqi nuclear research centre 
by Israeli forces had been condemned. Such acts of State terrorism threatened 
international peace and security and represented an attack on the Agency's safeguards 
system. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic firmly condemned Israel's 
refusal to place its nuclear installations under Agency safeguards and its 
aggressive policy in general. The Ukrainian delegation fully supported the 
Iraqi position on the Israeli attack and asked for sanctions to be taken against 
Israel in accordance with Article VII of the United Nations Charter. 
61. The Ukraine was one of the 26 founder Member States of the Agency and had 
always taken part in its work aimed at placing nuclear energy at the service of 
the whole of mankind. The Agency's role in the nuclear power field was becoming 
more and more important. The work which it was carrying out to assess present 
and future levels of nuclear power production and to establish an extensive 
system of information exchange and training should be continued and the amount 
of technical assistance given should be increased. 
62. Important research was currently being carried out in the Ukraine, especially 
in the fields of nuclear physics (particularly the structure of the 
nucleus), nuclear energy production and plasma physics. Sources of ionizing 
radiation were being used for research in physics, chemistry, biology, geology 
and agriculture. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was actively pursuing 
its programme for the construction and operation of nuclear power stations and 
parallel research was being carried out at the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences on 
nuclear safety and protection of the environment. Radioactive sources of 
various types were being used to automate and monitor a number of industrial 
processes. Nuclear techniques had been developed for selecting varieties of 
wheat which were extremely resistant and had a high protein content. 
Radioisotopes and ionizing radiation were being widely used in medicine for 
diagnostics and therapy. As a result of recent experiments it had been possible 
to obtain by means of an isochronous cyclotron short-lived isotopes (iodme-123 
and thallium-201) which would shortly be used in medicine. The work on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy was being carried out in close co-operation with 
other CMEA countries. Ukrainian institutes were collaborating with other bodies 


in those countries in the development of new methods for reactor core diagnostics 
and in research on nuclear power station safety. 


63. The scientific and technical ties between the Ukraine and the Agency were 
constantly being strengthened. Each year scientists from developing countries 
met in Kiev to study the use of ionizing radiation in medicine, and training 
courses on the application of safeguards were organized in Yalta. 
64. The Ukrainian delegation had carefully studied the Agency's accounts for 
1981 and draft budget for 1983. The Government would make a voluntary contribution 
in national currency to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
amounting to 200 000 roubles. 
65. Mr. MALM (Sweden) said that, even though the rate of growth of nuclear 
power had decreased, installed power had nevertheless shown a considerable 
increase over the previous decade - a tendency which could be expected to continue 
during the 1980s. That meant that there would be a large nuclear industry 
for a long time to come and that international co-operation must be strengthened, 
both inside and outside the Agency. Safety and security, international trade in 
nuclear materials and services, and of course non-proliferation, would remain 
matters of the highest importance and the Agency would continue to play a leading 
role. 
66. The rapid increase over the previous few years in contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund was continuing as expected. The 
Board had unanimously approved the technical co-operation budget for 1983 and 
the indicative figures for the period 1984-86, and Member States had contributed 
to a greater extent than ever before to the extrabudgetary resources for 
the financing of particular projects. The Secretariat was trying to bring about 
a further increase in the efficiency of resource utilization and the establishment 
of an evaluation section was one of the useful measures taken to that end. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 22 


67. The seminar on technical co-operation to be held during the current session 
would undoubtedly give recipient States the opportunity to make known their 
views on the future of the Agency's technical assistance activities and would 
also provide donor countries with the opportunity to study the possibility of 
pledging contributions for longer periods, so that the Agency could improve the 
planning of its technical assistance programme and projects. 
68. With regard to the staffing of the Secretariat, the policy pursued by the 
Director General would clearly lead to a more equitable representation for the 
developing countries. The special training programme for young graduates from 
developing countries was a useful innovation. 
69. The question of the composition of the Board had been widely discussed 
during the past year. Although the outgoing Board had not been able to find a 
solution, the talks held by the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen had nonetheless 
clarified the position of the States concerned. Views differed in regard to 
both elected and designated seats. Sweden felt that the differences which 
existed in relation to designation criteria would have to be ironed out, possibly 
during future consultations on the size and composition of the Board. Designations 
should be made following annual evaluations based on objective criteria in 
accordance with Article VI.A.1 of the Statute; that was certainly not the way 
they were made at present. 
70. The current stagnation in orders for new reactors should not be allowed to 
obscure the fact that the number of power reactors under construction was almost 
equal to the number of reactors which had been constructed since the inception 
of nuclear power. According to the Agency's latest estimates, nuclear generating 
capacity would treble by the end of the decade and a constantly increasing number 
of countries would have nuclear facilities. Nuclear safety had thus become a 
crucial issue and the Secretariat was to be congratulated on its efforts to 
strengthen the nuclear safety programme. The meetings and seminars which the 
Agency held and the information which it disseminated on safety-related incidents 
and research results were a valuable aid to the Member States. In the same context, 
he also welcomed the publication of the first annual report on nuclear 
safety. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 23 


71. In the past year, the Committee on Assurances of Supply had made some 
progress towards establishing recommendations for certain international rules of 
conduct in nuclear trade. The final report to be drawn up by the Committee 
would serve as a basis for any similar document to be adopted by the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation m the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. However, no document could by itself bring 
about harmonious trade relations between States. To achieve that end, there 
must be mutual trust between the parties involved. As an importer, Sweden was 
convinced that the acceptance of full-scope safeguards and the full exposure of 
all facets of nuclear power programmes were essential if a high degree of 
assurance of supply were to be obtained. 
72. The Agency's safeguards system was one of the most effective instruments 
for demonstrating that nuclear energy was being used for peaceful purposes, an 
assurance which was a prerequisite for free international nuclear trade. In 
that connection, his Government was deeply concerned that in four non-nuclearweapon 
States certain facilities capable of producing weapons-grade material 
which were either in service or under construction had not been placed under 
safeguards. Another cause for concern was that for the first time in its 
history the Agency had been forced to acknowledge that in certain cases its 
safeguards had been insufficient to guarantee detection of any diversion of 
nuclear fuel. Sweden was convinced that the safeguards system could be improved 
and therefore welcomed the decision of the Board to undertake a wide-ranging 
review of the system. The Director General's proposal to put more emphasis on 
the application of safeguards at certain bulk-handling facilities and on the 
interrelationship between all facilities under safeguards in a single State was 
especially useful. In the final analysis, the value of the safeguards system 
depended on the way in which Member States used it. A large number of States 
had unequivocally stated their support for a non-proliferation system based on 
full-scope safeguards and, as suppliers, had adopted a careful policy regarding 
transfers of sensitive technology. Unfortunately, recent transfers to States 
which did not clearly subscribe to non-proliferation raised doubts as to whether 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 24 


the professed policies were strictly applied by some of the major suppliers. 
In that connection, the Swedish Government considered that the inability of the 
major nuclear Powers to reach agreement on reducing their nuclear weapons was 
highly detrimental to non-proliferation. The refusal to accept, without delay, 
a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty could have serious consequences. 


73. In its 25 years, the Agency had become the most important forum for international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. It had acquired a solid 
reputation for high technical competence and his Government could only hope that 
it would continue to maintain its reputation in the future. The Agency must consolidate 
its technical competence while seeking new methods of satisfying the 
numerous, and sometimes conflicting, needs of its Members. For their part, 
Member States should stand by the Agency, provide it with adequate resources and 
maintain its central role in international co-operation. 
74, Mr. GR02A (Romania) said that it was of the utmost importance to ensure 

the unity of all nations and constantly to improve co-operation among them in 
order to put an end to the dangerous trend of events towards confrontation and 
war, to end the use of force or the threat of force in international relations 
and to promote a policy of detente, respect for national sovereignty and independence, 
co-operation and good-neighbourliness among States. 


75- His Government highly appreciated the Agency's activities and efforts to 
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and international co-operation in 
that important field. However, there was a tendency for the Agency's activities 
to turn more towards its regulatory function at the expense of its basic responsibility 
to support the efforts of Member States in utilizing nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes and promote international co-operation in that area - a 
tendency which could not be overlooked. 


76. The Agency should become more involved in efforts to build a new international 
economic order and to do away with underdevelopment. Member States 
should make greater efforts to strengthen the Agency's role. It was also important 
to ensure an unhampered transfer of nuclear technology, to guarantee access 
for all countries to developments in the nuclear field, to narrow and eliminate 
the gap separating the developing and developed countries and to safeguard the 
right of all States to benefit fully from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 25 


77. In view of the requirements of the national economy and the repercussions 
of the world energy crisis, Romania had drawn up new measures aimed at achieving 
self-sufficiency in energy and fuel by 1990. To that end, it had decided to 
step up construction work on nuclear power plants and to increase their 
installed capacity. His country wished to thank the Agency for the effectiveness 
of the technical assistance it had provided. 
78. In accordance with its principles, Romania strongly condemned the attack 
by the Israeli air force on the territory of Iraq. That unacceptable act of 
aggression on the Iraqi nuclear research centre constituted a grave violation 
of international law; it had seriously prejudiced the situation in the Middle 
East and the interests of all peoples in that area. 
79. The draft programme for 1983-88 reflected the principal trends in nuclear 
development. His delegation approved the amount proposed by the Director 
General for the 1983 draft budget but felt that more effort should be made to 
reduce administrative expenses further. His delegation could accept the target 
recommended for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1983 and the targets forecast for the three years 
thereafter. As in the past, Romania's contribution to that Fund for 1983 
would be in accordance with its base rate of assessment. 
80. Mr. SQDNOM (Mongolia), recalling that under the Statute the Agency's 
objectives were to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy 
to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world, said that his country 
highly appreciated the Agency's efforts to promote the peaceful uses of the 
atom, to strengthen peace and to develop international co-operation in 
accordance with the principles of the United Nations. 
81. The Agency, itself a product of co-operation in the interests of peace 
among countries with different social and economic systems and at different 
stages of development, had during the 25 years of its existence greatly 
contributed to preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Its role 
took on particular importance at the present time when the aggressive policies 
of the present Administration of the United States and its allies in the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization were exposing mankind to the real danger of 
a nuclear catastrophe, giving rise to mounting indignation and protests from 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 26 


nations which did not want the achievements of so many generations to be 
destroyed. 


82. The Soviet Union and the other countries of the socialist community had 
taken a number of initiatives to preserve and strengthen peace and international 
security, to halt the arms race and to accelerate disarmament. The 
Mongolian People's Republic was encouraged, for example, by the unilateral 
undertaking given by the USSR, which had been warmly welcomed by many peaceful 
nations, that it would not be the first to use nuclear weapons. That 
country was once again demonstrating its desire to ward off the atomic threat 
and to give practical shape to negotiations on nuclear disarmament. Mongolia 
considered it particularly important that other Powers should make the same 
pledge; that would be tantamount to the banning of nuclear weapons, and 
would promote confidence among States, thereby helping to solve the complex 
problems of disarmament. 
83. The Agency's role was more important then ever, first and foremost 
because of the increasing danger of a further proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
That danger came essentially from the "near-nuclear" States which, apart 
from two nuclear Powers (China and France), were among the 50 States that 
had not become party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT). The Republic of South Africa and Israel, for example, did 
not conceal their nuclear ambitions; as the United Nations General Assembly 
had pointed out on many occasions, they were in fact preparing to make 
nuclear weapons. It was therefore necessary to take further steps to increase 
the number of parties to NPT and to enhance the Treaty's efficiency. 
84. The murderous attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear research centre 
could be regarded as a serious attempt to destroy confidence in the 
non-proliferation regime and especially in the Agency's safeguards. His 
Government considered that the Agency's regulatory activities had been 
extremely fruitful and that, given the development of nuclear power in 
particular, it was necessary further to improve their effectiveness, full 
account being taken of the greater number and diversity of the facilities 
and material to be safeguarded. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 27 


85. Deferring to the wishes of a number of non-nuclear-weapon States that 
the nuclear Powers, too, should place some of their peaceful facilities under 
the safeguards established in connection with the non-proliferation regime, 
the USSR had expressed its willingness to place under Agency control some of 
its nuclear power plants and research reactors. His delegation welcomed that 
step, which would help to enhance the Agency's authority and bolster confidence 
m its safeguards system. 
86. It was becoming increasingly urgent to ensure security in Asia, to halt 
the arms race in that region and to prevent new armed conflicts. For that 
reason, Mongolia had proposed in 1981 that the countries of Asia and the 
Pacific should sign a mutual non-aggression pact, renouncing all recourse to 
the use of force in their relations. Firmly believing that efforts should be 
made at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels to reach agreements 
which would outlaw the use of force as a means of settling international 
disputes, Mongolia hoped that the countries of the region would understand 
and support that proposal. 
87. It was clear from the Agency's annual report for 1981 and from the 
Director General's statement that the organization's activities had been 
further refined and had contributed to the development of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while strengthening 
the non-proliferation regime and enhancing security in the world. His 
delegation considered that the annual report gave a faithful picture of those 
activities and agreed in principle that it should be adopted by the General 
Conference. 
88. The programme for 1983-88 covered the principal trends foreseen in the 
Agency's activities, giving a realistic assessment of its mission and its 
capabilities. Aware of the needs of the organization, his country endorsed 
the target of US $19 million for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund in 1983 and would make a voluntary contribution to that Fund. In its 
opinion, such contributions should remain voluntary in character, for that 
was an essential principle of international co-operation in the field of 
technical and economic development. The technical assistance provided by 
the Agency was valuable for the implementation of national programmes on 
nuclear science and technology in developing countries, where it played a 

GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 28 


vital role in creating and expanding the research infrastructures and helped 
in the solution of important national economic problems. 


89. Mongolia wished to express its gratitude to the Agency for its help in 
setting up a nuclear analytical laboratory and hoped that it would continue 
to provide assistance for the implementation of Mongolia's national 
programmes: several Agency projects were being carried out satisfactorily in 
Mongolia, and work on the applications of radioisotopes in medical diagnosis 
and on the establishment of a radiobiological laboratory at Darhan had begun. 
In view of the recent increase in the number of persons and organizations 
handling radioisotopes and radiation and the urgent need to prevent pollution, 
his country had undertaken to set up a radiation protection and dosimetry 
service with an appropriately equipped laboratory. 
90. His delegation hoped, in view of its past successes, that the Agency 
would continue to make a worthy contribution to the cause of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and to the cause of peace 
and security on earth. 
91. Mr. AMRQLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) welcomed the admission of 
Namibia to the Agency. The oppressed people of Iran had long lived under the 
despotic Pahlevi regime, and had been subjected to exploitation and domination 
by world imperialism. Without any consideration for the living conditions and 
essential needs of the people, without even seeking the advice of Iranian 
scientists and experts on site selection, plant capacity, methods of construction, 
or the conclusion of necessary contracts, the former Shah had decided to 
purchase nuclear power plants, thus contributing to making Iran an increasingly 
dependent country. Now that the Iranian people had become master of their own 
destiny, the Iranian Atomic Energy Organization intended to participate in the 
activities of the Agency in order to develop nuclear technology for peaceful 
purposes and to achieve a harmonious development of the country as a whole. 
The Islamic principles on which the Islamic Republic of Iran was founded forbade 
the use of nuclear technology to the detriment of mankind. Iran's adherence 
to that humanistic policy was demonstrated by the attitude of its soldiers in 
the war forced on it by Iraq. 


92. As everyone knew, Israel had disturbed the peace in the Middle East on 
behalf of the United States. Whatever the activities carried out at the 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 29 


Iraqi nuclear research centre might have been, the bombing of that centre by 
Israel had certainly caused great anxiety among the innocent people of Iraq 
and among all peace-loving Member States of the Agency. At the present time 
there was no guarantee that the Israeli Government would not bomb other nuclear 
facilities. His delegation therefore suggested that the General Conference 
should decide to expel Israel from the Agency in view of the fact that that 
country had clearly violated the principles of international law. 


93. One of the main objectives of the Iranian Government was self-sufficiency. 
It hoped one day to become self-sufficient in the nuclear field so that it 
could transfer to the oppressed nations the knowledge which would enable 
them to escape from the domination of the super-Powers of East and West. While 
every country had its own culture, the transfer of science, technology and 
civilization should not be restricted by nationalistic principles but, rather, 
should be governed by a spirit of internationalism. 


94. Every year $6000 million were spent on armaments. That amount should be 
compared with the $100 million which the World Health Organization had spent 
over the last ten years in its campaign against smallpox. The world was 
struggling at present with problems and difficulties which could only be 
resolved by those who had created them. Realization of that truth would 
create the basis for a world-wide uprising against injustice, which would 
eliminate those Powers which dominated the world for the sole purpose of their 
own survival. One of those problems was the present race for the production 
of neutron bombs and chemical nuclear weapons. Considerable efforts had 
so far been deployed at the international level by the United Nations and by 
the Disarmament Conference, and several measures had been suggested, such as 
non-proliferation, creation of nuclear-free zones, reduction of armed forces and 
non-nuclear weapons; but most of those efforts had remained fruitless. 


95. All the countries represented at the General Conference were directly 
responsible for all the disasters and afflictions suffered by the oppressed 
countries as a result of the nuclear industry. When the United States 
equipped its submarines with nuclear weapons, when the Soviet Union carried 
out nuclear explosions, when Israel destroyed the Iraqi nuclear research 
centre, who but the international nuclear community could be held responsible? 



GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 30 


It was high time for the nuclear community to decide that its knowledge and 
experience should be used exclusively for the well-being and happiness of 
mankind and peace in the world. 


96. Mr• MIDLAND (Commission of the European Communities) said that the 
Agency had a vital role to play xn promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, a role of which the member countries of the European Community were 
particularly aware. They themselves were becoming increasingly dependent on 
that source of energy, since 6% of all their energy needs were now met by 
nuclear power and the figure was expected to reach 12% by 1990. 
97. Like the Agency, the European Community had recently passed a historical 
milestone. The treaties establishing EURATOM and the European Economic 
Community had been signed in Rome 25 years ago. The States parties to those 
treaties had transferred to the Community certain of their responsibilities, 
including important responsibilities in the nuclear field - important because 
they concerned matters such as the supply of nuclear materials and the 
application of safeguards to them. 
98. From the first years of the Community's existence, the Commission had 
thus had to exercise safeguards responsibilities. At present it had 120 inspec 
tors who would have carried out some 6000 man-days of inspection work 
in 460 nuclear installations in 1982. By the end of the previous year the 
Agency had had 135 inspectors. At the beginning, the EURATOM safeguards 
inspectors had been the only ones operating in the Member States of the 
Community. During the past six years Agency inspectors had participated in 
inspection activities. Close co-operation had developed between the two 
inspectorates thanks to the good will and efforts of both parties. The 
Community was now the only region in the world in whiqh inspections were 
performed by two organizations working together. The three agreements 
concluded between the Agency, the Community and its various Member States 
between 1976 and 1981 had established the rules for co-operation between the 
Agency and EURATOM. At present, the work performed by Agency inspectors in 
the nuclear installations of Community Member States represented nearly 
50%, in terms of days of work, of all the Agency's inspection activities 
throughout the world. It was to be hoped that that close co-operation would 
be strengthened yet further. The Commission was prepared to take steps in 
GC(XXVI)/OR.242 
page 31 


that direction and was convinced that the Agency would do likewise. The 
experience acquired by Agency inspectors in the nuclear establishments of 
Community Members was very probably of special value since in many cases the 
installations of those countries were prototypes or the first commercial 
versions of new plants and were at the forefront of technical progress. 


99. Apart from applying safeguards, the Community and the Agency were 
co-operating closely in studies aimed at developing new safeguards techniques. 
The research establishments of the Community were at present carrying out an 
extensive programme in that sphere which had been drawn up after consultation 
with the Agency. The results of the programme were being communicated to the 
Agency in accordance with the Co-operation Agreement between the two organizations 
signed in 1981. A point to be stressed was that those activities 
were in addition to the substantial support programmes for Agency safeguards 
set up by certain Community Member States. 
100. Technical co-operation between the Commission and the Agency was developing 
steadily in other spheres such as pure nuclear research (in particular, 
research on fusion), the dissemination of the results of research, nuclear 
safety, waste management, radiation protection, the use of radioisotopes and 
the training of scientists. 
101. The Commission of the European Communities believed that it was thereby 
making a contribution to the success of the Agency's work, and it attached 
the greatest importance to that success. For that reason it was prepared 
in the future to expand its co-operation with the Agency in all possible ways. 
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
May 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 23 September 1982, at 10.15 a.m. 


President: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 
later: Mr. YAMATO (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
Paragraphs 
agenda** 
7 General debate and annual report for 1981 


(continued) 1 - 130 


Statements by the delegates of: 
1 -12 


Panama 


13 -23 


Algeria 


24 -36 


Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 


37 -49 


Nigeria 


50 -62 


Israel 


63 -67 


Liechtenstein 


68 -74 


Sri Lanka 


75 -80 


United Republic of Tanzania 


81 -91 


Egypt 


92 -99 


Morocco 


100 -111 


Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 


112 -121 


Turkey 


122 -130 


Malaysia 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 4 October 1982. 
** GC(XXVI)/674. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVI)/INF/208/Rev.4. 

83-2412 


GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1981 (GC(XXVI)/664 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. KOREF (Panama) took pleasure in welcoming the valiant people of 
Namibia to membership of the Agency. Namibia would doubtless offer valuable 
services to the Agency and also acquire, through its membership, information of 
value to the Namibian homeland. 
2. The present occasion offered a good opportunity to congratulate the Agency's 
Secretariat and in particular its very able Director General on the excellent 
work carried out over the past year in the two main areas of the Agency's 
activity, technical co-operation and safeguards, as well as in research and 
many other fields. Nor should the achievements of 1981 under the guidance of 
the Director General Emeritus, Sigvard Eklund - described succinctly yet in 
adequate detail in document GC(XXVI)/664 - be forgotten. 


3. Panama was fortunately still endowed with large hydroelectric energy 
reserves. Its interest in technical co-operation therefore lay mainly in the 
fields of agriculture and medicine, and it was very grateful for the assistance 
granted in 1982 and that planned for 1983. Research of some importance was 
being done by Panama on the usefulness of induced mutations in bananas, sugarcane 
and other plants: the results could well prove valuable, not only for Panama and 
its neighbours but also for other sugar- and banana-growing regions which 
required disease-resistant plants and enhanced production. It was to be hoped 
that a donor prepared to finance that important research could be found. 
4. Technical co-operation with developing countries was exceptionally important, 
not just as direct aid but as a means of enabling them to produce more and better 
products for export as well as for domestic use. It was wrong to consider 
technical co-operation as a form of charity: indeed, it was vital to the 
industrialized countries themselves as a means of opening up new markets for 
their sophisticated products. The developing countries represented the only 
possibility for such new markets, but they needed adequate revenues from their 
own exports to finance imports from the industrialized countries. In his 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 3 


opinion the serious economic crisis the world was passing through was due 
largely to the fact that markets in the developed countries were simply saturated 
with products which were being sold in many instances at less than cost 
price. In saying all that, he merely wished to emphasize that the money 
invested in technical assistance by donor countries was money well invested. 


5. Great progress had clearly been made in the application of safeguards. 
More countries had placed their nuclear facilities under safeguards in 1982, 
and it was to be hoped that many others, including the nuclear-weapon States, 
would do so in the near future. The time might be drawing near when the Agency 
would be able to satisfy all inspection requirements. That was an important 
goal, and it was also to be hoped that some countries where difficulties still 
impeded adequate inspection work would co-operate to the full with the Agency. 
6. The Director General had referred to the broad sentiment in favour of 
nuclear disarmament, adding that the Agency, with its experience in the application 
of safeguards, could provide technical assistance at least on a regional 
basis. One possibility lay in the creation of new nuclear-free zones on the 
model of Latin America, where the Treaty of Tlatelolco was working so well. He 
understood that such a scheme was under discussion for the Middle East: in that 
connection the Agency could perhaps serve as a forum for discussion and help to 
bring about a generally acceptable solution to one of the serious problems 
likely to confront the Conference. 
7. As the Director General had said, the Agency, though it should promote 
nuclear power, was not a public relations agency. Quite true; nevertheless, in 
Panama's opinion, it could and should provide more information to the general 
public on the reliability of nuclear power plants, especially in view of the 
striking fact that the nearly 300 power plants in operation had never caused a 
fatal accident. There might seem to be an abundance of fossil fuels at the 
moment, but everyone knew that their reserves were limited and that atomic 
energy would eventually be essential. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 4 


8. The Agency was promoting the design of advanced reactors, including 
breeders, and at the same time was giving some attention to the small, economic 
reactors required by developing countries. Fusion reactors were something for 
the relatively distant future, but the Agency's programme in plasma physics and 
nuclear fusion deserved commendation. 
9. Panama was pleased by the good atmosphere that prevailed in the meetings of 
CAS and had good hope that in the not too distant future the Committee would be 
able to bring its work to a successful issue. 
10. The technical co-operation evaluation unit which was to take up its work 
in 1983 would doubtless help to make the operations of the Agency more efficient. 
Also, the Agency's new policies in relation to the use of experts and the training 
of technicians, the supply of equipment and the utilization of Secretariat 
staff for short missions were welcome developments, the last-mentioned policy 
being of special importance in the view of the Panamanian delegation. 
11. The Director General's efforts to comply with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 
concerning the recruitment of nationals of developing countries gave reason for 
satisfaction. That policy should be continued, for no post ought to be considered 
the exclusive preserve of any one Member State or group of States. 
12. In conclusion, Panama wished to congratulate the Agency on its 25th anniversary 
and thank all members of the Secretariat, past and present, for the 
excellent services they had rendered to the cause of atomic energy and hence to 
mankind. 
13. Mr. CHERIF (Algeria) said that the achievements of nuclear technology 
had naturally prompted Algeria, like other countries, to prepare to introduce 
that new form of energy into its own national energy scheme. Eager to pursue 
its economic development and to guarantee adequate energy resources for the 
future, Algeria considered that the time had really come to launch a programme 
for the development of replacement energy sources which could take over from 
the old familiar ones; for the latter, as everyone knew, would be exhausted in 
the foreseeable future just at the time when demand was growing at an ever 
faster rate. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 5 


14. With that concern in mind, Algeria had established a Commission for New 
Energy Sources in January last, hoping to gain effective control in good time 
over the long-term energy future of the country. The creation of that Commission 
coincided, it would be noted, with the 25th anniversary of the Agency. 
Thus only a quarter of a century after the founding of the IAEA, Algeria had 
established a body capable of making the necessary preparations to launch a 
nuclear power programme. Efforts in the realm of scientific research and training 
had of course been made before, but nuclear energy nevertheless remained 
something new, as the name of the Commission implied; furthermore, the 
Commission's sphere of competence extended not only to nuclear energy but also 
to other sources: wind, biomass, and solar and geothermal energy. 
15. Algeria welcomed the admission of Namibia as a new Member of the Agency, 
which marked a further victory in the Namibian people's struggle for independence 
and national sovereignty. For half a century the Namibians had been living under 
the brutal oppression of South Africa's racist regime, experiencing the barbarian 
policy of apartheid and witnessing the shameless theft of the country's 
resources by the occupation authorities and the multinational companies. By 
accepting Namibia as a Member, the Agency was recognizing the legitimacy of the 
Namibian people's struggle and pledging to support the United Nations' efforts 
to accelerate the decolonization of Namibian territory. 


16. In that context, his delegation wished to stress its strong disapproval of 
the presence of South Africa in Agency working groups or those with which the 
Agency was associated, such as the joint IAEA/OECD working group on uranium 
resources. South Africa could derive great advantages from its membership of 
the IAEA, advantages which enabled it to develop its uranium industry - based 
partly on Namibian uranium to which it had no right at all - and to expand its 
already enormous nuclear military programme. Such collaboration was in flagrant 
violation of decisions taken by the General Assembly, the Security Council and 
the Agency's own Board of Governors, which in June 1981 had forbidden South 
Africa to take part in the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS). 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 6 


17. The Conference was being held shortly after one of the largest massacres 
of civilian population in modern history. Strengthened by the unconditional 
political and military support it received from the largest technological power 
in the West, Israel had undertaken in the Lebanon - with the cowardice and 
savagery on which its whole existence was founded - to compass the genocide of 
the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples, an act which had filled the international 
community with indignation and horror. 
18. At its previous session the General Conference had adopted resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/381, by which it proposed to suspend Israel from the rights and 
privileges of membership if it did not comply with the provisions of Security 
Council resolution 487. A year later it was not hard to see that, far from 
complying, Israel had replied to the international community with a further challenge 
and additional contempt for the most elementary rules of international 
law. The Algerian delegation felt that the time had come for a firm reply by 
the IAEA to a Member which had had the effrontery to damage the organization's 
credibility and ruin the safeguards system. That reply could be nothing less 
than an unequivocal condemnation of Zionist expansionism and an immediate 
rejection of Israel, which was totally insensible to all the virtues and values 
for which the Agency stood. 
19. For some years the Board of Governors and the General Conference had been 
considering, continuously but with no noteworthy progress, the question of 
equitable geographical representation on the Board. The previous year the 
Conference had adopted a resolution asking the Board to study the matter and 
recommend an amendment that could be submitted to the Conference at its twenty-sixth 
session, with a view to granting more equitable representation to the areas of 
Africa and the Middle East and South Asia, which were notoriously underrepresented 
on the Board. 
20. His delegation much regretted the confession of failure in which the intensive 
consultations of the Chairman of the Board on that subject had ended. It 
was now more urgent than ever that an end should be put to the present inequity 
of the Board's composition. If the present impasse persisted, his delegation 
would be compelled, along with others, to seek a thoroughgoing revision of the 
basic criteria governing membership of the Board. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 7 


21. Algeria had noted with satisfaction the steps the Director General had 
taken to increase the recruitment of nationals of developing countries for posts 
at all levels in the Secretariat, including senior posts, in order gradually to 
correct the present imbalance. The Director General should be given every 
encouragement to strive for complete implementation of resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/386, and in particular to create a climate in which candidates from 
the countries of the third world could be guaranteed access to all posts within 
the Secretariat. 


22. The financing of technical assistance was another important subject before 
the Conference. His delegation could only regret the very modest volume of 
technical assistance being offered at present and hoped that it could be brought 
in line with the growing needs of third-world countries. The inadequacy of 
technical assistance at present reflected the lack of proportion between the 
Agency's main activities: safeguards on the one hand, which Algeria held to be 
necessary, and the promotional activities. Algeria continued to believe that 
technical assistance should be financed from the Regular Budget on the basis of 
assured and predictable resources. 
23. He felt confident that all the decisions taken in the course of the present 
session would help to improve the operations of the Agency and fulfil the hopes 
placed in the organization at the time of its creation. It was his hope that 
the Agency's 25th anniversary would mark a new departure favouring the utilization 
of nuclear science and technology by all peoples in the interests of 
their development. 
24. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
last quarter of a century had been a historically important period for nuclear 
power. The Agency's many years of successful work had won international recognition 
and it had become a highly respected international centre for the 
co-ordination of co-operation among countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The Agency had received due recognition for the concrete results it had 
achieved in reviewing and disseminating information on world experience and 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 8 


knowledge of the most important aspects of nuclear energy, in particular the 
fuel cycle, nuclear power plant technology and operation, safety and environmental 
protection problems and the use of radiation in agriculture, medicine 
and so on. International conferences conducted by the Agency, especially the 


successful Conference on Nuclear Power Experience held the previous week in 
Vienna, had made a significant contribution to modern science and engineering 
practices. 


25. His delegation broadly supported the work the Agency had carried out in 
1981 in the safeguards, technical assistance, nuclear power, nuclear safety, 
environmental protection and other fields. 
26. The use of nuclear energy for military purposes represented a terrible 
threat to all nations. The strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation 
regime was therefore an important element in the preservation of peace. The 
application by the Agency of effective international safeguards served the 
interests of all countries, nuclear and non-nuclear, developed and developing. 
As had been stated by Mr. Brezhnev in his message to the participants in the twentysixth 
session of the General Conference, the fullest possible consolidation of 
the non-proliferation regime was an essential factor in limiting the nuclear 
arms race, and was also an indispensable prerequisite for broad-based international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The serious 
worsening of the international situation as a result of the return to the arms 
race on an unprecedented scale by certain nations was a matter of grave concern. 
In stark contrast to that blatantly militaristic trend, the Soviet Union and 
the Socialist countries had presented a reasonable and constructive policy aimed 
at implementing practicable measures to limit armaments, and nuclear missiles 
in particular. The importance of the new peace initiatives of the Soviet 
Union could scarcely be exaggerated: they included the establishment of a stepby-
step programme of nuclear disarmament, an undertaking not to be the first to 
use nuclear weapons and a draft declaration on the prevention of nuclear 
disaster at the thirty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 9 


27. He noted with satisfaction the effective and reliable manner in which the 
Agency's safeguards programme had been implemented. The success achieved in 
spite of the increasing number of inspections to be performed and volume of 
data to be processed was due to untiring efforts to improve the methodological 
and technical means of obtaining and processing information, the standardization 
of procedures, the development of the International Safeguards Information 
System and the use of computers at all levels. 
28. With the Agency's assistance, an ever-increasing number of countries were 
establishing and developing their own nuclear infrastructure. The Departments 
of Nuclear Energy and Safety and of Research and Isotopes had contributed particularly 
to that effort. His delegation had always recognized the importance 
to the developing countries and their economies of the Secretariat's work in the 
provision of technical assistance. The Byelorussian delegation supported the 
practice of using indicative planning figures for a three-year period and had 
no objection to the recommendations for the period 1984-86. The Government of 
the Republic had decided to increase its voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund to 60 000 roubles in national currency, a 
figure which was higher than its calculated share. The success of the technical 
co-operation programme had demonstrated that voluntary contributions were a 
reliable as well as a constantly increasing source for the financing of that 
activity. 
29. Byelorussia had drawn up a programme for the construction of nuclear 
plants for heat and electricity production. Construction work had already begun 
on the Minsk nuclear district heating plant, which would consist of two units 
equipped with WWER-1000 reactors. It was planned in the coming five years to 
increase capacity for supplying heat to industrial centres by building 
primarily nuclear heat production plants but also dual-purpose nuclear heat and 
power plants. 
30. Since the only real technical and economically viable solution to the problem 
of long-term energy resources was nuclear power generated from fast reactors, 
the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic had developed the scientific and 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 10 


technical basis required for the use of dissociated N,0_ as a coolant and working 
medium in nuclear power plants equipped with fast gas-cooled reactors. 
Problems relating to reactor design, fuel elements, turbines, pumps, heat 
exchangers and auxiliary systems had been successfully overcome. Design work 
and tests were under way on 300-MW(e) industrial prototype plants using a new 
coolant. A number of CMEA countries were participating in that work. 


31. His delegation fully supported the Agency's work on, and a certain expansion 
of, programmes dealing with research into the technical and economic 
aspects of nuclear power, the collection, analysis and dissemination of information 
on nuclear sources of low-temperature heat, improvements in nuclear 
power technology and advanced power reactor technology. 
32. His delegation approved the Agency's nuclear safety activities. Having 
examined the programme proposed for the coming years, it felt that more attention 
should be given to questions concerning the safety of advanced types of 
reactor for heat production and fast reactors, and that the development of more 
sophisticated safeguards approaches for converter and breeder reactors should 
be accelerated. 
33. Research had demonstrated the theoretical possibility of the practical 
application of controlled nuclear fusion. That technology held out the prospect 
of solving once and for all the problem of energy supplies and environmental 
protection. However, the design and technological development of thermonuclear 
reactor components and the system as a whole required the investment of considerable 
scientific, technical and material resources. All possible support 
should be given to the Agency's efforts in implementing the INTOR project. 
34. The International Nuclear Information System (INIS) was one of the Agency's 
major achievements. The steady improvement in methods for processing and compiling 
the latest data had enabled scientific and technical information to be 
made readily available to all Agency Member States. His delegation also welcomed 
the work on the evaluation, compilation and analysis of nuclear data and 
their exchange as well as the planned programme for reviewing the evaluated 
nuclear data files and publishing up-to-date reference literature. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 11 


35. Work was in progress in many Byelorussian scientific and research establishments 
in practically all branches of modern science. That work included 
fundamental and applied research on nuclear physics and nuclear power, lowtemperature 
plasma physics, solid state physics and semi-conductors, optics, 
electronics, radiobiology, radiation chemistry, physiology, genetics and 
cytology. Irradiation units were widely used in medical science, in agriculture, 
for the purpose of producing new and modified technical and construction 
materials and for producing fertilizers. 
36. In conclusion, his delegation wished to congratulate Namibia on its admission 
to membership of the Agency and wished it every success for its independent 
economic and social development. 
37. Mr. DOSUNMU (Nigeria) said that, on behalf of the President of the 
Federal Republic of Nigeria, he extended warm congratulations to the Agency on 
its 25th anniversary and wished it continued success in its efforts to promote 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
38. The crowded agenda before them demonstrated the urgency of the issues and 
challenges currently confronting the Agency. The General Conference was taking 
place at a time when the economic situation in the world was characterized by 
high interest rates, recession, unemployment and general political tension and 
strife. To compound that gloomy outlook, it had been reported at the Salzburg 
seminar on non-proliferation— that the number of nuclear explosive devices had 
increased to the awe-inspiring total of about 15 000. In terms of explosive 
power that meant approximately 20 000 million tons of TNT - 1.6 million times 
stronger than the bomb dropped over Hiroshima. The whole world had thus become 
virtual hostages of the nuclear Super-Powers. In the light of those developments, 
it was essential that the Agency should live up to public expectations about the 
fulfilment of its mandates. 
39. The work accomplished at the Conference on Nuclear Power Experience was 
to be welcomed. Governments, especially those from developing countries, would 
find the presentations and conclusions of that Conference a virtual gold mine of 
1/ Seminar on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Regime, sponsored by the Austrian 
Ministry for External Affairs and held from 2 to 7 August 1982. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 12 


vital information. With regard to the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, 
Member States should be urged to be more flexible at the preparatory stage so that 
the high hopes that were held for the Conference could be achieved. The Conference 
would be political in nature in the sense that it would afford an opportunity for 
representatives of the participating Governments to consider carefully what 
political steps should be adopted towards the establishment of a reliable and 
solid basis for development of international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. While exploring the possibilities of promoting that 
co-operation, the Conference would also consider the danger of further proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and take appropriate action in line with its mandate. 


40. The Nigerian delegation had taken due note of the detailed and impressive 
opening statement made by the Director General. His submission would serve as 
food for thought and should be considered further at the national level and in 
future sessions of the Board. The statement was further testimony of the breath 
of fresh air, the purposefulness, responsiveness and openness which had marked 
the work of the Agency since Dr. Blix had taken office. 
41. Nigeria, at its present stage of development, had an enormously energythirsty 
economy. Indeed, the demands for energy were so high that the inability 
to keep pace had become the major constraint on development. Of course, Nigeria 
did have a plentiful supply of fossil fuels, including coal and gas, but they 
were finite in nature. Nigeria was therefore forced to consider very seriously 
the nuclear option in its overall energy development strategy. It had, however, 
exercised a great deal of caution, because of certain problems that the Director 
General had mentioned in his presentation relating to the capital-intensive 
nature of nuclear energy facilities, safety, reliability and waste disposal. 
Nigeria therefore wholeheartedly welcomed the proposals and ideas which had been 
put forward for international co-operation in the reporting of all forms of 
nuclear accidents and mutual assistance in the event of accidents and 
emergencies. Honest and comprehensive reporting would help build up the inventory 
of knowledge necessary for appropriate measures to be devised. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 13 


42. Nigeria noted with pleasure the measures which had already been taken in 
connection with the problem of nuclear waste disposal. Its concern about that 
issue did not derive from the fact that Nigeria or most of the developing world 
produced any nuclear waste, but because they did not want to see a situation 
where the world's ocean beds and other areas of economic interest to developing 
nations would become polluted. Priority attention should be given to the subject 
by the Agency. 
43. The Nigerian delegation fully endorsed the fact that safeguards continued 
to attract the priority attention of the Agency. All nations and peoples must 
be protected from the possibility of irresponsible misuse of nuclear material. 
The vast explosive arsenal now at the disposal of the nuclear Powers was enough 
to give serious cause for concern. Nigeria therefore very strongly supported 
all actions by the Agency aimed at effectively guaranteeing the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. However, whilst the developing and non-nuclear nations of 
the world applauded the existing safeguards measures, it was their sincere hope 
that nuclear Powers would soon see the wisdom of ceasing to accumulate those 
fearful weapons of mass destruction. The Agency should, within the limits of 
its mandate, attempt to make a serious contribution to the difficult task of 
extending safeguards to ensure there was no further expansion of the existing 
nuclear explosive stock. 


44. Even though Nigeria was cautious m its approach to nuclear power, it could 
not afford to be left too far behind. Meanwhile, it would continue to draw on 
the resources of the Agency and make use of nuclear technology in the fields of 
agriculture, health, manpower development and research. 
45. The Nigerian delegation had already placed on record its strong condemnation 
of the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi reactor. Safeguards was a 
primary function of the Agency and no country would arrogate to itself the right 
to make decisions and take actions that infringed on the sovereignty of other 
law-abiding nations. A number of delegations had continued to draw attention to 
the need for appropriate action on United Nations resolution 35/146 A and B of 
12 December 1980 and hoped that the necessary decisions would be reached at the 
present session of the General Conference. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 14 


46. The South African regime had persistently refused to conclude adequate 
and comprehensive safeguards agreements with the IAEA. Certain prominent 
Members had continued, regrettably, to provide help with the establishment of a 
pilot enrichment plant in South Africa. 
47. Many countries felt that certain Member States were pursuing double standards 
and had allowed their companies to deal with the notorious South African 
regime in sensitive nuclear materials. At the appropriate time, Nigeria hoped, 
in concert with other peace-loving nations in the Agency, to propose further 
action that would prevent South Africa from reaping the benefits of membership 
whilst it continued to be an international outlaw and refused to respect basic 
human rights. 
48. One of the unresolved issues before the General Conference was the question 
of representation on the Board of Governors. No progress had been made in six 
years towards redressing the obvious injustice that existed. Nigeria therefore 
called on the Conference to put an end to the circuitous practice that had been 
adopted for many years in relation to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute. Member States, and especially the developed ones, which had persistently 
expressed their opposition to any increase or alteration in membership 
structure should consider changing their attitude because the political climate 
that had existed at the foundation of the Agency had drastically altered. It 
should not be impossible to devise a compromise which would not only meet the 
patently just demands of the developing countries but also dispel the fears of 
those who had expressed reservations. 
49. Nigeria was satisfied with the pioneering work of the Agency in the first 
25 years of its existence. In confirmation of that fact, it had fully discharged 
all its financial obligations to the Agency and, in addition, had made 
the full pledge of US $30 400 towards the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1983. That had been done in the face of a serious decline in the 
nation's economic fortunes which had necessitated a major cut-back in Government 
programmes, and it was solid evidence of Nigeria's support. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 15 


50. Mr. EILAM (Israel) noted that during the general debate some delegations 
had stated their positions on the events in Lebanon. The delegation of 
Israel wished to point out that discussion of that matter in the General 
Conference or any other organ of the Agency was beyond the statutory competence 
of the Agency. The Government of Israel had clearly stated that it was not 
responsible for the latest events in Beirut and that it condemned any act of 
killing. The delegation of Israel would not be drawn into any further discussion 
of the subject. 
51. The agenda before the Conference included various items on which Israel 
could make a modest contribution to the work of the Agency, but circumstances 
obliged him to confine his remarks to item 8. Resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381, 
adopted on 26 September 1981, addressed itself to a political matter beyond the 
Agency's mandate, and was incompatible with its Statute. The subject of the 
resolution was a matter of international peace and security which was primarily 
the responsibility of the Security Council of the United Nations. 
52. To consider suspending Israel from the exercise of its privileges and 
rights of membership as defined in operative paragraph 3 of resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/381 and in item 8 of the agenda before the Conference wasa politically 
motivated demarche with no legal foundation in the Statute. 
53. First, the IAEA Statute did not make membership of the IAEA conditional 
upon a State's agreement to place its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. 
To link the consideration of suspension with the question of safeguards outside 
the scope of and unrelated to the terms of a safeguards agreement between a 
Member State and the Agency would violate the Statute. 
54. Second, the suspension of a State from the exercise of its privileges and 
rights of membership could only be considered by the General Conference in the 
light of Article XIX.B of the Statute, i.e., if a Member State had "persistently 
violated provisions of this Statute or of any agreement entered into by it 
pursuant to this Statute". The working relationship between the IAEA and Israel 
had always been highly satisfactory. Ever since it had become a Member of the 
Agency, Israel had always fulfilled all its obligations under the Statute and 
had extended, through the Agency, a helping hand to other developing countries 
m fields in which its own achievements were of value. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 16 


55. Third, to invoke Security Council resolution 487 as grounds for considering 
the suspension of Israel's privileges and rights of membership was both artificial 
and inconsistent with the Agency's relationship agreement with the United 
Nations. 
56. Fourth, to consider suspension would also contradict the principle of 
sovereign equality of Member States, as spelled out in Article IV.C of the 
Statute, and would also violate the principle of universality. 
57. In view of all those considerations, the potential consequences of action 
by the General Conference against Israel were grave. Disregard for the legal 
basis of the Agency on grounds of political expediency by a majority of Members 
would deprive the Agency of its ability to achieve its objectives and perform 
credibly its functions as laid down in the Statute. There was no greater 
damage to the international non-proliferation regime and to world peace than 
a politicized safeguards system. 


58. As far as the Middle East was concerned, further damage would be inflicted 
on the tenuous progress towards the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in 
that region. It should be remembered that Iraq had already succeeded at the 
last session of the United Nations General Assembly in scuttling the consensus 
reached in 1980 on the Egyptian initiative. 
59. The Government of Israel had taken in recent years a number of measures 
aimed at the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, to be 
organized along the lines of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. 
60. The latest initiative had found its expression in the statement made by 
the Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Menachem Begin, in his address on 18 June 1982 
to the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. 
Mr. Begin had stated that Israel was prepared to negotiate and sign such a 
treaty with all its neighbours in the Middle East. 
61. Suspension of Israel from membership of the Agency would discourage his 
country from putting its trust in the Agency's ability to discharge its global 
mission in the nuclear field. In any case, Israel could not possibly contemplate 
a state of affairs in which its rights and privileges were suspended, 
but the duties of membership were maintained. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 17 


62. To sum up, Israel strongly believed that the Agency should be allowed to 
maintain the unique position it had enjoyed ever since its inception. Agency 
staff should be allowed to discharge their duties loyally and effectively 
within the limits of the mandate defined by the international community. Israel 
therefore proposed that the 25th anniversary of the Agency as well as the 
26th session of the General Conference should be remembered as milestones on the 
road to the implementation of the Agency's ideals, rather than as dates on 
which illegality had triumphed. 
63. Mr. AUWAERTER (Liechtenstein) said that his country had become a 
Member of the International Atomic Energy Agency convinced that the Agency was 
able to realize its aim of accelerating and enlarging the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world and, by means of 
NPT and of its control functions, of avoiding the misuse of nuclear energy. 
64. An adequate supply of energy was the basis of civilization. That applied 
to small States as well as to big ones. Civilization itself was only meaningful 
when it improved the quality of life of the people and thus contributed to 
peaceful co-existence. 
65. Although such a small country, Liechtenstein had, by its industrial 
activity, attained world-wide significance. That success was due to the knowledge, 
ability and assiduity of its people, which with its sense of discipline 
had achieved true democracy. 
66. His Government was more and more concerned about the growing tensions 
between States. Although the Agency had achieved considerable success, his 
country regretted that there were still States which had not joined the Agency, 
or which had not signed or ratified NPT. Furthermore, some States were not 
respecting the obligations into which they had entered. 
67. It was therefore necessary for the IAEA and its Member States to exert 
every effort to respect the commitments they had undertaken and to find ways of 
ensuring their acceptance by all States. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 


page 18 


Mr. Yaroato, Vice-President, took the chair. 


68. Mr• DHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) said that the present year was a very 
special one for the Agency, which had now completed a quarter of a century of 
successful international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. It was 
also a special year for the nuclear industry as a whole since it was the 
50th anniversary of Chadwick's discovery of the neutron - a discovery that had 
made nuclear energy possible. In Sri Lanka itself, nuclear energy activities 
had come of age through the completion of 21 years of the Radioisotope Centre, 
a successfully functioning laboratory set up for the country's nuclear energy 


programme. 


69. Sri Lanka had continued to make every effort towards development: in spite 
of the global problems hampering the growth of developing countries; there had 
been significant improvements in agriculture and industry, as well as in earnings 
from exports and foreign investment. Although the potential contribution 
by nuclear energy to improving standards in everyday life was not really known 
with any degree of certainty in the third-world countries, the role that it 
could play in accelerating the progress of the developing countries at the 
present time had been made quite clear. It could contribute to the provision 
of adequate quantities of food, improved health care, the supply of water to 
arid zones, and basic industrial production at competitive costs. 
70. If, however, there was to be a global balance on both the economic and 
political planes, it was essential for nuclear technologies to be made available 
to developing countries. Any financial, technical or political obstructions 
in the way of such transfer of technology to developing countries could only 
widen the gap between the more affluent and less affluent States. Anti-nuclear 
activities by uninformed groups in developing contries would produce much the 
same effect. 


71. Sir Lanka had set up the Radioisotope Centre in Colombo in 1961 for the 
application of nuclear techniques in such areas as agriculture, industry and 
hydrology. A nuclear medicine unit had also been established ten years ago, 
and a second nuclear medicine unit was to be established in the near future 
to cope with a greater demand for nuclear techniques in medicine. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 19 


72. Sri Lanka was a non-aligned State actively working for world peace. The 
Sri Lankan National Atomic Energy Act proscribed any non-peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. He therefore supported all Agency activities aimed at preventing 
the use of nuclear energy for non-peaceful purposes. 
73. Sri Lanka was not endowed with any energy resources other than hydro power, 
but even the capacity of such resources was limited, compared to the demand for 
electricity. As a result, a committee had been set up to study the suitability 
of introducing nuclear power reactors. That committee had recommended immediate 
action on manpower training and infrastructure development. As a result, the 
recommendations had been adopted and facilities had been created for training 
the requisite personnel, including university courses in the subject. It was 
hoped that the Agency would provide guidance and assistance in that venture. 
74. His delegation was proud of the fact that Sri Lanka was one of the 
countries in the Asia and the Pacific region that had completed ten years of 
co-operation under the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) and was 
gratified to see that another region was now forming a similar co-operative 
group. It was hoped that the United Nations Conference for the Promotion 
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy to be 
held in 1983 would help to promote co-operation in nuclear activities between 
all countries, and that such would lead to a greater level of peace and understanding 
in the world. 
75. Mr. MPANGALA (United Republic of Tanzania) said that he would begin 
his short statement by addressing himself to both the Agency's annual report 
for 1981 and the draft programme for 1983-88 and budget for 1983. In 
connection with the Agency's annual report for 1981, his delegation wished to 
congratulate the Secretariat for producing a report whose format and 
presentation was eminently clear and understandable. His Government continued 
to be favourably impressed by the range of the Agency's activities in the use 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes as detailed in the annual report. 
Thus, he had in general no difficulty in accepting the report. Tanzania was 
particularly anxious that in the Agency's programme an equitable balance 
should be struck between the annual rate of increase in the budget for safeguards 
and the rate of increase in that for technical assistance. His 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 20 


delegation's acceptance of the target for voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund should thus be viewed against 
that background. Subject to those observations and reservations he supported 
the adoption of the draft resolutions on the Regular Budget appropriations 
for 1983, the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund allocation for 1983 
and the Working Capital Fund m 1983. 


76. He now wished to address the question of financing technical assistance 
in the Agency, an issue of crucial importance to all developing countries 
and one which had been under discussion in the Board of Governors and the 
General Conference since 1973. Although the Board had arrived at a temporary 
compromise whereby the target for voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1982 was US $16 million, with a figure 
of US $19 million proposed for 1983, his Government still strongly maintained 
the view held by other developing countries that, in order to ensure the 
predictability of financial resources for technical assistance, and in order to 
give technical assistance the same status as safeguards in accordance with the 
Agency's Statute, the technical assistance programme should be financed from 
the Regular Budget. 
77. He announced that his Government had pledged US $1900 as its voluntary 
contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1983. 


78. Turning to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, he remarked that, 13 years after 
NPT had come into being, the achievement was hardly more than the fact that 
there had been no nuclear war, whereas the potential for a nuclear war had 
increased tremendously. In that connection he reminded the Conference that 
Tanzania was not a party to NPT. It had always believed that NPT did more harm 
than good to the world's disarmament efforts. For one thing it did nothing to 
break the nuclear weapons monopoly of a few States. Secondly, it created a 
false sense of satisfaction and complacency and thus led to a slackening of 
the global striving towards disarmament. Thirdly, it struck at the sovereignty 
of Member States by linking the Agency's technical assistance to their being 
parties to the Treaty, although that was in fact contrary to Articles II and III 
of the Agency's Statute. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 21 


79. In conclusion, he wished to make some remarks on the technical assistance 
received from the Agency since Tanzania had joined the organization in 1975. 
When Tanzania had decided to join the Agency, it had not had the manpower or the 
institutional framework to handle nuclear energy matters. The decision to'join 
had been prompted by a genuine desire to exploit the benefits of the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy for the development of the Tanzanian people. 
80. During 1980-82 the Government of Tanzania had received technical assistance 
from the Agency involving isotope laboratories, training courses for Tanzanian 
fellows, expert services and a hydrology project using tritium. His 
Government was indeed grateful to the Agency for that assistance. 
81. Mr• SHASH (Egypt) said that his delegation had listened with great 
interest to the statement made by the Director General at the start of the 
session and had noted the various constructive proposals contained therein 
aimed at guiding and consolidating the activities of the Agency in various 
fields. His delegation wished to express its satisfaction at the use of 
Arabic at the General Conference for the first time, an event which coincided 
with the 25th anniversary of the Agency's establishment. That represented 
an opportunity for him to express his Government's feelings of pride at the 
fact that the Agency, during that relatively limited time span, had been able 
to make great progress in the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and the perfection of a system ensuring the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
82. However, those 25 years also gave grounds for pausing to consider what had 
actually occurred, and to judge to what extent hopes had already become 
reality, or would do so in the future. He recalled that Egypt had participated 
in the Conference on the Statute and had been one of the first countries to 
accept the Agency's founding instrument. Down the years Egypt had also contributed 
to and supported all the activities of the Agency, and he wished to 
take this opportunity to affirm that it would continue to do so. His 
Government had on 29 June 1982 officially notified the Agency that the necessary 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 22 


constitutional measures had been taken to ratify its safeguards agreement with 
the Agency pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 


(NPT), which Egypt had ratified in February 1981. That ratification had been the 
logical result of the support which Egypt had consistently lent to the creation 
of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East. The strong consensus in favour of the 
relevant resolution adopted at the 35th session of the United Nations General Assembly 
showed the support which the concept enjoyed world-wide. However, the resolution 
would merely be an empty declaration of good intentions unless the Agency's 
General Conference made specific arrangements for its implementation. 


83. Egypt continued to hope that its ratification of NPT would encourage the 
other States in the region which had not yet done so to follow suit, so as to 
consolidate peace and security in an area which was so important for the peace 
and security of the entire world. It was therefore logical that Egypt should 
strive for the universal acceptance of NPT, which called for all States, 
especially the nuclear-weapon States, to find ways and means of ending the 
nuclear arms race and of achieving complete disarmament under effective 
international control. The Agency now had valuable experience which could be 
placed at the disposal of NPT and could also be applied in the field of disarmament. 
Putting a stop to the nuclear arms race could help realize the objectives 
of the Agency in the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, since 
an end to the arms race would help counter the negative influence which the 
latter had on public opinion as far as nuclear power was concerned. 
84. The vital role which the Agency had to play in the sphere of non-proliferation 
presupposed total confidence in the safeguards system, and for that reason one 
of the main duties of Member States was to respect the Statute, as otherwise 
the Agency would lose its effectiveness. That was why the Board of Governors 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 23 


and the General Conference, at its 25th session, had condemned the barbaric 
aggression perpetrated against the Iraqi nuclear research centre. As a 
Member of the Agency and a party to NPT, Iraq had placed its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. The Security Council and the General Assembly of the 
United Nations had also condemned that act of aggression, which had aroused 
public opinion throughout the world. 


85. The refusal by Israel to obey the terms of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 meant 
that the General Conference, at its present session, had to face up to its 
responsibilities and act in order to ensure respect for the provisions of the 
Statute and indeed respect for the Agency itself. 
86. Egypt had developed an ambitious nuclear power programme aimed at bringing 
a number of nuclear power stations on stream by the year 2000. The total power 
available would be about 8000 MW(e), which would cover approximately 40% of 
the country's electricity requirements at that date. The Egyptian authorities 
had, in the course of the past year, concluded nuclear co-operation agreements 
with France, the United States of America, the Federal Republic of Germany, 
Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom and Sweden. In addition, preliminary 
steps had been taken for the construction of the first two power-generating 
units in the nuclear power programme under a co-operation agreement signed 
with France. The two units in question should be commissioned in 1991 and 
1992 respectively. Based on the personnel cadres which already existed thanks 
to an interest in nuclear affairs going back to 1957, a scheme had recently 
been launched for training the scientific and technical staff required for 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 24 


operating the stations to be erected under the ambitious nuclear power programme 
The United States, France and the Federal Republic of Germany and the IAEA were 
participating in that training scheme. 


87. Many developing countries were finding it necessary to have recourse to 
nuclear power in order to meet their energy requirements. That was why Egypt 
attached special importance to the Agency's work of providing technical assistance 
to developing countries, in order to assist them in promoting the use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In that connection his Government had 
been a supporter of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388, which requested the Board of 
Governors to take the necessary measures in order to finance technical 
assistance from the Agency's Regular Budget or from comparably predictable 
and assured resources. The same resolution included a request for the Board 
of Governors to take appropriate steps so that technical assistance funds were 
increased in order to respond adequately to meet increasing financial requirements 
for the maximum possible number of technically sound projects and to 
enable progress in technical assistance to keep pace with the progress in other 
main activities of the Agency. His delegation regarded that resolution as a 
fundamental instrument whose full implementation over the years to come should 
be the aim of all Member States. Egypt therefore welcomed the consensus which 
had emerged from the informal consultations held in the Board over the past 
year and which evolved satisfactory indicative planning figures for the 
period 1984-86. That augured well for the further implementation of resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/388. The indicative planning figures for the following three 
years represented of course the minimum requirement, but if they proved 
inadequate he was confident that adjustments could be made in the spirit of 
co-operation and good will which had marked the consultations to date. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 25 


88. Nuclear power called for extensive long-term investments and for the 
assured availability of fuel, equipment and services on a large scale. That 
was why Egypt had been among those States which had helped to promote the 
establishment of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) in June 1980. 
He was gratified to note the significant progress which had been made within 
the framework of CAS, and trusted that the work which had been entrusted to 
it would be completed as soon as possible. 
89. The number of States Members of the Agency had now reached more than 110, 
after 25 years of steady growth- Nevertheless the necessary interregional balance 
had not been achieved, and there was still no adequate representation of all 
areas, his own area of Africa, for example, being grossly under-represented. 
His delegation therefore greatly regretted that the consultations in the 
Board of Governors during the past year with a view to implementing resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/389 had not led to any positive results. It hoped that those 
consultations would be continued more energetically, and would lead to the 
addition of three seats for the area of Africa and two seats for the area of 
the Middle East and South Asia. 
90. His Government welcomed the action taken by the Director General to 
implement resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 on the subject of increasing the number of 
staff members recruited from developing countries, especially to the higher 
echelons of the Secretariat. Further measures in that direction were, however, 
required. 
91. In conclusion, he wished to draw attention to the significance of the 
Conference on Nuclear Power Experience which had been held just before the 
present session, to the Round Table discussion on the Role of Nuclear Power in 
Overall Energy Planning which had been held on the first day of the session 
itself, and to the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social 
Development to be held in Geneva in the late summer of 1983. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 26 


92. Mr• BADDOU (Morocco) said that there was hardly need to perorate on 
the vital importance of nuclear energy in all aspects of the economic and 
social life of today. In face of the inevitable diminution of natural energy 
sources, the constantly increasing demand in the world for energy, the energy 
crises following one upon the other in a more and more dramatic way, and the 
ever widening gap between the developed and developing countries, nuclear 
energy seemed the only hope and might perhaps be the only really satisfactory 
solution to the energy problem at a planetary level. 
93. Nuclear techniques and the spheres of application of atomic energy had 
in fact made considerable progress in recent years, as was abundantly clear 
from the work of the International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience held 
the week before in Vienna. It had emerged from the statements of the experts 
at that meeting that nuclear energy had not only attained its maturity, but 
that it had become an economically competitive, technically Feasible and sate 
energy source. 
94. Nevertheless, paradoxical as it might seem, there had been a slow-down in 
the implementation of nuclear programmes in most of the developed countries, 
and with all the more reason, in the developing countries, too. Whereas that 
situation was undoubtedly due, on the one hand, to the unfavourable world 
economic situation as well as to certain doubts about the safety of nuclear 
power plants and the risks of nuclear proliferation, it had been brought about, 
on the other, by the high cost of operations, the delays involved in implementing 
projects and a lack of high-calibre personnel. Hence the importance of 
the Agency's mission, both in promotional terms and in terms of strengthening 
its safeguards system and encouraging non-proliferation, was manifestly clear. 
Efforts had, in fact, always been geared to that objective and it was gratifying 
to see that the number of Member States joining NPT had continued to rise 
and now amounted to 116. 
95. There was need, nowever, to strive far harder if genuine non-proliferation 
was to be brought about. His delegation believed that there were certain conditions 
which would have to be met in order to improve the chances of reaching 
that goal; they were, first, vertical non-proliferation of nuclear weapons; 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 27 


second, horizontal non-proliferation by means of the universality of NPT; 
third, complete security for non-nuclear-weapon States party to NPT; and 
fourth, immediate and specifically oriented assistance to those States in their 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. In addition, non-nuclear-weapon 
States would have to have been given satisfactory and tangible guarantees of 
safety by nuclear-weapon States that were such as to assure their independence, 
sovereignty and territorial integrity. 


96. Furthermore, his delegation believed that the creation of denuclearized 
zones constituted an additional approach that could be instrumental m 
achieving the aim in view. It had to be recalled in that connection that the 
resolution adopted on the denuclearization of the African continent by the 
United Nations would not be followed up for a long time to come unless the 
racialist Government in Pretoria agreed to place its nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards. Similarly, there could not be denuclearized zones in the 
Middle East as long as Israel continued to refuse to join NPT. 
97. The Agency's second basic function was to encourage the development of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. He believed in that connection that 
efforts should be geared more to the technical co-operation programmes, with 
priority being given to the developing countries. To that end it was essential 
for resources earmarked for such activities to be appropriated from the Regular 
Budget so that the funding of technical assistance was not exposed to the risk 
of constant and unpredictable fluctuation m voluntary contributions. 
98. Lastly, his delegation wished to refer to a particular problem, the implications 
of which were serious enough to jeopardise the Agency's very basis, 
namely the Israeli air attack in June 1981 on the Tamuz nuclear research centre 
in Iraq. At its twenty-fifth session the General Conference had resolutely 
condemned that act of violence in its resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381. It had been 
clearly recognized, in adopting the resolution, that the attack had not only 
been directed against the nuclear facilities of a Member State which was party 
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, but had also dealt a severe blow to the 
Agency's safeguards system. Israel, however, had not complied with that 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 28 


resolution or with any others of a similar kind, which was perhaps not so surprising 
in view of the sad record of that country's violations of the United 
Nations Charter and the most elementary principles of human rights. 


99. The Agency should take up that challenge, for its reputation and credibility 
were at stake. Rather than just verbal condemnation, it was time for 
the General Conference to adopt specific sanctions against Israel, which had 
failed to carry out its obligations as a Member State. In consideration of the 
United Nations Charter and pursuant to the provisions of resolution 487 of the 
United Nations Security Council, and the Conference's resolution GC(XXV)/RES/38l, 
it was now the duty of all present to suspend Israel from the exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership. Any hesitation or lenience in that matter 
would be in effect a dangerous precedent with incalculable implications for the 
Agency's future. 
100. Mr. EL GHOUD (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said it was a pleasure to 
welcome Namibia as a new Member of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The 
people of Namibia had long suffered under racialist colonialism, and one could 
only wish them all success for the future. 
101. As the Agency celebrated its twenty-fifth anniversary, Libya wished to 
offer its congratulations and express the hope that in future the Agency would 
continue to fulfil all its tasks and achieve even more success in furthering the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, so that developing countries could benefit on 
an equal basis from technical assistance. As a developing country, Libya was 
very grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance it had received. 
However, it felt that, overall, the distribution of assistance had not been 
entirely equitable; the technical assistance programme could profitably be 
revised in such a way as to provide developing countries with yet more effective 
assistance for their nuclear programmes, so that they could acquire a new source 
of energy contributing to economic prosperity for their peoples. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 29 


102. There were a number of very urgent problems that still had not been 
resolved. One was the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute: even though 
five years had passed since the presentation of the draft resolution for 
the amendment of that Article, co-sponsored by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and 
supported by a majority of developing countries, no progress had been achieved, 
the draft resolution was presented annually at the sessions of the General 
Conference without being adopted definitively. The amendment of Article VI.A.2 
had thus not yet taken place, owing to the attitude of the developed countries, 
which refused to accept any change without presenting valid arguments other than 
depriving the developing countries of their right of adequate representation 
on the Board. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya considered it extremely important 
that the Conference should adopt an appropriate amendment at its present session. 


103. The Libyan delegation supported the adoption of the necessary measures to 
enable technical assistance to be financed from the Regular Budget. Only then 
could the Agency effectively fulfil its commitments in technical assistance 
and co-operation on a larger scale than heretofore. Libya called on the 
developed States advanced in the nuclear field to increase their contributions 
to technical assistance and co-operation in order to make it possible for the 
Agency to meet the growing needs and requirements of developing countries. 
104. Libya had launched a programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in 
medicine, agriculture, industry and power production. It was considering the 
introduction of a first nuclear power station, consisting of two units each with 
3 


an output of 440 MW, and a desalination plant with a capacity of 80 000 m /day. 
Studies on the radiation preservation of food were also making progress, within 
the framework of the country's Nuclear Research Centre, as was the production 
of radioisotopes to use in those areas, especially in the selection of appropriate 
fertilizers. It was to be hoped that the Agency would increase its 
assistance, and that Libya would also be able to benefit from the assistance 
of peace-loving countries. Not only the Agency but all friendly countries 
which had provided assistance, first and foremost the Soviet Union, had Libya's 
gratitude. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 30 


105. All States had an absolute right ro develop their nuclear energy programmes. 
That inalienable right was enshrined in the Agency's Statute and also in the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, both of which reaffirmed the absolute right of every 
Member State of the Agency to develop the economic, scientific and technical 
aspects of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy within the framework of the 
Agency's safeguards system. Despite such provisions of international statutes, 
charters and documents, the racist Zionist entity had launched a military 
aggression on the nuclear research facilities of a Member State - Iraq. Iraq 
was a party ro NPT and had concluded safeguards agreements under that Treaty; 
that it had acted in conformity with its obligations under NPT was a fact 
demonstrated in the reports of the Agency and of its safeguards missions. 
106. While reiterating its condemnation of the unqualifiable aggression perpetrated 
by the racist Zionist entity, his delegation wished to recall the 
resolution adopted at the previous session which,in one of its operative 
paragraphs, called for suspension of the membership of the Zionist entity if it 
did not comply with the relevant resolutions and place its nuclear facilities 
under safeguards. In fact, the Zionist entity had consistently spurned the 
resolutions of the United Nations and other international organizations, acting 
at the instigation and with the support of the United States of America, which 
was abusing its veto right in order to support the Zionist entity. So far the 
Zionist entity had refused to place its nuclear facilities under safeguards and 
had also refused to sign NPT, showing beyond any doubt that it was not qualified 
for membership of the Agency. Therefore, his delegation wished to call for 
implementation of Lhe resolution adopted by the General Conference at its last 
session. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 31 


107. The criminal military aggression perpetrated by the military establishment 
of the racist Zionist entity could hardly be considered a surprise. That 
entity was the United States' instrument of intimidation and could not exist 
without assassination and destruction. The simplest proof of that could 
be found in its wanton massacre of the Arab Palestinian population and the 
Arab Lebanese population, which had resulted in the death and displacement 
of thousands of innocent children, women and elderly people and the destruction 
of a great number of buildings, institutions, hospitals, schools and other 
facilities. The Zionist entity, through those criminal acts, had reaffirmed 
its aggressiveness and its blind hatred based on racism, nazism and fascism. 


108. The support of the United States, the supply by the United States of all 
technological and military means of destruction, had made it possible for the 
Zionist entity to implement the law of the jungle. It was that moral and 
technological assistance from the United States which had made it possible to 
annihilate all the efforts made by the International Atomic Energy Agency 
throughout its existence. And a new dimension of destructiveness was now 
possible, for, to quote a report in the "Economist" of 27 August 1981, "it is 
quite possible that Israel has more than 12 plutonium bombs and a number of 
neutron bombs as well". Probably most of the delegates present had come across 
a book called "Two minutes over Baghdad", written by three Zionist writers. 
On page 51 of "Two minutes over Baghdad" one read the statement that "Despite 
divergencies in the evaluation of the possibilities of Israel's nuclear 
capabilities, the latest US CIA report estimates that the number of operational 
warheads in the possession of Israel is almost 200 warheads". 



GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 32 


109. AH that clearly meant that the Agency and Its Member States must stop 
all technical assistance to and co-operation with the Zionist and racist 
entity. That was a responsibility which had to be fulfilled if the Agency 
was to be preserved in its present form - if it was to apply the provisions 
of its Statute and carry out its objectives. 
110. The present-day world suffered from various crises and serious conflicts 
and from the depredations of States which had recourse to armed aggression 
and believed only in force against people who were peace-loving. United 
States military aggression over Libya's territorial waters afforded additional 
proof of how the United States Administration felt. The United States had 
demonstrated, by such actions, that it aimed at preventing the progress of 
the Libyan Arab people. 


111. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the Agency would continue 
its valuable contribution to the welfare of mankind and succeed in attaining 
the objectives enshrined in its Statute, 
112. Mr. BARUTCU (Turkey), welcoming Namibia as a new Member of the 
Agency, expressed the hope that it would soon attain full independence and 
contribute actively to the work of the Agency with its considerable uranium 
resources. 
113. The current session of the General Conference marked the silver jubilee 
of the Agency and had been preceded by the Conference on Nuclear Power 
Experience, which had provided an overview of the organization's activities 
and of the status of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the world. 
114. Unfortunately, the picture which had emerged was not very encouraging. 
115. The world energy problem was, on the whole, becoming more and more 
acute and, besides, there was a growing disparity in the availability 
of energy to the different regions of the world. It appeared that, by the 
year 2000, nuclear energy would be essential to fill the energy gap. 
116. However, the present situation was paradoxical in that the human and 
technical resources built up over forty years of nuclear power plant construction 
were being under-utilized and that scarcely one half of the total 
construction capacity in the industrialized countries was being used. That 
situation was closely linked with the public acceptance issue. In that 
GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 33 


connection, the problems of reactor safety and waste management and disposal 
should be carefully and urgently studied by the industrialized countries. 
The Agency's efforts in those areas should be commended. 


117. The problems faced by the developing countries were of a different nature. 
In addition to their lack of infrastructure and manpower, they encountered 
great economic problems in financing their nuclear power programmes. That 
had a restrictive effect on international nuclear trade and thus on the 
nuclear industry. The interaction of those various factors created a vicious 
circle. As production fell in the nuclear industry the costs rose, making 
it even costlier for the developing countries to carry out their programmes. 
It was time to add new dimensions to the technical co-operation and assistance 
activities of the Agency: the seminar on technical assistance being held during 
the present Conference session was a good occasion to explore the possibilities. A 
number of developing countries had reached the necessary level of infrastructure 
and manpower to build their own power reactors. He hoped that the 
Agency would play a more constructive role in that regard, bringing to life 
the relevant provisions of the Statute. 


118. A vital aspect of the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
was assurances of supply of fuel, equipment and technology. Non-proliferation 
and assurances of supply were interdependent. The creation of a climate of 
mutual confidence where countries could pursue the goals of economic and 
technological development without hindrance would provide the assurance of 
non-proliferation. It was of the utmost importance, therefore, that the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply should conduct its work fruitfully. 
119. At its preceding session the General Conference had considered an 
unprecedented act of aggression by one Member State against the peaceful 
installations of another Member State. That act had undermined confidence 
in the Agency's safeguards system and continued to be a serious matter. 
His delegation noted with great regret that the resolution adopted by the 
General Conference on the subject had remained unobserved, and wished to 
emphasize that there should be no discrimination among Member States as to 
the fulfilment of obligations. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 34 


120. In so far as developments in Turkey were concerned, reorganization of 
the Turkish Atomic Energy Commission had been completed. It was a country 
with relatively rich energy resources. Its potential of hydraulic energy 
was estimated at 100 000 million and that of lignite resources at 
60 000 million kilowatt-hours per annum. If Turkey could develop 80% of its 
hydraulic energy potential and'all of its lignite resources potential by the year 2000, 
there would still be a gap of 40 000 million kilowatt-hours since the energy requirements 
for that period were expected to be 180 000 million kilowatt-hours. Nuclear 
energy was therefore essential. His country was persisting in its efforts to implement 
its nuclear power programme. A site had already been selected for a nuclear power 
plant and provision was being made for the necessary infrastructure and port facilities. 
The Turkish authorities were studying new offers for the nuclear power 
plant. At the same time, uranium exploration activities had been stepped 
up. According to the most recent data, the proven uranium resources amounted 
to 5000 tons. Following the completion of the yellow-cake pilot project, 
research on a laboratory scale was under way. In addition to the TR-1 and 
TRIGA Mark-II research reactors of the Technical University of Istanbul, 
a 5-MW TR-2 research reactor had become operational in 1982 at the Cekmece 
nuclear research centre of the Turkish Atomic Energy Commission. 


121. In conclusion, he wished to express his appreciation for the contribution 
which the Agency had made to Turkey's nuclear power programme. 


122. Mr. GHAZALI bin Hj. Abd. RAHMAN (Malaysia) congratulated the 
United Nations Council for Namibia on being admitted to membership of the 
Agency. 
123. It was recognized in Malaysia that although science, and in particular 
nuclear science, was capable of offering the deepest insights into the nature 
of the universe, as well as great economic benefits, it was also capable of 
being misused for destructive purposes. Men had always faced mortal dangers, 
but there was a categorical difference between endangering the lives of one 
or more men and endangering the existence of life itself, between a threat 
to a nation and a threat to mankind, between the destruction of personal 
property and the destruction of the Earth. That was a moral problem which 
had never been faced by man before. Future generations would be threatened 
with alienation and illness of the spirit and loss of conscience and of the 


GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 35 


sense of outrage at evil. A so-called "new morality" and a "new ethic" 
were arising, and faith in the democratic process was being eroded. There 
was also a decline in the acceptance of pluralism of race, culture and life 
styles. 


124. There could be no doubt that NPT and the Agency's safeguards were vital 
to the non-proliferation regime and should be strengthened in every way 
possible. The Director General's proposal that the Agency's activities 
might be expanded to cover the area of disarmament was worthy of examination. 
125. The unwarranted and unprovoked attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear 
research centre, a facility subject to safeguards, had grave implications for 
the Agency. The attack had been a flagrant violation of international 
laws and of all norms of international relations and constituted a serious 
blow to the Agency's safeguards regime, which was internationally accepted 
as the basis for NPT. The General Conference at its twenty-fifth regular 
session had adopted resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 requesting Israel to comply 
with Security Council resolution 487 of 19 June 1981, but Israel had taken no 
notice. The General Conference had a moral obligation to ensure that its 
decision was respected by taking strong action against the party concerned. 
126. The international situation with regard to the transfer of nuclear technology 
was very uncertain. An international consensus on trade in nuclear 
technology was being sought in the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), 
but progress had been slow so far. Countries with small nuclear programmes 
needed guaranteed access to the whole range of fuel cycle services, including 
waste disposal, and the Agency should play a leading role in protecting 
the interests of developing countries in that area. 


127. Malaysia had entered the nuclear age when its 1-MW TRIGA reactor had 
achieved criticality in June 1982. The reactor's potential was limited, 
but the technical know-how involved would now be domestically available and 
would provide an impetus for the introduction and utilization of nuclear 
science and technology. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.243 
page 36 


128. The Agency had been instrumental in encouraging and assisting 
Member States to co-operate towards the efficient utilization of available 
resources in areas of common interest. The establishment of the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Scince and Technology (RCA) had been one of the 
most successful innovations in the attempt to spread the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. Co-operation programmes and projects under RCA had 
covered a broad spectrum of technologies, including agriculture and 
food, medicine, environmental research and control, industrial applications, 
hydrology, instrumentation, and training. RCA had demonstrated 
the value of regional co-operation by a number of co-operation programmes 
and projects of importance to Member States and by regular meetings on 
technological needs and on the means of satisfying those needs on a regional 
basis. 
129. The Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund also existed in order 
to promote co-operation between countries in the field of nuclear energy, 
and Malaysia was pleased to be able to pledge, for 1983, a voluntary 
contribution to that Fund amounting to US $17 100. 
130. In addition to scientific results and theories it was necessary to have 
a science policy to ensure that scientific progress brought as much good and 
as little harm as possible. The politics of nuclear science did not differ 
essentially from other types of politics, having its elites, its down-trodden, 
its alliances, bosses, loves, hates and vested interests. Mankind could not 
progress without nuclear science but, far from providing a sense of power, 
nuclear science emphasized man's weakness and futility, because the powers of 
ignorance and greed distorted nuclear science and led it astray. 
The session rose at 1.6 p.m. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
May 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

Paragraphs 


TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 23 September 1982, at 3.5 p.m. 


President: Mr. M0R0Z0V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) 
later: Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda** 


General debate and annual report for 1981 


(continued) 


Statements by the delegates of the following 


States and organizations: 


Korea, Republic of 
Greece 
Uruguay 
Spain 
Zambia 
Cyprus 
Sudan 
Jordan 
Portugal 
Zaire 
Denmark 
Paraguay 
United Arab Emirates 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Mali 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
Replies by the delegates of the Republic of 
Korea and the United States of America to 
the statement by the delegate of the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Reply by the delegate of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea 


1 11 
19 
24 
28 
32 
37 
42 
49 
55 
61 
66 
68 
71 
78 
84 



88 - 89 
90 


90 


10 
18 
23 
27 
31 
36 
41 
48 
54 
60 
65 
67 
70 
77 
83 
87 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 15 October 1982. 
**_/ GC(XXVI)/674. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVI)/INF/208/Rev.4. 
83-1764 


GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AH!) ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1981 (GC(XXVI)/664 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) extended a warm welcome to Namibia, 
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, which had just been 
approved for membership of the Agency. 
2. On the occasion of the Agency's twenty-fifth anniversary his Government 
noted with satisfaction that the organization had played an important role in 
the promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy for economic and social 
development and that it had made a considerable effort to extend the system of 
safeguards with a view to preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. He 
strongly urged the nuclear-weapon States to abide by Article VI of the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). His delegation was in favour 
of the Agency concerning itself with issues of long- and short-term importance 
such as spent fuel and radioactive waste management. As an instrument of international 
co-operation, the Agency should play a key role in that field. 
3. Since the commissioning of its first nuclear power plant, in April 1978, the 
Republic of Korea had gained considerable experience in the construction, 
operation and maintenance of reactors. Eight other nuclear power plants were 
under construction, and it was planned, as from the following year, to commission 
a new plant every year. The installed capacity would be further expanded, and 
was expected to reach about 30 GW(e) by the end of the century, accounting for 
60% of the country's total electricity generation. 
4. In order to improve reactor safety, his Government was studying the 
standardization of power plant components. In addition, the Atomic Energy Law 
had recently been amended to incorporate mandatory requirements for safety 
regulations at all stages of construction, operation, maintenance and decommissioning. 
The Nuclear Safety Centre, recently established to assist the 
Government in its regulatory and licensing functions, would deal with safety 
analyses and evaluations, the preparation of safety codes and standards appropriate 
to the country's conditions, inspections and the auditing of major nuclear 
facilities, radiation protection and emergency preparedness, and the systematic 
dissemination of safety information. It believed that timely and effective 
assistance could be provided best under the regional co-operation schen-e for 
emergency preparedness. In that regard, the Agency's role was vital. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 3 


5. His country was willing to share with other developing countries its 
experience in the solution of the difficult problems which arose in the course 
of planning and implementing nuclear programmes. The success of such programmes 
depended, to a large extent, on the timely availability of nuclear materials, 
technology and competent personnel. In that respect his Government fully 
supported the initiative taken by the Board of Governors in establishing the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply and by the Secretariat in organizing the 
Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage to foster an international 
commercial market, to assure supply anvj 1.0 manage u^.e uacic—en*. OL u*.e LIISI cyci.e. 
It was in favour of establishing internationally acceptable norms for nuclear 
trade and of full access to the essential technology on the basis of Agency 
safeguards and an international non-proliferation regime. It welcomed the 
positive steps taken by some suppliers, for example the announcement of the 
criteria for exercising the right of prior consent, which contributed to 
strengthening mutual confidence. 
6. His country was an active proponent of an effective non-proliferation 
regime and had strongly supported the Agency's safeguards system. The nonproliferation 
objective could be achieved only through political means. The 
Agency was an effective and vital element in that regime. His Government was 
of the opinion that safeguards information should be strictly confidential and 
that only overall conclusions should be published. 
7. The Government of the Republic of Korea, which was constructively participating 
in several regional projects under RCA, welcomed the Agency's efforts to 
provide assistance to an RCA project. 
8. As regards the technical co-operation programme proposed in the draft 
budget for 1983, his delegation considered that the best method of obtaining 
fruitful results was to evaluate projects more stringently, to implement 
them more efficiently and to carry out post-project evaluations. The proposed 
1983 target of US $19 million for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 4 


Fund was reasonable even though it fell far short of requirements. The indicative 
planning figures for 1984, 1985 and 1986 on which a consensus had been 
reached in the Board would provide a sound and predictable basis for those years. 


9. Furthermore, his delegation noted with satisfaction that the Director 
General had taken steps to recruit nationals from developing countries and hoped 
that those efforts would continue. 
10. The Republic of Korea would continue to use nuclear energy as an alternative 
to oil and would expand its nuclear power programme through closer international 
co-operation, while observing the highest standards of nuclear safety. 
11. Mr• PREVEDOURAKIS (Greece) congratulated Namibia, represented by the 
United Nations Council for Namibia, on its being approved for membership of the 


Agency. 


12. It emerged from the International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience 
and the Director General's statement that the growth of nuclear power had slowed 
down significantly owing to energy conservation measures and the withering of 
public confidence, but that nuclear power accounted for about 107o of world 
electricity production and remained an essential factor in the diversification 
of energy resources in the future. 
13. His country continued to depend largely on imported oil and attached great 
importance to the diversification of its energy sources. It had opted for the 
development, on a priority basis, of its domestic resources such as water power, 
lignite, geothermal energy, solar energy and wind energy in the short and medium 
term. Having deferred the nuclear option, Greece could take its time over 
training the manpower and developing the manufacturing capabilities required for 
a viable national programme. At the same time it hoped that the serious 
problems of escalating investments, longer lead times and higher costs of 
ensuring safety would be resolved satisfactorily. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 5 


14. The Agency's safeguards system encouraged greater public acceptance of 
nuclear energy and formed the essential basis of confidence-building measures, 
which could be expanded substantially through the work of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS) and the Expert Group on International Plutonium 
Storage and through activities in the fiejds of nuclear safety and waste management. 
In that context he welcomed the publication of annual reviews of nuclear 
safety research results. 
15. His delegation noted with satisfaction that the Agency had undertaken 
activities regarding mutual emergency assistance in the event of nuclear accidents 
and hoped that the advisory group appointed to study the matter would take into 
consideration all trans-frontier aspects of nuclear power. 
16. Although CAS had made some progress, it had not yet found a formula combining 
the necessary assurances of supply with the appropriate non-proliferation 
guarantees. He hoped that the Committee would be able to arrive at concrete 
results before the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, taking into consideration 
that an effective safeguards system which did not hinder nuclear trade was 
essential for implementation of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. As one of the 
first countries to have ratified the Treaty, Greece urged all States to do so 
and to accept full-scope safeguards. In that connection it welcomed the accession 
of Egypt and Viet Nam to NPT and the Soviet Union's invitation to the Agency to 
apply safeguards to some of its peaceful nuclear facilities. The Greek Government 
recognized, however, that it was difficult to prevent a country which had 
the political will to do so from switching from a peaceful to a military 
nuclear programme. Non-proliferation was clearly a political problem. In 
applying safeguards the Agency had not detected any anomaly which would have 
indicated diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material. 
Nevertheless, as the Director General had quite rightly pointed out, in spite 
of all the technical refinements of the system, the Agency could not prevent 
anything but could only report. 


17. Any action which undermined the credibility of the safeguards system was 
deplorable and must be condemned. The Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear 
research centre was one such action, which had been condemned immediately by 
the then Greek Government as an unacceptable violation of international law. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 6 


The present Greek Government regretted that Israel persisted in its aggressive 
policy and had not complied with Security Council resolution 487. The aggressor 
must be condemned in an exemplary manner, and moral, political and, as far as 
possible, material satisfaction should be given to the victims. The Agency must 
do its utmost within the framework of its Statute to restore its own credibility 
In that sense resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 was almost fully justified. It was to 
be hoped that the discussions on the subject would lead to a decision which 
would strike a balance between the need to apply sanctions and the desirability 
of maintaining the universal character of an international organization. 
However, brutal actions were not alone in undermining the credibility of the 


safeguards system. The problems arising out of the application of safeguards 


in certain Member States had a similar effect. It was to be hoped that early 
technical solutions would be found to those problems and that it would be 
possible to restore confidence. 


18. However important the regulatory activities of the Agency were, they should 
not overshadow its technical co-operation programme. His delegation considered 
that there should be a balance between those two types of activity and that the 
financing of technical co-operation should be such as would permit expansion of 
the programme on a predictable basis. His Government had already pledged to 
meet in full its 1983 assessed contribution to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund, which amounted to US $65 000. Greece, which also benefited 
from the technical assistance programme, had embarked on a reappraisal of its 
activities with a view to determining whether it was necessary to reorient its 
programmes and change priorities in order to speed up the training of manpower 
in the nuclear field. It would rely on the Agency's continued assistance m 
those efforts. 
19. Mr. LEVRERO PUIG (Uruguay) said that his country had pursued its 
efforts to set up its National Atomic Energy Commission's nuclear centre and, 
in particular, had embarked on a feasibility study which was to be carried out 
with the co-operation of the Agency, the United Nations Development 
Programme and the Argentine National Atomic Energy Commission. The 
Uruguayan Atomic Energy Commission had maintained its support for programmes 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 7 


aimed at the promotion and testing of applications of nuclear techniques, 
particularly in medicine, agriculture and industry, and also for scientific 
programmes at the university level. In addition, it intended to participate in 
the regional programme on non-destructive analyses. As far as it was able, 
Uruguay was receiving fellows from the Latin American region and was placing 
its experts at the disposal of the Agency for the implementation of technical 
co-operation projects. 


20. The Uruguayan Government attached great importance to the work of the 
Agency, especially its work on the development of peaceful applications of 
nuclear technology and on the promotion of international co-operation. At the 
twenty-third session of the General Conference it had proposed that the Agency 
set up a Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America and was strongly in 
favour of the conclusion of such an agreement, which was currently under study. 
21. Article III of the Statute stated clearly that the Agency's main efforts 
should relate to technical assistance. Nevertheless, at present that assistance 
was still financed from voluntary contributions by Member States, whereas safeguards 
were financed under the Regular Budget. Consequently, Uruguay once 
again called for a restructuring of the Agency's Regular Budget. While recognizing 
the importance of safeguards, it believed that it would be appropriate 
to treat safeguards and technical assistance on at least an equal basis, with 
particular account being taken of the interests of the developing countries, 
which represented the majority of Agency Members. 


22. Uruguay continued to believe that the various regions should be properly 
represented on the Board of Governors. In order to amend Article VI of the 
Statute it would be necessary to re-examine it as a whole and to ensure that 
the new version did not result in the proportion of seats occupied by the area 
of Latin America becoming smaller. 
23. Uruguay considered that Latin American countries were insufficiently 
represented among the staff of the Agency's Secretariat and hoped that the 
Secretariat would undertake an analysis which would enable the problem to be 
solved satisfactorily. The Secretariat had declared that it was continuously 
revising its internal standards and regulations governing the recruitment of 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 8 


staff in order to eliminate possible obstacles impeding the selection of candidates 
from developing areas, and that when qualifications and competence were 
comparable it gave preference to candidates from developing countries or other 
under-represented areas. Uruguay supported the training programmes for young 
graduates from developing countries, which would result in an increase in the 
number of qualified candidates from such countries available for filling posts 
in the Secretariat. 


24. Mr. RIOSALIDO GAMBOTTI (Spain) said that his country was pursuing its 
uranium prospection programme, which had made it possible to confirm the 
3000 tonnes of U,0. discovered in the Mazarete deposit and to determine that on 
3 8 
31 December uranium reserves minable at a cost below US $30/lb of Uo0„ amounted 
to 25 000 tonnes. It hoped that the uranium oxide fuel fabrication plant would 
go into service during 1983. The review of the Spanish energy plan carried out 
in 1981 hardly modified the ratio between nuclear power and hydro power but 
reduced the proportion of oil while increasing those of coal and natural gas. 
At present Spain had four operating nuclear power stations with a total capacity 
of 2030 MW(e). In 1990 Spain's nuclear power stations should be able to meet 
15% of primary energy needs and account for 39% of electricity production. 


25. In the face of the concern manifested by public opinion in most Western 
European countries with regard to nuclear power programmes, it would be necessary 
to take steps aimed at allaying that concern while ensuring that nuclear power 
continued to be used in a way which improved the quality of life of the population. 
Those problems went beyond the competence of a single State and 
required international co-operation within the framework of the appropriate 
bodies. 
26. The Spanish Government considered that it was desirable to adapt the 
structure and composition of the Agency's policy-making organs, including the 
Board of Governors, to the present world situation in the nuclear field. The 
provisions of the Statute governing the composition of the Board and the 
practices relating to the designation of its Members did not ensure sufficiently 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 9 


frequent participation by Spain in the Board's work. Such participation would 
indubitably be of value to the Agency m view of the fact that Spain was at an 
advanced stage in the development of nuclear technology and wished a number of 
problems to be solved at the international level. 


27. Spain, which had always considered that international co-operation constituted 
the best means of ensuring the progress of mankind, had pursued and 
intensified its co-operation with other countries, in particular with the 
countries of Latin America and with Portugal. That was demonstrated by the 
conclusion of new agreements with foreign organizations such as the Nuclear 
Research Institute of Colombia, the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission, the 
French Commissariat a l'energie atomique and the Portuguese Engineering and 
Industrial Technology Laboratory. Specifically, those agreements related to 
the transfer of technology and training of staff. As far as co-operation with 
international organizations was concerned, Spain had agreed to lend its support 
to the holding of the NEA/IAEA Symposium on the Application of the Dose Limitation 
System in Nuclear Fuel Cycle Facilities, which had taken place in Madrid 
in October 1981, and to the Training Course on Uranium Ore Analysis given in 
May-June 1982 in Madrid under the auspices of the Agency. In addition Spain, 
which was convinced that the peaceful character of nuclear energy would contribute 
to international coexistence, had signed a trilateral safeguards agreement 
with the Agency and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. 
28. Mr. CHISHIMBA (Zambia) welcomed the Conference's approval of Namibia 
for membership of the Agency and hoped that the international efforts at present 
being made to achieve the withdrawal of the South African occupation forces 
would soon be crowned with success. Zambia reaffirmed its attachment to the 
peace, security and prosperity of all peoples of the world and was convinced 
that atomic energy and nuclear techniques could make a great contribution to the 
fight against disease, hunger and poverty. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 10 


29. Zambia's nuclear activities were limited owing to a lack of qualified 
personnel and of financial resources; they concerned mainly agriculture, medicine 
and industry. Radioactive ore prospecting activities were continuing. Zambia 
had received technical assistance from the Agency in the form of fellowships, 
equipment and expert services. It welcomed the improvement in the utilization 
of the resources of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1981 and 
the increase in extrabudgetary resources devoted to implementing technical 
assistance projects. His delegation hoped that the Agency would continue to 
pay particular attention to the needs of the less advanced Member States and 
urged the Agency to help such States to develop an infrastructure which would 
enable them to apply nuclear techniques for peaceful purposes. His delegation 
also trusted that the number of staff members from developing countries 
in the Division of Technical Assistance and Co-operation would continue 
to grow and that the Agency would improve further its procedures for the 
selection of experts and the purchase of supplies, equipment and materials. 
Existing training facilities associated with technical assistance and 
co-operation should be strengthened or new regional centres set up for nuclear 
training. His delegation was concerned at the reduction in the number of 
Type II fellowships offered by Member States and at the growing difficulties 
encountered in the acceptance of Agency fellows in certain areas such as 
practical training. His Government would like to see the establishment of a 
mechanism which would put the financing of the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme on a more predictable footing. 


30. With regard to nuclear safety, he noted with satisfaction the Agency's 
work in revising and completing the nuclear safety standards series, particularly 
in the fields of radiation protection, the transport of radioactive 
materials, waste management and uranium mining and milling. With regard to 
safeguards, his Government was deeply concerned that, in the nuclear-weapon 
States, dangerous nuclear facilities and activities had not been placed under 
Agency safeguards and that the nuclear arms race was continuing. He urged all 
progressive Member States to terminate all relations in the nuclear field with 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 11 


South Africa and Israel, since those countries had not submitted their nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. Without the active support, assistance and 
encouragement of certain Powers those two countries could not continue to adopt 
a contemptuous, bellicose and aggressive posture towards their neighbours. 
The Director General should inform the General Conference at its present 
session whether or not Israel had complied with the provisions of Security 
Council resolution 487, and appropriate measures should then be taken. 


31. His Government was extremely disappointed and concerned that no agreement 
was in sight on the subject of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 
and that certain Member States continued to dominate Agency affairs. On the 
other hand it welcomed the efforts made by the Secretariat to increase the 
number of Agency staff members from developing countries at all levels and 
thus to correct the imbalance which existed in that respect. 
32. Mr. PAPAD0P0UL0S (Cyprus) said that in the context of the present 
economic crisis it was particularly important for the Agency to achieve its 
objectives, in view of the contribution which nuclear energy could make to the 
world economy by helping to overcome energy problems. The Agency could play a 
vital role in promoting confidence in nuclear energy by disseminating objective 
information, widening its activities and stabilizing the world's nuclear 
supply system. 
33. In direct contrast to the worsening economic situation, nuclear arsenals 
were rapidly expanding. Disarmament measures were urgently needed and any 
further spread of nuclear weapons should be halted. There was a ray of hope 
in the fact that non-proliferation efforts had so far been successful and that 
there was broad support for NPT. Aware of the grave danger inherent in proliferation, 
Cyprus had frequently stressed that universal acceptance of NPT was 
a matter of urgency since it represented the only possibility for saving the 
world from total destruction. Cyprus wanted to see an end to the arms race, 
which was a threat to the very existence of the world community, and advocated 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 12 


genuine disarmament based on justice, freedom and development which would 
reflect the interrelationship and interdependence of disarmament, security 
and peace. The Director General had clearly defined the Agency's role in that 
regard, and its safeguards system was an extremely important instrument for 
verifying compliance with commitments given. Despite the limitations of the 
present system, his country believed that access to nuclear technology should 
be subject to Agency safeguards if the world wished to prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. Only acceptance of Agency safeguards could guarantee that 
nuclear energy was used exclusively for peaceful purposes, and Cyprus called 
on all countries to assist the Agency in removing obstacles to the effectiveness 
of safeguards by demonstrating the political will necessary to make the 
system comprehensive. That would serve the interests of everybody. 


34. In the field of nuclear safety it had become apparent after the Three Mile 
Island accident that safety standards would have to be improved through 
international action. The Agency's role and responsibilities in that 
connection were perfectly clear. The Agency's past record in that field was 
impressive and, in view of its vigorous efforts to strengthen the nuclear 
safety standards programme and ensure the transition from the development of 
standards to their implementation, its future plans also looked promising. 
35. Cyprus welcomed the establishment of the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
and hoped that a supply mechanism could be designed which would meet the 
special needs of the developing countries. It also hoped that specific 
measures would be adopted for providing assured supplies linked with nonproliferation 
guarantees. 
36. The Agency had already accomplished a great deal in the field of technical 
co-operation with developing countries. As a recipient, Cyprus, fully 
recognized the value of its programme and highly commended the Agency for 
putting the services of experts at the disposal of developing countries. It 
warmly welcomed the unanimous decision of the Board to recommend a target of 
US $19 million for contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund in 1983 and indicative planning figures for three subsequent years. Member 
States must place their confidence in the Agency and strive to strengthen it 
through co-operation and understanding. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 13 


37. Mr. EL AGIB (Sudan) said that his Government had earmarked 
substantial funds for its scientific development programme covering the 
period 1980-90, despite the difficult economic situation. That indicated the 
importance attached to the programme, one of the essential elements of which 
was a project supported by the Agency in connection with the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy in food and agriculture. Under that project, Sudan 
2 


had constructed buildings with an approximate area of 10 000 m in which 
laboratories were to be installed; a group of Agency experts was to help 
select the equipment in conjunction with Sudanese scientists. The project 
included the construction of a large laboratory for research on serum and 
the improvement of animal production. His country had announced its readiness 
to put that laboratory at the Agency's disposal for the holding of regional 
training courses for students from neighbouring countries. The peaceful 


utilization of nuclear energy should have high priority in international 
technical co-operation programmes in view of its importance in improving 
productivity and combating disease. Sudan strongly urged other donors, 
countries and organizations to assist with the implementation of those 
important development programmes. 


38. The developing countries attached great importance to the stability of 
the financing of the technical assistance and co-operation programme. In 
resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388, the General Conference had in 1981 requested the 
Board to take measures aimed at financing technical assistance through the 
Agency's Regular Budget or through other comparably predictable and assured 
resources. Despite that resolution, the Board had not been able to reach 
agreement on financing technical assistance through the Regular Budget nor 
had it agreed to increase the resources allocated to technical assistance in a 
way which responded to the needs and aspirations of the developing countries. 
Indeed, while the safeguards budget had risen by 20%, that for technical 
assistance had increased by only 67.. 
39. Multi-year programming for technical assistance was particularly wellsuited 
to the needs of the developing countries. However, multi-year projects 
represented no more than one third of the total number of technical assistance 
projects, and he hoped that the Agency would take steps to increase that 
fraction. Sudan also considered the training and fellowship programmes to 
be of importance since they contributed to the successful implementation of 



GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 14 


approved projects, and it was to be hoped that the Agency would expand 


them. 


40. Sudan had consistently spoken in favour of increasing the number of Members 
of the Board of Governors in order to achieve more equitable representation in 
the Agency for the various areas, and particularly Africa. Despite General 
Conference resolutions, the Board had not yet made a recommendation on the 
amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. That item had been on the agenda 
of the General Conference for many years and his country hoped that more would 
be done to achieve satisfactory agreement. 


41. In 1981, through resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381, the General Conference had 
decided to consider suspending the exercise by Israel of the privileges and 
rights of membership if it did not comply with the provisions of Security 
Council resolution 487. Far from complying with the resolution, Israel had 
committed further crimes and acts of aggression against Lebanon and the 
Palestinian people. It "had organized and supervised the recent massacre of 
Palestinians in Lebanon, in which thousands of women, children and elderly 
people had been killed. At the same time, the racist Zionist regime had 
intensified its co-operation and collusion with the South African regime to the 
detriment of the interests of the people of South Africa and African liberation 
movements. Furthermore, Israel had refused to heed Security Council resolutions 
508 and 509 calling upon Israel to withdraw from Lebanon and retreat to 
its internationally recognized borders. In view of Israel's systematic 
contempt for the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Security Council and 
the Agency's General Conference and of its violations of the United Nations 
Charter and of fundamental human rights, the General Conference should expel 
it immediately. It was paradoxical that, while efforts were being made to 
prevent the use of nuclear energy for military purposes in order to save 


innocent people, thousands of women and children had been killed by conventional 
weapons, and that controls were imposed on the weakest nations while 
tyrannical and savage States were permitted full scope to destroy. Sudan 
hoped that the General Conference would adopt the draft resolution aimed at 
suspending the exercise by Israel of the privileges and rights of Agency 
membership. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 15 


42. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) welcomed the Conference's approval of Namibia for 
membership of the Agency. He hoped that the Agency's twenty-fifth anniversary, 
which marked also the technical and administrative maturity of the organization, 
would be the start of a new era of responsibility towards all countries and in 
particular the developing ones. 
43. At times of energy crises, the fundamental aim of the Agency must be to 
help the developing countries by all possible means to increase their technical 
capacity and to construct nuclear facilities so as to produce the energy they 
urgently needed for development. That required a fundamental change in the 
philosophy, priorities, organization and policy of technical assistance. Market 
forces and industrial development would raise the price of fossil fuels to a 
point where the developing countries would face a second energy crisis. In such 
a situation, the Agency's historic responsibility for the future was to aid the 
developing countries to obtain, implement and develop nuclear techniques. 
44. Despite the efforts made by the Agency and the majority of its Member 
States to improve the international safeguards system, a dangerous trend had 
been observed on the part of a number of countries. The most serious example 
had been the armed aggression of June 1981 carried out against the Iraqi nuclear 
reactor by Israel, which had cast doubt on the Agency's neutrality and 
credibility. Instead of using the respite it had been granted at the twentyfifth 
regular session of the General Conference to prove its respect for the 
Statute and for the relevant Security Council resolution, Israel had not only 
failed to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards but had recently 
extended its acts of aggression. The Jordanian delegation therefore urged the 
General Conference to suspend Israel from the privileges of membership. 
45. On a more general level, the Agency and the international community should 
consider the problem which was posed for the developing countries by the threat 
of the destruction of peaceful nuclear facilities under safeguards by States 
which were following a policy of aggression. The safeguards system should be 
considered not only in terms of its technical aspects but also in terms of its 
legal connotations. In guaranteeing the peaceful nature of facilities, it called 
for a sense of responsibility on the part of the international community, which 
should defend the right of developing countries to use nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 16 


4b. Jordan associated itself with other delegations which were requesting a 
change in Article VI.A.2 of the Statute regarding representation on the Board 
of Governors. Representation should be made more regional in nature in view 
of the current energy and technology problems and the prospects of co-operation 
within a context exhibiting at least basic cultural and political homogenity. 


47. Technical assistance should be re-examined, because despite its importance 
it had suffered from the absence of a fixed and well-defined form of financing 
and from the fact that it had not been treated as a priority area. The training 
courses and fellowships provided by the Agency should be revised so as to 
become integrated into a coherent programme and play a greater part in regional 
co-operation. 
48. Member States expected the Agency to help bridge the technological gap 
separating various countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. That task 
would not be easy, but the success of the work carried out during the preceding 
25 years suggested that the quarter century to come would be an excellent 
example of international co-operation. 
49. Mr. MELO BREYNER ANDRESEN (Portugal) congratulated Namibia on its 
having been approved for membership of the Agency. 
50. The Agency was to be complimented on the efforts it had made, especially 
in strengthening the application of safeguards and concluding new safeguards 
agreements, in preparing codes and guides under the NUSS programme and in 
revising its basic radiation protection regulations. The spirit of international 
co-operation had been particularly apparent in those fields, but there were also 
other areas of co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. One example 
of such co-operation was provided by the agreements between Spain and Portugal 
relating, in particular, to the safety of nuclear power stations situated near 
their common border. 
51. The Agency should certainly make economies, particularly in its bureaucracy 
and administration, but that should not be done to the detriment of safeguards 
and nuclear safety. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 17 


52. One of the major difficulties confronting the development of nuclear 
energy in the world was public resistance. To combat that attitude, it was 
necessary to make concerted efforts to establish, for the benefit of the 
general public, a system for disseminating authentic and attractively presented 
information concerning the status of various techniques and the progress already 
achieved. The example of the ocean dumping of wastes, which was of particular 
interest to Portugal as a maritime country, showed that clear and simple 
scientific information could help to overcome public fears. In that connection, 
Portugal welcomed the holding of a major international conference on waste 
management and hoped that considerable progress would soon be made in that 
field. 
53. Turning to the nuclear power situation in Portugal, he said that prospecting 
and mining were continuing and the results of the first phases of the energy 
plan seemed to favour the nuclear option. The selection of nuclear power 
station sites was in progress and was expected to last two years. Portugal 
hoped that the Agency would be able to provide assistance and was grateful for 
the help it had already received - for the training of personnel, nuclear 
research and development and secondary standard dosimetry laboratories. 
54. In conclusion, he urged the participants in the Conference session to 
exercise prudence in an effort to preserve the future of the Agency. Political 
problems should not make them forget the fundamentally technical and universal 
nature of the organization, even though there were grounds for condemning 
certain actions which Portugal also regarded with horror. 
55. Mr. BINTOU'a-TSHIABOLA (Zaire) welcomed the Conference's approval of 
Namibia for membership of the Agency - a step which marked one more victory for 
legality in the progress of that country towards independence. For Zaire, the 
current session of the General Conference represented not only the twenty-fifth 
anniversary of the Agency but also the twentieth anniversary of Zairian participation 
in the work of the organization. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 18 


56. The Zairian delegation believed chat the spirit of compromise which had 
always prevailed would help to reduce the differences which existed within the 
Agency, and which were normal, and to produce a consensus on a number of contentious 
issues: the staffing of the Agency Secretariat, the amendment of 
Article VI of the Statute, the safeguards system and the financing of technical 
assistance. 
57. On the first of those points, the Zairian delegation noted with satisfaction 
that the Director General had made a special effort to achieve results. 
It hoped that that effort would be continued so as to ensure a better geographical 
distribution of posts involving responsibility and the taking of 
decisions. 
58. While some progress had been recorded during the previous year on the 
representation of developing countries in the Secretariat, that was not true 
of representation on the Board of Governors. All the relevant arguments had 
been put forward. What was lacking was a desire to compromise. For reasons 
which seemed to be associated more with a concern about safeguards than with 
the relevance of the claims put forward by Africa,- there was still a refusal to 
grant that region the two extra seats to which simple numerical logic gave it 
the right. The Zairian delegation hoped that the spirit of compromise would 
once again prevail and that the discussions on the amendment of Article VI 
would soon reach a conclusion. 
59. Zaire was convinced that an efficient safeguards system was an essential 
condition for promoting the use of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind. 
60. While safeguards was certainly a priority area, it only had meaning in 
association with another priority activity, namely technical assistance. The 
promotion of such assistance required a reform in the method of financing. 
His delegation noted with regret that that point of view was not shared by the 
majority of advanced countries, which continued to regard the present system 
of financing based on voluntary contributions as the only acceptable one. All 
the Secretariat's efforts at rationalization would be in vain as long .as the 
financial resources continued to fall below the needs expressed by the developing 
countries. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 19 


61. Mr. SCHACK LARSEN (Denmark) congratulated the Agency on the sustained 
efforts that it had made over 25 years in various fields relating to 
the use of nuclear energy. The Agency had also contributed in a decisive way 
to awakening the confidence of the world community by developing its safeguards 
system. 
62. He had particularly noted the references by the Director General in his 
statement to nuclear safety and the disposal of radioactive wastes. His 
delegation would welcome the Agency's efforts to find solutions to those 
crucial problems and awaited with great interest the International Conference 
on Radioactive Waste Management to be held in May 1983. 
63. His country attached great importance to the technical assistance programme 
and had welcomed the consensus on indicative planning figures for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
in 1984-86. His country had already pledged its contribution for 1983. 
64. He hoped that the Committee on Assurances of Supply would make a major 
contribution to the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social 
Development. However, assurances of non-proliferation had a fundamental part 
to play in the promotion of nuclear energy. Priority should be given to 
extending and improving the Agency's system of safeguards, which had a crucial 
impact on public acceptance of the uses of nuclear energy. 
65. In view of the energy outlook, his country would have to make use of all 
forms of energy, including nuclear energy, with due regard for the safety of 
the population and the protection of the environment. Studies by his Government 
of nuclear safety and the disposal of radioactive wastes should be completed 
in 1983. If the results were satisfactory, nuclear power could be introduced 
in Denmark in 1993. By the year 2000, the installed power could have reached 
1800 MW, equivalent to 15-20%. of the total electricity generating capacity. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 20 


66. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) stated that, on the occasion of its twenty-fifth 
anniversary, he wished to congratulate the Agency on the success of its technical 
and scientific activities and on the way it had carried out its fundamental 
role, which was to preserve mankind from the terrible consequences of the use 
of nuclear weapons. His country continued scrupulously to observe its commitments 
as party to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America (Tlatelolco Treaty) and as signatory of a safeguards agreement. The 
Agency should keep out of the political debate and devote itself entirely to 
improving the technical capacity of its Member States. His country was grateful 
to the Agency for its assistance in developing the uses of nuclear energy. 
67. The Paraguayan nuclear programme would be backed up by the exploitation of 
the immense hydroelectric potential of the Itaipu dam from 1983 onwards. Work 
was drawing to a close on the design of a centre for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and further nuclear medicine and soil research laboratories. 
68. Mr. DARWISH (United Arab Emirates) said he hoped that the Agency 
would increase its technical assistance to meet the growing needs of the 
developing countries in, for instance, medicine, agriculture, prospecting for 
underground water, electricity production and desalination. He congratulated 
the Agency on its activities in the fields of radiation protection and nuclear 
safety and on its action to discourage any diversion of nuclear materials for 
military purposes. 
69. Israel had refused to open its nuclear installations for Agency inspection, 
thus proving that they were being used for military purposes. As a peaceloving 
nation, his country strongly condemned the Israeli attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear research centre and called upon all law-abiding countries to support 
the draft resolutions aimed at suspending Israel from the exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership and severing all technical assistance in 
the applications of nuclear energy. Those measures would prevent the recurrence 
of such acts of aggression, whichwere reminiscent of the law of the 
jungle. All Member States were aware of the massacres perpetrated against 
Palestinian and Lebanese civilians. Israel was directly responsible for those 
massacres, and the consequences would be grave if the international community 
stood idly by. His country supported the proposal that the Agency draft a 
treaty prohibiting attacks against nuclear installations. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 21 


70. Careful consideration should be given to the proposal to amend 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute with a view to improving the position on the Board 
of the under-represented areas, especially Africa and the Middle East. 


71. Mr. PAK (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that he wished 
to congratulate Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, 
on being approved for membership of the Agency. 
72. Despite some difficulties, the role of nuclear energy was increasing 
rapidly throughout the world. The International Conference on Nuclear Power 
Experience had clearly shown that nuclear energy accounted for a substantial 
proportion of world electricity generation. The development of nuclear energy 
was being promoted by the Agency's work on nuclear safety, especially the 
preparation of safety codes and guides and the revision of the basic standards 
for radiation protection, and also on the management and disposal of radioactive 
wastes. 
73. Technical assistance was also furthering the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy in the developing countries. However, the technical assistance programme 
was not adequate to meet the needs of those countries. Owing to financial 
constraints, technically sound projects had not been approved, and even some 
approved projects were not being completed on time. The agreement on 
indicative planning figures for 1984, 1985 and 1986 was a step towards a 
solution to that problem. 
74. His delegation was pleased to note that, in carrying out the safeguards 
programme, the Secretariat had not detected any anomaly that might indicate 
the diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear materials. 
75. The Israeli attack against nuclear installations safeguarded by the Agency 
had been duly condemned by the General Conference at its twenty-fifth regular 
session. However, far from observing the resolution of the General Conference 
and Security Council resolution 487, Israel had again aroused world indignation 
by conducting a war of aggression against Lebanon. Sanctions must be taken 
against Israel. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 22 


76. In view of the country's rapid economic growth, his Government had 
embarked on a vast programme for the construction of hydroelectric and thermal 
power stations and had undertaken the necessary studies for the introduction 
of nuclear power. 
77. As stated by the Director General, the increasing number of nuclear 
weapons was creating a dangerous situation. In order to remove the danger of a 
nuclear war and the devastation that would ensue therefrom, denuclearized 
zones should be established throughout the world as a matter of urgency. His 
Government had made efforts to set up a denuclearized zone in north-east Asia, 
including the Korean peninsula. To bring that about, the United States must 
first withdraw the military equipment and 700 nuclear warheads deployed in 
the southern part of the peninsula. The United States and its allies would 
have no justification for claiming that in so saying his delegation was 
interfering in the internal affairs of another country. 


78. Mr. DEME (Mali) said that he welcomed the Conference's approval of 
Namibia for Agency membership. He wished to consider the major problems facing 
the Agency after the first 25 years of its existence. 
79. No one could deny that Israel was persistently infringing the provisions 
of the Statute and that, pursuant to Article XIX.B, it should be suspended 
from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. Israel had not 
heeded the call by the General Conference in its resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381. 
It still refused to submit its nuclear facilities to safeguards and was pursuing 
its efforts to acquire nuclear weapons. The attack on Tamuz was a setback to 
progress towards the achievement of the objectives set forth in Article II of 
the Statute. None of the examples of disregard for the Agency's regulations 
came near to the various persistent and provocative acts by Israel in violation 
of the aims and regulations of the Agency. That should come as no surprise, 
given Israel's responsibility in respect of the tragic events in Lebanon and 
the tension in the Middle East. The legal code of the Agency, its ethics and 
even its credibility called for the suspension of Israel by the General 
Conference. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 23 


80. With regard to the more equitable representation of developing countries 
on the Board of Governors, it was logical that the Statute, which had been drawn 
up at a time when the number of developing countries and their share in the 
utilization of atomic energy were still insignificant, should be modified in 
order to take account of the evolution that had taken place: an expansion in 
the recruitment of experts and other professional personnel from developing 
countries should also follow from that evolution. 
81. At a moment when, thanks to the sustained efforts of the Secretariat and 
the technological progress achieved, the key role which the Agency could play 
in the limitation of nuclear armaments and in economic and social progress was 
recognized by all, the Agency - like all other international institutions - was 
being threatened by a crisis of resources. The justification advanced by many 
Member States for the stagnation and even reduction in contributions was the 
economic recession. Without wishing to open a debate on the new international 
economic order, his delegation recalled the analyses and recommendations made 
by eminent experts who saw the solution to the world economic crisis in 
improving the living standards in and increasing the purchasing power of 
developing countries, where the Agency could play an important part. 
82. Mali had not made the construction of nuclear power stations one of its 
current development priorities. Its co-operation with the Agency related 
mainly to the utilization of nuclear techniques - in hydrology, agriculture and 
medicine in particular - and also to uranium prospecting and sample analysis; 
Mali had uranium deposits which were believed to be extensive. 
83. It seemed there were those who feared that the developing countries would 
seek to strengthen technical co-operation and the transfer of technology at 
the expense of safeguards and nuclear safety if they held more power within the 
Board of Governors- But that was to forget that those countries, a great 
majority of which were members of the non-aligned movement, were working 
actively for peace in the world - to which the Agency's contribution was 
essential - and also that they would become able, as they developed, to gain 
access to nuclear energy. Their priorities at present related of course to the 
transfer of technology, but that would not lead them to neglect the other fundamental 
activities of the Agency. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 24 


84. Mr. PANASENKOV (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance) stated that 
CMEA, which had ten socialist member countries (Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, 
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics and Viet Nam), had celebrated its thirtieth anniversary 
in 1979. Co-operation between those countries within the framework of CMEA 
focused principally on economic development and was being increasingly directed 
towards technological progress, the specialization and standardization of 
production, and the exploitation of natural resources. It had constituted the 
basis of important achievements, such as the development of a high-voltage 
electrical grid linking the European member countries of CMEA and distributing 
the electricity produced in various large nuclear power stations, and the construction 
of the 2750-kilometre-long "Soyuz" gas pipeline between Orenburg and 
the western border of the USSR. Co-operation in nuclear power production 
represented an important part of the activities performed in the context of CMEA 
and the installed capacities of the nuclear power stations of CMEA member 
countries now exceeded 20 000 MW(e). That figure would have doubled by 1985 and 
would reach 100 000 MW(e) in ten years' time. The share of nuclear power m 
the electricity generation of each of those countries was likely to be between 
20 and 30% in 1990, except in Bulgaria, where it would be over 40%. 


85. The rapid progress m the nuclear power sector was being accompanied by 
collaboration between the member countries of CMEA in drawing up construction 
programmes for nuclear power stations, fabricating the necessary plant and 
solving fuel cycle problems, whereby each country specialized in the manufacture 
of a certain type of product. Similarly, the fabrication of nuclear instrumentation, 
including that for nuclear power stations, was the subject of 
co-operation in the framework of the "Interatominstrument" association. Special 
attention was being paid in co-operation agreements to quality control and to 
compliance with production schedules as well as to the operational safety of 
nuclear power stations. 
86. A co-operation agreement had been concluded in 1980 with a viewto developing 
high-power fast reactors. An international team of scientists and other 
GC(XXVI)/OR.244 
page 25 


experts from CMEA member countries, based at the Nuclear Physics Research 
Institute in Hungary, was performing important work on the physics of WWER 
reactors in co-operation with the Yugoslav Technical Research Centre. 


87. In the context of the Co-operation Agreement concluded in 1975 between 
CMEA and the Agency, numerous exchanges of scientific and technical information 
had taken place and experts from the two organizations had had several meetings 
on the study of problems associated with different applications of nuclear 
energy. CMEA intended to take all the necessary steps to intensify its 
co-operation with the Agency. 
88. Mr. PARK (Republic of Korea), exercising his right of reply, stated 
that the allegations made by the delegate of the Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea were without foundation, had nothing whatever to do with the agenda 
of the General Conference and served exclusively propaganda purposes. On 
several occasions the Republic of Korea had proposed to the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea that the problems that had arisen as a result of the division 
of the country into two States should be resolved through dialogue, but the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea had always refused that dialogue. 
89. Mr. BRUSH (United States of America), exercising his right of reply, 
deeply regretted the fact that accusations of a political nature, which were 
totally foreign to the topic under discussion, had been made. He categorically 
rejected the allegations made against the United States by the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea. 
90. Mr. PAK (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), exercising his right 
of reply, pointed out that in his previous statement he had merely mentioned 
the 700 nuclear warheads deployed by the United States in the southern part of 
the country. With regard to the dialogue between the two parts, the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea had on several occasions proposed to the Republic 
of Korea that negotiations should be undertaken with a view to the reunification 
of the country. The conditions that it laid down, however, were that the United 
States should withdraw its troops stationed in the southern part of the 
country and that the regime of the Republic of Korea should be democratized. 


The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
May 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 24 September 1982, at 10.35 a.m. 
President; Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 
CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda-'* * 
Paragraphs 
8 Consideration of the suspension of 
Israel from the exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership 
if, by the time of the General 
Conference's twenty-sixth regular 
session, it has not complied with 
the provisions of United Nations 
Security Council resolution 487 of 
19 June 1981 1-5 2 
17 Report on voluntary contributions 
pledged to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund for 1983 53 54 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 4 October 1982. 
**/ GC(XXVI)/674-
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVI)7lNF/208/Rev.4. 
83-2040 



GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 2 


CONSIDERATION OF THE SUSPENSION OF ISRAEL FROM THE EXERCISE OF THE PRIVILEGES 
AND RIGHTS OF MEMBERSHIP IF, BY THE TIME OF THE GENERAL CONFERENCE'S TWENTY-
SIXTH REGULAR SESSION, IT HAS NOT COMPLIED WITH THE PROVISIONS OF UNITED NATIONS 
SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION 487 OF 19 JUNE 1981 (GC(XXVI)/675 and Add.1 and 2) 


1. The PRESIDENT pointed out that delegates had before them the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXVI)/675. He wished to announce that 
Jordan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Morocco and Nicaragua 
were additional co-sponsors of the draft resolution. 
2. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) recalled that on 12 June 1981 the Board of 
Governors had considered the question of the military attack by Israel on the 
Iraqi research reactor and had adopted a resolution declaring that the attack' 
represented an act of aggression against the Agency's safeguards system which 
could have-extremely serious consequences. The Board had recommended that the 
General Conference consider the possible suspension of Israel from the privileges 
and rights of membership. 
3. At its twenty-fifth regular session, the General Conference had adopted 
resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381, stating inter alia that the I.sraeli action constituted 
an attack against the Agency and its safeguards regime. -The General 
Conference had decided to suspend the provision of technical assistance to 
Israel and had resolved to reconsider the question of its suspension from member 
ship of the Agency at the twenty-sixth regular session if by that time Israel 
had not complied with the provisions of United Nations Security Council resolution 
487. The Israeli refusal to comply with that resolution was clearly 
contrary to the principles of the United Nations Charter and a violation of the 
conditions for the admission of States to membership of the Agency. 
4. Article IV.B of the Statute stated that "In recommending and approving a 
State for membership,.the Board of Governors and the General Conference shall 
determine that the State is able and willing to carry out the obligations of 
membership in the Agency, giving due consideration to its ability and willingness 
to act in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the 
United Nations". -Article XIX.B allowed for the suspension of a Member which had 
"persistently violated the provisions of this Statute or any agreement entered 
into by it pursuant to this Statute". 
GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 3 


5. The General Conference ought to be able to take a decision on the question 
before it. To defend its credibility, the Agency must decide to suspend Israel 
from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership for its persistent 
violation of the Statute and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the 
United Nations. It should also condemn Israel for maintaining its threats to 
repeat its attacks in the future and should call upon all Member States to 
initiate action for the adoption of a convention to prohibit armed attacks 
against nuclear facilities used for peaceful purposes. All Member States should 
further be urged to release all information in their possession concerning the 
Israeli nuclear arms programme. 
6. The Board of Governors, the General Conference and the international community 
had judged the Israeli attack to be an unprecedented form of aggression 
against peace and security in the Middle East and an assault on the very raison 
d'etre of the Agency. 
7. The sponsors of the draft resolution hoped that it would receive the 
support of Member States so that they could show the world that they were 
determined to preserve the Agency and guarantee its future. 
8. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) noted that the General Conference 
was being asked for the second time to consider the suspension of Israel from 
the privileges and rights of membership. His Government had consistently 
opposed proposals to exr>el or suspend Israel illegally in the past, and continued 
to do so. The substantive and procedural grounds for suspension required 
under the Statute were clearly not present. Continued consideration of the subject 
was disruptive of the Agency and detracted from the time and attention 
Member States could give to important issues under the Agency's mandate. 
9. The Statute contained no provision for expulsion. Article XIX.B set out 
the grounds for suspension, namely when a Member "....has persistently 
violated the provisions of this Statute or of any agreement entered into by it 
pursuant to this Statute ....". The Israeli military raid had been condemned in 

GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 4 


Security Council resolution 487, for which the United States Government had 
voted. However, that attack did not violate any specific Article of the 
Statute or any agreement entered into pursuant to the Statute. Nor could a 
one-time action qualify as "persistent". 


10. The Agency's Statute gave no mandate to attempt to enforce resolutions of 
the Security Council or other United Nations organizations. The Agency's 
relationship agreement with the United Nations made it clear that the Agency 
was bound by the Statute alone. Furthermore, Security Council resolution 487 
contained no recommendation for sanctions for whatever reason. 
11. Although the United States Government favoured the universal acceptance of 
full-scope safeguards, such acceptance was not a condition of Agency membership 
and its absence did not constitute grounds for suspension. Indeed, the Security 
Council resolution had recognized that it was in the interest of all to encourage 
Israel's maximum participation in Agency safeguards. Because the Security 
Council had not imposed sanctions, suspension by the Agency would run counter 
to the considered judgement of the United Nations organ specifically charged 
with responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. 


12. Article XIX.B of the Agency's Statute also provided that suspension by the 
General Conference was ".... upon recommendation by the Board of Governors". 
There had been no such recommendation. Nor were there grounds for the 
suspension of technical assistance - one of the rights of membership. 
13. Although the Statute specifically set out the grounds for suspension - in 
Article XIX.B - the draft resolution before the General Conference ignored that 
and was based on Article IV.B, which related to the consideration of new 
Members. It attempted to link together a series of political issues which 
were outside the mandate of the Agency. The United States Government, like 
many others, placed great importance on the principle of universality, which 
underpinned the integrity of the entire United Nations system. If the United 
Nations was to be able to influence the resolution of conflicts peacefully, it 
made no sense to exclude States party to such disputes. That was why, after 
30 years marked by military action in virtually every region of the globe, no 
Member State had ever been suspended. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 5 


14. Specifically, it was in no one's interest to banish Israel from the one 
international organization designed to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and the broad extension of international safeguards. Furthermore, to 
embroil the Agency in the problems of recurrent violence in the Kiddle East 
could only lead it away from its responsibilities under the Statute, 
immobilizing it and rendering it ineffective. As he had made clear the 
previous year, the suspension of Israel from any United Nations body would 
jeopardize continued United States support for that body and would have grave 
consequences for its continued participation m it. The illegal suspension of 
Members would be the dangerous first step toward the unravelling of the whole 
United Nations system. 
15. Mr. M0R0Z0V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre had been severely condemned 
by the Board of Govenors and the Security Council. The General Conference in 
1981 had resolved to reconsider the question at its current session if Israel 
had not by then complied with Security Council resolution 487. Israel had 
clearly shown it would not heed that resolution and that it had no respect for 
the United Nations Charter or the Agency's Statute. 
16. The Soviet Union fully shared the position of those countries which had 
condemned the aggressive policy of Israel. The matter before the General 
Conference had to be considered in relation to the existing situation in the 
Middle East. Under those conditions, the Conference was fully justified in 
raising the question of Israel's suspension, since its actions had been in contravention 
of the Statute. The Agency could not stand aside when one Member 
State attacked the peaceful nuclear installations of another and thus threatened 
the future use of nuclear energy in the whole region. 
17. The Soviet delegation therefore supported the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXVI)/675. 
18. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his delegation was 
not surprised by the United States support of Israel as it still remembered the 
destruction of Hiroshima. He would not only call for the suspension of Israel 
but request its expulsion. 
19. Mr. MAPARA (Zambia) recalled the background to the draft resolution 
before the General Conference. It was clear that Israel had not complied with 

GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 6 


the requirements of Security Council resolution 487. The world had been 
horrified at the recent massacres in Beirut, which had occurred at a time when 
Israel had taken it upon itself to act as the custodian of law and order in that 
city. The time was opportune for the General Conference to take punitive action 
so as to make Israel realize the folly of its actions. 


20. Mr. SINGH (India) said that his country supported the draft resolution 
The facts were that Israel had launched an unprovoked attack asainst a fellow 
Member State's nuclear facility and that the Board had in June 1981 recommended 
that the General Conference should consider the implications of that attack for 
the Agency, which included the possibility of suspension of Israel from the 
exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. The Security Council had 
condemned the Israeli attack as a clear violation of the Charter of the United 
Nations and of all the norms of international conduct. At its 237th plenary 
meeting, the General Conference had recognized that Israel's military attack 
on the Iraqi research reactor constituted an attack on the Agency and its 
safeguards system and had decided to consider the suspension of Israel at its 
26th regular session if certain conditions had not been fulfilled by then. The 
only question the General Conference was called upon to consider, therefore, 
was whether or not Israel had fulfilled those conditions by complying with the 
provisions of United Nations Security Council resolution 487 of 19 June 1981. 
If it had, the draft resolution now before the Conference should be withdrawn. 
On the other hand, if no delegation felt it could truthfully state that Israel 
had complied with those provisions, the General Conference must regretfully 
agree to suspend Israel from exercising the privileges and rights of membership. 
21. Mr• ERNEMANN (Belgium) said that, although his country had always 
defended Israel's right of existence and independence, it could not but condemn 
the military attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre as an act of international 
piracy and aggression and as a serious blow against the Agency and its 
safeguards system. Since the General Conference's decision to allow Israel 
one year in which to comply with the provisions of Security Council resolution 
487, Israel had shown no sign of wishing to comply with those provisions; 
indeed, it had indicated that it would take military action again if attempts 
were made to reconstruct the Iraqi facility. Recent events in Lebanon further 
showed that Israel was not willing to abandon its policy of violence and war. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 7 


22. However, his country believed in the principle of universality for the 
organizations in the United Nations family. The expulsion of one Member State 
would set a precedent which could easily lead to the expulsion of others on 
various pretexts. Moreover, as the United States delegate had pointed out, 
Article XIX.B of the Statute called for suspension only in cases of persistent 
violation of the provisions of the Statute, and acceptance of NPT or of 
safeguards did not constitute a requirement for membership of the Agency. 
Belgium therefore felt that it would be wise not to suspend Israel from membership, 
but to continue efforts to persuade Israel eventually to accept safeguards 
on all its installations. 
23. Mr. SCHACK LARSEN (Denmark), speaking on behalf of the Member States 
of the European Community, said that those States had strongly condemned 
Israel for its premeditated and unjustified attack on the Iraqi nuclear centre, 
but nevertheless opposed the suspension of Israel from membership because of 
the fundamental importance of the principle of universality, without which the 
organizations of the United Nations family could not operate effectively. 
24. Mr. GHAZALI bin Hj. Abd. RAHMAN (Malaysia) said that Israel's 
unwarranted and unprovoked attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre, a 
facility under Agency safeguards, was a flagrant violation of international law 
and norms and a serious blow against the Agency's safeguards regime, which was 
internationally accepted as the foundation of NPT. Israel had not heeded the 
General Conference's request that it whould comply with Security Council 
resolution 487, and the General Conference was therefore under a moral obligation 
to see that its decisions were respected by taking strong action 
against the party concerned. 
25. Mr. LALOVIC (Yugoslavia) said that the inadmissible behaviour of 
Israel in its international relations had been the subject of detailed discussions 
both in the United Nations and in the Agency. Several resolutions had 
been adopted which clearly stated what action should be taken in order to 
prevent such acts from being repeated in the future. Unfortunately, those 
resolutions had not been implemented, and further violation of the norms of 
international behaviour had occurred in the meantime. Recent tragic events 
showed clearly that the country concerned was unwilling to assume 

GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 8 


responsibility for its acts and had no regard for the international community 
and its standards of behaviour. Failure of the international community to 
ensure implementation of its resolutions and to restore confidence in the 
Agency's safeguards and in mutual relations between Member States might have 
serious consequences. If any provisions of the Agency's Statute were ignored, 
the Agency's position and authority as the leading international organization 
in the field of nuclear energy would be weakened, and that would be damaging 
to the principle of universality. Yugoslavia therefore supported the draft 
resolution calling for the suspension of Israel from membership, which was 
fully consistent with the letter and spirit of Article XIX of the Statute. 


26. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said that the draft resolution before the 
Conference to suspend Israel's rights and privileges was politically motivated, 
illegal and discriminatory. It concerned a political matter beyond the scope 
of the Agency's mandate and was therefore incompatible with Articles II and III 
of the Statute. 
27. The consideration of suspension of Israel from the exercise of its 
privileges and rights of membership on the proposed grounds had no legal 
foundation in the Statute and was inconsistent with Articles IV.C and XIX.B 
of the Statute as well as with the Agency's relationship agreement with the 
United Nations. To invoke Security Council resolution 487 or any other 
United Nations resolution as grounds for considering the suspension of Israel's 
rights and privileges of membership was both artificial and illegal. If such 
political requirements for membership existed, many States represented at 
the Conference, in particular Iraq, would be in violation of the Statute and 
therefore subject to suspension. 


28. The consequences of action by the General Conference against Israel would 
be grave. Disregard for the legal foundations of the Agency would deprive it 
of its ability to achieve its objectives and to perform its functions credibly 
in accordance with the Statute. There could be no greater damage to the 
international non-proliferation regime than a politicized International Atomic 
Energy Agency. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 9 


29. In the Middle East, further harm would be done to the tenuous progress 
towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in that region. The 
Government of Israel had in recent years taken a number of initiatives 
towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, to 
be negotiated and patterned after the Tlatelolco Treaty. Those initiatives 
by themselves constituted an expression of Israel's support for the establish


ment of an effective non-proliferation regime in the Middle East. 


30. Israel strongly believed that the Agency should be allowed to maintain the 
unique position it had assumed within the family of international organizations. 
Iraq and its supporters should not be allowed to destroy the organization and 
what it stood for. Israel therefore requested other delegations to oppose 
the draft resolution under consideration so that wisdom and responsibility 
might prevail. 


31. Mr. AL-ZAHAWI (Iraq) said that Article III.B of the Statute called 
upon the Agency to conduct its activities in accordance with the purposes, 
principles and policies of the United Nations. It was therefore nonsense to 
assert that the Agency was being politicized, or acting illegally, if it 
considered the Israeli military attack in the light of the purposes and 
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. 
32. It was also wrong to claim that Israel was to be suspended from membership 
because it had failed to accept full-scope safeguards, since the real 
reason was its act of aggression against the Agency and its safeguards system 
and against the peaceful use of nuclear energy by another country. 
33. The delegate of Israel had gone so far as to invoke the principle of 
sovereign equality of all the Agency's Members, embodied in Article IV.C of 
the Statute. Surely there had never been a greater violation of that principle 
than Israel's decision to take the law into its own hands and destroy a 
research reactor operated for peaceful purposes by another Member of the 
Agency. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 10 


34. The argument that Israel should not be suspended for the sake of the 
principle of universality was fallacious. The principle of universality was 
nowhere mentioned in the Statute. On the other hand, to argue on the basis of 
that principle that no Member should ever be suspended constituted an illegal 
alteration of the Statute, since it rendered inoperative Article XIX.B, which 
contained clear provisions for such suspension in certain cases. Moreover, the 
principle of universality had never been considered as being worth upholding at 
any cost, even if it meant retaining in the Agency a Member bent upon destroying 
the Agency and all it stood for. It was therefore illogical of the United 
States of America to threaten to withdraw from the Agency, and thereby wreck it, 
in order to protect a Member that clearly desired its destruction. 
35. Those who had spoken against the draft resolution appeared to be unaware of 
the feelings of revulsion in their own countries and in Israel itself at the 
terrorist regime of Begin, since they were pursuing a policy of appeasement 
towards that regime which would lead to results more disastrous than those of 
Munich 1938, now that Israel had access to weapons of mass destruction and 
seemed to know no limits to its desire for expansion. 
36. Israel had been allowed a full year in which to show some sign of 
repentance; instead, it had invaded Lebanon and committed crimes far worse even 
than the attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre. People the world over 
were waiting with impatience to see how the Agency would treat the Israeli 
aggressor. The delegation of Iraq therefore requested the General Conference 
to proceed to a roll-call vote on the draft resolution presented in document 
GC(XXVI)/675. 
37. The PRESIDENT said that he would now ask the Conference to vote on 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVI)/675. 
38. At the request of Mr. Al-Zahawi (Iraq), a roll-call vote was taken. 
39. The Philippines, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called 
upon to vote first. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 11 


40. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic 
Republic of Korea, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Niger, 
Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, 
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, 
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia. 


Against: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Colombia', Denmark, 
Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Guatemala, Iceland, 
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of 
America, Uruguay. 


Abstaining: Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Ecuador, Egypt, Greece, 


Ivory Coast, Kenya, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Spain, 


Sri Lanka, Thailand, Venezuela. 


41. There were 43 votes in favour and 27 against, with 16 abstentions. The 
required two-thirds ma.jority being 47, the draft resolution was rejected. 
42. Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) pointed out that his country had categorically 
condemned the Israeli attack on the Iraqi reactor, severely censured 
Israel's aggression against other countries in the Middle East and expressed 
its indignation at the recent, massacre in Beirut. However, it had abstained 
from voting on the draft resolution for a number of reasons. First, the 
United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council were the only two 
bodies which were competent to impose sanctions on a State for violation of the 
United Nations Charter. Second, under Article XIX.B suspension could be 
imposed only if violations of the Statute were persistent; furthermore, suspension 
under that Article could not be resorted to as a political sanction. 
Third, for those reasons, the operative paragraphs of the draft resolution 
calling for suspension went beyond the Agency's competence. Furthermore, the 

GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 12' 


proposed measure would not serve the purpose for which it was intended, for a 
country which had hitherto behaved xn an anti-social manner would then have even 
more complete freedom to act as it pleased without being accountable to anyone. 


43. Operative paragraphs 4 and 5 were outside the scope of the Agency's functions. 
Lastly, although no provision of the Statute expressly called for 
universality in membership, such a principle was inherent in any international 
organization. Suspension of a Member State would jeopardize that principle. 
44. Mr. do NASCIMENTO e SILVA (Brazil), Mr. GALVEZ VILLARROEL (Peru), 
Mr. MUSSI (Austria) and Mr. PINEIROS RIVERA (Ecuador) said that they had 
abstained from voting for the reasons mentioned by the delegate of Venezuela. 
Their abstention did not imply that they condoned the Israeli attack on the 
Iraqi reactor or the recent events in Lebanon. 
45. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay), indicating his agreement with the views 
expressed, stressed the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs 
of a Member State. The Agency's functions were scientific and technical, 
relating as they did to the application of safeguards and promotion of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
46. Mr. BELTRAMINO (Argentina) added that persuasion could be more 
effective than suspension. Moreover, the draft resolution should have condemned 
Israel for its attack on the Iraqi reactor without mentioning safeguards, which 
were a matter for voluntary agreement between a St'ate and the Agency. He 
strongly agreed, however, about the need for an international convention on the 
protection of nuclear facilities. 
47. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile), Mr. LEVRERO PUIG (Uruguay), Mr. KORHONEN 
(Finland), Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada), Mr. OTALORA (Colombia), Mr. KOREF (Panama) 
and Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) explained that their countries could not approve 
the draft resolution for essentially the same reasons as those put forth by 
the States which had abstained from voting. They strongly deplored the Israeli 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research centre and its action in Lebanon. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 13 


48. Mr. MALM (Sweden), associating himself with the views already 
expressed, called upon Member States to make a serious effort to draft an 
international convention on the protection of nuclear facilities which could 
gain wide acceptance. 
49. Mr. HAMAMOTO (Japan) stared that his delegation had voted against the 
draft resolution for the following reasons: first, it considered that the 
principle of the universality of the Agency should be protected, especially 
given the Agency's technical character; and secondly, legally speaking his 
delegation had doubts as to whether suspension of the exercise of the privileges 
and rights of membership under the Statute - especially pursuant to 
Article XIX.B -• applied in the present case. 


50. At the same time, his delegation's vote did not imply any weakening of 
the sense of outrage his country felt about the Israeli attack, and Japan's 
strong condemnation of it still held. 
51. His Government considered that an international convention should be 
concluded to prohibit armed attacks against nuclear facilities being used for 
peaceful purposes, but it did not think that the Agency was the proper forum 
for considering that question. 
52. Lastly, he urged the Government of Israel to accept Agency safeguards on 
all its nuclear facilities and stated that on a number of occasions his 
Government had expressed its condemnation of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon 
and its deep sympathy with the inhabitants of Lebanon, including the 
Palestinians, over the losses and suffering caused. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1983 (GC(XXVI) /673/Rev.3) 


53. The PRESIDENT stated that by 6 p.m. on 23 September 1982, 49 Member 
States had pledged voluntary contributions amounting to $9 695 660. 
Because of the dates fixed for the adoption of their national budgets, some 
Member States were not yet able to pledge their contributions, but would do so 
at a later stage. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.245 
page 14 


54. The pledges so far amounted Co 51.3% of the target figure. He therefore 
appealed to Member States which had not yet done so to pledge their voluntary 
contributions at their earliest convenience, for which purpose they should 
contact the Agency Secretariat. His appeal was addressed in particular to 
those Member States which were sufficiently developed to be able to afford 
easily their base rate share of the target recommended by the Board. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
May 1983* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION: 20-24 SEPTEMBER 1982 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 24 September 1982, at 2.45 p.m. 


President: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda** 


- 
Oral report by the Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole on the following items: 1-15 
The Agency's accounts for 1981 
The Agency's programme for 1983-88 and 
budget for 1983 
Scale of assessment of Members' contri


butions for 1983 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
The financing of technical assistance 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 


Statute 


16 
Election of Members to the Board of Governors 16 - 18 


15 
Examination of delegates' credentials 19 - 62 


16 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
(resumed) 63 - 79 


Closing of the session 
80 - 81 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 13 October 1982. 


**l GC(XXVI)/674. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVI)/INF/208/Rev.4. 

83-2045 


GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 2 


ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


1. Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the report of the Committee on items 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 
of the agenda, which had been referred to it for initial discussion. 


2. 
The Committee of the Whole recommended that the General Conference adopt 
the following draft resolutions: 


The draft resolution contained in Part I of document GC(XXVI)/665 


(item 9 - The Agency's accounts for 1981); 


The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVI)/671 with the 
Annex reproduced in document GC(XXVI)/671/Mod.1 (item 11 - Scale 
of assessment of Members' contributions for 1983); and 


The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVI)/679 (item 12 -
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat). 


3. 
With regard to item 10, the Agency's programme for 1983-1988 and budget 
for 1983, the Committee recommended that the General Conference: 
Adopt draft resolution A (Regular Budget appropriations for 1983) 
set out in Appendix 5 of document GC(XXVI)/666/Mod. 1 on the 
understanding that the allocation of US $362 000 for the international 
plutonium storage study was of a contingency nature and 
that it was subject to certain constraints which had been formulated 
in the Committee's decision on that matter. In that connection, 
the Committee had decided that the summary records of its discussion 
concerning the question of zero real growth in the Agency's 
Regular Budget should be transmitted to the Board of Governors; 


Adopt draft resolutions B and C (Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund allocation for 1983 and the Working Capital Fund 
in 1983) set out in Annex VII of document GC(XXVI)/666; 


Adopt the draft resolution concerning the Agency's work in the 
field of radioactive waste disposal set out in document GC(XXVI)/677; 
and 


- Adopt the draft resolution concerning a review of the Agency's 
'GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 3 


activities set out in document GC(XXVI)/678. In that connection, 


the Committee had decided that the summary records of its dis


cussions on the question should be transmitted to the Board of 


Governors. 


4. Concerning item 13, the financing of technical assistance, the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution set forth 
in document GC(XXVI)/680. It had decided that the summary records of its 
discussions on the question should be transmitted both to the Board of 
Governors and to the Board's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee. 
5. With respect to item 14, amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, the 
Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXVI)/681. It had decided that the summary records 
of its discussions on that matter should be transmitted to the Board of 
Governors. 
6. The PRESIDENT thanked the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole 
and suggested that the draft resolutions relating to the items of the agenda 
that had been referred to the Committee could now be considered by the 
General Conference with a view to their adoption. 
7. 
It was so agreed. 
The Agency's accounts for 1981 


8. The draft resolution contained in Part I of document GC(XXVI)/665 
was adopted. 
The Agency's programme for 1983-1988 and budget for 1983 


9. Draft resolution A contained in Appendix 5 of document GC(XXVI)/666/Mod.1 
and draft resolutions B and C contained in Annex VII of document GC(XXVI)/666 
were adopted. 
10. The draft resolutions contained in documents GC(XXVI)/677 and 
GC(XXVI)/678 were adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1983 


11. 
The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVI)/671 and the Annex 

GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 4 


Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


12. The draft resolution contained m document GC(XXVI)/679 was adopted. 
The financing of technical assistance 


13. The draft resolution contained m document GC(XXVI)/680 was adopted. 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


14. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVI)/681 was adopted. 
15. Mr. SUARE2 de PUGA y VILLEGAS (Spain), referring to item 14, said 
that his delegation wished to make the same reservations it had expressed 
during the Committee of the Whole's discussion of the question. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXVI)/667, 676) 


16. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that 11 Members had to be 
elected to the Board from the geographical areas specified in paragraph 2 of 
document GC(XXVI)/676 to ensure that the Board would be consituted in 
accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute. 
17. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Tunisian delegation 
and a member of the United Kingdom delegation acted as tellers. 


18. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members of the Board of 
Governors. 


The meeting was suspended at 3.10 p.m. and resumed at 4.5 p.m. 


EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXVI)/682) 


19. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) pointed out that when the General Committee 
had met as a credentials committee seven delegates had rejected the 
credentials of the Israeli delegation and only six had accepted them. In 
those circumstances, he was surprised to see that Israel appeared on the list 
of delegations whose credentials had been considered to satisfy the requirements 
of Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. Israel had 
formally declared its annexation of the Golan Heights and of Jerusalem and was 
continuing to occupy the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Those annexations had 
been condemned by the Security Council and the General Assembly of the 
United Nations. His delegation refused to consider Isreal to be the legal 
representative of the peoples of that region. Given the circumstances, the case 


GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 5 


of Israel was no different from that of South Africa, and the credentials 
presented by the delegation from the latter country had been rejected in the 
past on the same grounds. It was for those reasons that the Iraqi delegation 
proposed that the text of the draft resolution contained in paragraph 17 of 
document GC(XXVI)/682 be amended by adding the following phrase at the end of 
the operative paragraph: "with the exception of the credentials of the 
delegation from Israel". 


20. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) said that his delegation 
strongly opposed the amendment submitted by the Iraqi delegation, which was 
inspired by political considerations that had nothing to do with the Agency's 
work. To reject the credentials of the Israeli delegation would be contrary 
to the Statute and to practice. Such a decision would consitute a violation 
of Article V to the extent that it would be equivalent to suspending the 
privileges and rights of a Member. Under Article VI.E.3 and Article XIX, the 
suspension of the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership could 
only be decided by a two-thirds majority. Other principles would also be 
called into question by such a decision, including that of the universality of 
the organization, according to which every Member State had the right to 
express its views. The Government of the United States, which had condemned the 
Israeli attack on the Iraqi research reactor, deplored the attempt to impose 
political sanctions on Israel on the occasion of the examination of a purely 
technical question, namely that of determining whether delegations' credentials 
conformed with the rules laid down. 
21. His delegation wished it to be clearly understood that, in the event of de 
facto suspension of the exercise by Israel of the rights and privileges of 
membership, which would be illegal, it would withdraw from the current session 
of Che General Conference and that the Government of the United States would 
reconsider its participation in the Agency's work. 
22. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said that the rejection of his delegation's 
credentials would be illegal, arbitrary and discriminatory. It would amount to 
depriving a Member State of its rights and would violate the principle of the 
universality of international organizations, a principle which had been confirmed 
by the General Assembly of the United Nations. The examination of 

GC(XXVI)/OR.246 


page 6 


the credentials submitted by delegates was a purely technical process which 
should be entirely divorced from any political consideration. If the amendment 
proposed by the Iraqi delegation were put to a vote, he requested that 
the vote be by roll-call. 


23. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) said that he supported the arguments put forward 
by the delegation of Iraq, which were based on human, political and legal 
considerations. Israel was claiming to represent populations whose territories 
it had annexed by armed force. Despite the indignation that annexation had 
aroused m the international community, Israel had opted for scorn and 
indifference and was pursuing its policy of aggression. The Member States 
represented at the General Conference must respond by refusing to accept the 
credentials of the delegation of Israel. 
2 4. Mr. PASHA (Pakistan) stated that he unreservedly supported the amendment 
tabled by the delegate of Iraq for the reasons clearly set forth by that 
delegation and by the Moroccan delegation. A Member State that annexed 
territories by force and thereby failed to comply with internationally accepted 
norms had no right to be represented at the General Conference. 
25. Replying to a request for clarification by Mr. Davis (United States 
of America), the PRESIDENT explained that a "yes" vote on the amendment 
proposed by the delegate of Iraq would mean rejection of the credentials of 
the delegation of Israel and a "no" vote their acceptance. 
26. At the request of Mr. Eilam (Israel), a roll-call vote was taken on the 
amendment proposed by the delegation of Iraq. 
2 7. Lebanon, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


'GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 7 


The result of the vote was as follows: 


In favour: Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mongolia, 


Morocco, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia, 


Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic 


of Korea, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait 


Against: Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire, Argentina, 
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Denmark, 
Ecuador, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Guatemala, 
Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya 


Abstaining: Sri Lanka, Turkey, Egypt, Greece, Ivory Coast, Republic 
of Korea. 


28. The PRESIDENT announced that there were 40 votes in favour and 40 
against, with 6 abstentions, and that, in accordance with Rule 78 of the 
Rules of Procedure, the amendment proposed by the delegation of Iraq was not 
adopted. 
29. At the request of the delegate of Iraq and on the instructions of 
the President, the SECRETARY read out the list of countries voting and the votes 
which they had cast. 
30. Mr. ANDRIANASOLO (Madagascar) explained that he had been present at 
the time of the vote and that he wished his vote to be recorded. His delegation 
voted "yes". 
31. Responding to a request from the President for advice on whether the 
vote of the Malagasy delegation should be recorded or not, Mr. HERRON (Director, 
Legal Division) recalled that a similar situation had occurred at a meeting of 
the Board the previous year. One Governor had returned to the room before the 

GC(XXVI)/OR.246 


page 8 


end of the ballot. His advice on that occasion had been that the Governor's 


vote should be regarded as valid, so as not to deprive a delegation of its 


sovereign right to vote and in accordance with the principle of international 


law whereby a defect of form - in that case the late recording of a repre


sentative's vote - should not invalidate substance, in other words the vote of 


the representative in question. In the United Nations organization, the 


practice was also based on the desire not to deprive a delegation of its right 


to vote. The vote of the Malagasy delegation should, therefore, be counted in 


the result. 


32. Rising to a point of order, Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) observed 
that the present situation was different because the results of the vote 
had already been announced. In the present case, the recording of an additional 
vote amounted to a reconsideration of the ballot which had already taken place, 
and a decision to hold a fresh ballot required a two-thirds majority. 
33. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) pointed out that the President had requested the 
opinion of the Director of the Legal Division, who had duly given his view. It 
would, therefore, not be appropriate to reconsider a decision which was motivated 
by the desire to avoid an injustice. 
34. Mr. VAN BARNEVELD KOOY (Netherlands) observed that, in the opinion of 
the Director of the Legal Division, a vote could be counted after the close of 
the ballot and announcement of the results. He wished to know up to what time 
a delegate who was absent for a ballot could still have his vote recorded. 
35. The PRESIDENT declared that, in the General Assembly of the United 
Nations, a delegation could still take part in a vote before the results were 
announced. In the present case the decision was a difficult one. Whichever 
•way the decision went, the rights of one State would be affected. However, 
basing himself on the opinion of the Director of the Legal Division, he considered 
that the vote of the Malagasy delegation was valid. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 9 


36. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) said that, in accordance with 
Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure, he wished to appeal against the President's 
ruling. 
37. Replying to a request for clarification from the President, Mr. HERRON 
(Director, Legal Division) explained that, under Rule 56 of the Rules of 
Procedure, a decision on an appeal against the ruling of the presiding officer 
required only a simple majority. 
3 8. At the request of Mr. Davis (United States of America), a roll-call vote 
was taken on his appeal against the President's ruling. 
3 9. Ghana, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote 
first. 
The result of the vote was as follows; 


In favour: Guatemala, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Kenya, Republic of Korea, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Zaire, Argentina, 
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Denmark, 
Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany 


Against: Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab 
Emirates, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, 
Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Cyprus, 
Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, German 
Democratic Republic 


Abstaining: Greece, Ivory Coast, Mexico, Romania, Sri Lanka, Turkey 


Venezuela, Ecuador, Egypt. 


40. There were 37 votes in favour and 40 against, with 9 abstentions. The 
appeal against the President's ruling was rejected. 

GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 10 


41. In accordance with the President's ruling, the amendment proposed by the 
delegation of Iraq to the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVI)/682 
was adopted by 41 votes to 40 with 6 abstentions. 
42. Mr. VAN BARNEVELD KOOY (Netherlands) repeated that he wished to know 
from the Director of the Legal Division up to what time a delegation could still 
have its vote recorded after the closure of a ballot. 
43. The PRESIDENT explained that he had made a ruling after consulting the 
Director of the Legal Division and that the appeal against that ruling by the 
United States delegation had not been upheld. The General Conference had, 
therefore, decided to adopt the amendment proposed by the delegation of Iraq, 
and the question by the delegate of the Netherlands was purely academic. 
44. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) declared that he would vote 
against the draft resolution as amended and urged the other delegations to do 
likewise. 
45. At the request of Mr. Davis (United States of America), a roll-call vote 
was taken on the draft resolution in paragraph 17 of document GC(XXVI)/682, as 
amended. 
46. Burma, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote 
first.— 
The result of the vote was as follows: 


In favour: Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, 
Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, German 
Democratic Republic, Ghana,. Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, 
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, 
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Albania, 
Algeria, Bangladesh 


1/ As the delegate of Burma was not present, the first vote was cast by the 
delegate of Bulgaria. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 11 


Against: Canada, Chile, Colombia, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, 


Federal Republic of Germany, Guatemala, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, 
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Republic of Korea, Liechtenstein, 


Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, 


Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, United Kingdom of Great 


Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, 


Venezuela, Zaire, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil 


Abstaining: Egypt, Greece, Ivory Coast, Romania, Turkey. 


4 7. There were 41 votes in favour and 39 against, with 5 abstentions. The 
draft resolution in paragraph 17 of document GC(XXVI)/682, as amended, was 
adopted. 
48. Mr• KELLY (United Kingdom) said that he was disquieted by the use of 
procedural means to achieve a political end, by the ruling of the President and 
by the opinion given by the Director of the Legal Division. He remembered that 
the previous year in the Board the vote of one Governor had been accepted late, 
but the case had been different. In the circumstances he felt, and a number of 
delegations felt similarly, that it would not be proper to participate further 
in the current session of the General Conference. It was with regret that he 
notified the President that his delegation would now leave the hall. 
49. Mr. DAVIS (United States of America) declared that he deplored the 
President's ruling and was appalled by the opinion rendered by the Director of 
the Legal Division. The credentials of the delegation of Israel should be 
accepted as they were absolutely in accordance with the established rules. An 
item such as the examination of delegates' credentials must not be used as a 
pretext for re-opening a debate which had already been closed by the decision 
of the General Conference to reject a draft resolution on the suspension of 
Israel from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. The extent 
to which the Agency had become politicized, as evidenced by the resolution just 
adopted, was wholly unacceptable to his Government. The Agency had been founded 
as a technical body to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Instead, it 
had become a forum for political debates. The persistent abuse of the United 
Nations system for the pursuit of political vendettas was an exceptionally 

GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 12 


dangerous course. The politicization of the Agency must cease. In the circumstances, 
his delegation must withdraw from the General Conference. His Government 
would reassess its policy regarding United States support for and participation 
in the IAEA and its activities. 


50. Mr. YAMATO (Japan) said that, in the view of his delegation, the purpose 
of the examination of credentials was to ascertain whether their form 
satisfied the requirements of the Agency; any considerations extraneous to that 
purpose - for example, considerations regarding the policies of a particular 
government - had no place in the examination of credentials. His delegation 
had therefore voted against the proposal to reject the credentials of the 
Israeli delegate. He considered it regrettable that such an important question 
had been decided by a voting procedure which itself had raised much controversy. 
51. Mr. C0PITH0RNE (Canada) observed that the credentials of delegations 
should be examined only from the point of view of their conformity with the 
rules. A delegation whose credentials satisfied the rules should not be 
prevented from taking its seat. The procedure which had been followed amounted 
to recourse to devious means in order to bring about a result which could not 
be achieved directly. His delegation had voted against the draft resolution as 
amended. 
52. Mr. RUGGIERO (Italy) stated that his delegation had been surprised 
by the ruling given by the President on the advice of the Director of the Legal 
Division. Its surprise was such that the Italien delegation felt obliged to 
leave the hall and not to take any further part in the twenty-sixth session of the 
General Conference. 
53. Mr. THABAULT (France) said that the acceptance of an additional vote 
after the results of the ballot had been officially announced was without 
precedent. On that point, and that point alone, he was in profound disagreement 
with the manner in which the proceedings had been conducted. 
54. Mr. CAMPBELL (Australia) declared that he was deeply concerned by the 
illegal situation in which the General Conference had been placed as a result of 
the present debate. At the plenary meeting that morning the General Conference 
had rejected a draft resolution on the suspension of Israel from the exercise 
of its privileges and rights of membership. 


GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 13 


55. Mr. SCHACK LARSEN (Denmark) explained that his position was based 
solely on legal considerations. The credentials of a delegation should be 
examined only from the point of view of their conformity with the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference and the Statute. No political considerations 
should enter into the examination of a delegation's credentials. The 
decision which had been taken was tantamount to the suspension of a Member of 
the Agency by a simple majority when in fact a two-thirds majority was required 
for such a decision. An organization which did not respect its statute or rules 
of procedure became very vulnerable. 
56. 
Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) reported that the Malagasy delegate had been in 
2/ 
the hall— at the time of the ballot and that he had notified the Secretariat of 
the General Conference that he would register his vote. He thanked the 
President for his courage in defending legality. 


57. Mr. BRENNAN (Ireland) declared that his delegation was traditionally 
opposed to the use of a vote on the credentials of a delegation in order to 
achieve what could not be achieved by a vote on the suspension of a Member 
State. Such a procedure was regrettable since it ran counter to the smooth 
functioning of the Agency and could only bring harm to its reputation. 
58. Mr. PREVEDOURAKIS (Greece) said that his delegation had abstained 
from voting. The General Committee and the General Conference should not bring 
political considerations into play when examining the credentials of delegations. 
By doing so, they might infringe the Agency's Statute and harm its credibility. 
The Israeli attack on the Iraqi reactor also threatened the Agency's Statute, 
and the aggressive policy which the Israeli Government had since pursued 
certainly did nothing to allay fears. His delegation had abstained because it 
wished firmly to express its opposition to that policy without contributing to 
a trend which rendered the Agency more vulnerable. 


59. Mr. DERPSCH BARTSCH (Chile) declared that he was also opposed to the 
procedure that had been followed. The resolution which had been adopted was 
contrary to the Statute. 
60. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) said that the votes that had taken place were in 
conformity with the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference since the 
2/ The delegate used the word 'hall'. 



GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 14 


President's ruling had been made on the advice of the Director of the Legal 
Division. He was disappointed by the reactions to those votes, which were also 
in accordance with the rules of democracy applied in Western Europe, rules which 
his country admired and sought to emulate. He paid tribute to the courage of 
the President. 


61. Mr. GHAZALI bin Hj. Abd. RAHMAN (Malaysia) explained that he had voted 
for the draft resolution as amended since it was an attempt to stem the erosion 
of moral values throughout the world. 
62. Mr. BARUTCU (Turkey) stated that he had abstained because two quite 
separate issues had been put to the vote: firstly, the suspension of Israel, 
which his delegation had supported at the previous meeting and, secondly, the 
examination of credentials. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXVI)/667, 676) (resumed) 


63. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of the 
voting: 
64. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Latin America 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 19 
Valid votes: 218 
Required majority: 37 
Votes obtained: 
Brazil 72 
Mexico 73 
Venezuela 73 

65. Having obtained the required majority, Brazil, Mexico and Venezuela were 
elected to the Board. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 15 


66. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Western Europe 
was as follows; 
Abstentions: 19 
Valid votes: 139 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 
Denmark / ± 
Portugal 68 

67. Having obtained the required majority, Denmark and Portugal were elected 
to the Board. 
68. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Eastern Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 75 
Required majority: 38 
Votes obtained: 
Bulgaria 75 


69. Having obtained the required majority, Bulgaria was elected to the Board. 
70. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was as 
follows: 

GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 16 


Abstentions: 23 
Valid votes: 135 
Required majority: 34 
Votes obtained: 


Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 69 


Zaire 65 


Kenya 1 


71. Having obtained the required majority, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Zaire 
were elected to the Board. 
72. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 74 
Required majority: 38 
Votes obtained: 
Pakistan 38 
Syrian Arab Republic 36 


73. Having obtained the required majority, Pakistan was elected to the Board. 
74. The result of the election of one Member from the area of South East Asia 
and the Pacific was as follows: 
Abstentions: 7 
Valid votes: 71 
Required majority: 36 
Votes obtained: 
Thailand 71 


75. Having obtained the required majority, Thailand was elected to the Board. 
GC(XXVI)/OR.246 
page 17 


76. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Africa, or of the 
Middle East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific was as follows: 
Abstentions: 10 
Valid votes: 69 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 
Kenya 69 

77. Having obtained the required majority, Kenya was elected to the Board. 
78. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, 
recalled that under Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold office from the 
end of the current session until the end of the twenty-eighth regular session 
of the General Conference, i.e. for a period of two years. 
79. He thanked the delegations of Tunisia and the United Kingdom, which had 
provided tellers, the two tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistants. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


80. After the customary acknowledgements and expressions of appreciation, 
the PRESIDENT, in accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, invited 
the delegates to observe a minute's silence for prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


81. The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-sixth session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m. 



