GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
January 1984* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Monday, 10 October 1983, at 10.15 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) 
President: Mr. KEBLUSEK (Czechoslovakia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 


- 
Opening of the session 1 - 10 
Election of the President 11 - 21 
Opening statements 22 - 23 
2 
Message from the Secretary-General of 24 - 29 
the United Nations 
3 Statement by the Director General 30 - 95 
6 General debate and annual report for 1982 96 - 174 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 96 - 140 
Japan 141 - 174 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 12 October 1983. 
**/ GC(XXVII)/683. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 

84-0002 


GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the twenty-seventh regular session 
of the General Conference open. 


2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed the delegates, observers, representatives 
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and representatives 
of other intergovernmental organizations. He thanked the Austrian 
authorities for once again making the Hofburg Palace available for the 
General Conference of the Agency. 
4. Every session of the General Conference was a special event, but the 
present session represented a turning-point in the life of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. 
5. The large number of delegations participating in the present session of 
the General Conference demonstrated that the binding energy represented by 
Member States' common interests in the Agency was far stronger than the 
divisive forces due to different perceptions of the same issues, which were 
a natural consequence of the varied political and economic systems and distinct 
cultural values of Member States. An essential aspect of the democratic 
process of decision-making embodied in the Agency's Statute was occasional 
opposition to the status quo, and a commitment on the part of all Member 
States to seek solutions for the common good was equally essential. 
6. The present session of the Conference was taking place under very 
difficult international circumstances, characterized by the escalating nuclear 
arms race, a pervasive economic downturn, fear of nuclear war and anxiety 
about job security. Obviously the Conference could offer no immediate remedy 
to those problems, but delegates no doubt realized that attainment of the 
Agency's statutory objectives might help to improve the situation. 
7. The General Conference was about to consider the application of a State 
to become the 112th Member of the Agency. That membership would mean that, 
for the first time, all the nuclear-weapon States were Members of the Agency, 
and would thus mark a large step forward towards greater universality. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 3 


8. Membership in the Agency of all the nuclear-weapon States, and their 
acceptance of the Agency's safeguards system for some of their peaceful nuclear 
facilities, was bound to improve the prospects of formulating nuclear disarmament 
agreements verifiable by international mechanisms similar to the 
Agency's safeguards system. In order to prepare itself for that (possibly 
remote) eventuality, the Agency should improve the international credibility 
of its safeguards system, making it politically more acceptable and providing 
more stable financing arrangements. 
9. As in the past, the General Conference could be expected to focus attention 
on the Agency's safeguards system, but also on the need for more generous 
technical assistance and other difficult issues, technical and political. 
10. In conclusion, he felt that he could not do better than to borrow the 
words of the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, who had called upon 
the whole world to unite to fight global inequality and save peace, with the 
admonition that no section could hope to gain by trying to defeat another. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


11. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
12. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), speaking 
on behalf of the Eastern Europe regional group, said that he had great 
pleasure in proposing Mr. Keblusek, delegate of Czechoslovakia, as President 
of the General Conference at its twenty-seventh regular session. 
Mr. Keblusek had for the past year served as Chairman of the Board of 
Governors of the Agency and had wide experience of the problems facing the 
Agency. He had every confidence that under his expert guidance the 
Conference would successfully complete its work. 
13. Mr. SULLIVAN (Canada), speaking on behalf of the North America 
regional group, seconded the nomination of Mr. Keblusek. 
14. Mr. MIYAZAWA (Japan), on behalf of the Far East regional group, 
Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany), on behalf of the Western Europe 
regional group, Mr. MANOUAN (Ivory Coast), on behalf of the Africa regional 
group, Mr. BELTRAMINO (Argentina), on behalf of the Latin America regional group, 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 4 


Mr. SINGH (India), on behalf of the Middle East and South Asia regional group, 
and Mr. BRENNAN (Australia), on behalf of the South East Asia and the Pacific 
regional group, supported the nomination. 


15. Mr. Keblusek (Czechoslovakia) was elected President of the General 
Conference for its twenty-seventh regular session by acclamation. 
16. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT congratulated Mr. Keblusek on his election. 
Mr. Keblusek (Czechoslovakia) took the Chair. 


17. The PRESIDENT thanked the representative of the Eastern Europe regional 
group for nominating him and expressed his gratitude to all delegates for the 
confidence they had shown in him and his country by electing him as President 
of the General Conference. 
18. The Agency occupied a unique position in international affairs, dealing 
with a wide range of problems which lay outside the competence of any other 
body. Its most urgent task was to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
throughout the world, and its success in performing that task was dependent on 
securing consistent assurance that there would be no proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
19. The General Conference faced great problems at its present session. 
In order to meet the challenge of resolving those problems and to create the 
conditions in which the Agency might continue its work, a calm and business-like 
atmosphere was essential. While a whole series of political problems were 
likely to arise during the Conference - that could not be avoided - he hoped 
that all delegates would co-operate with him and bear in mind the Conference's 
responsibility for working out a clear programme for the future development of 
the Agency. He would turn to delegates for advice whenever necessary and 
would propose forms of consultation, as he had done during his term as 
Chairman of the Board of Governors. 
20. The Board of Governors had already done much to prepare for the Conference, 
and the problems facing the latter were by no means new. Different countries 
and regional groups had different interests and would accordingly take 
different stands on a variety of issues. The assistance of the General 
Conference in plenary and of the Committee of the Whole would therefore be 
essential if the endeavour to find solutions reflecting the views and interests 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 5 


of a majority of Member States and of the Agency as a whole - solutions in 


conformity with the Statute - was to be crowned with success. 


21. In conclusion, he appealed to the delegates to work in a spirit of 
co-operation and wished the Conference every success. 
OPENING STATEMENTS 


22. The PRESIDENT proposed that, in view of the fact that consultations 
were still being held on the composition of the General Committee, the 
Conference should agree to waive Rule 42(a) of the Rules of Procedure and 
proceed immediately to items 2, 3 and 6 of the provisional agenda. 
23. It was so decided. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


24. Mr. ALLAF, the representative of the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations, said that the General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency was meeting at a time when serious international problems 
were sharply accentuated. Concern over nuclear proliferation was growing as 
a result of the limited success of attempts to improve the international 
non-proliferation regime. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT), whose implementation was soon to be reviewed for the third time, 
had been criticized, mainly because of the lack of progress in negotiations 
between the two major nuclear Powers on effective measures to stop the nuclear 
arms race and to carry out nuclear disarmament. Initiatives to establish 
nuclear-weapon-free zones in different areas remained unfulfilled. Even the 
Tlatelolco Treaty - at present in its seventeenth year - had not obtained the 
adherence of all States in the region to which it related. Furthermore, there 
was the danger that areas at present free from nuclear weapons, such as outer 
space, would become the arena for a new dimension to the arms race. 
25. New problems had also arisen for the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. The economic recession had reduced the demand for nuclear energy; 
there was public resistance in industrialized countries to its use for the 
generation of electricity; developing countries had difficulties in raising 
the capital required to make nuclear power practical as an additional energy 
source; and the question of what to do with spent fuel remained unresolved. 

GC(XXVII)/0R.247 
page 6 


26. None of those problems resulted from any want of effort or failure on the 
part of the Agency. The Agency had done valuable work on nuclear safety and on 
waste disposal, and in that connection it deserved gratitude for its co-operation 
with the Secretariat of the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). 
27. The Agency's safeguards activities gave it a unique position among international 
organizations. As an international verification system with on-site 
inspection, the Agency's safeguards represented an important element in 
international relations. It was, therefore, the more noteworthy that some 
recent problems in their application had been solved through consultations 
between the Agency and the Governments concerned. 
28. The Agency could not avoid involvement in the political problems that 
increasingly beset the United Nations system. However, by its perseverance, 
the Agency was setting an example for valuable work that could be done by a 
member of the United Nations system - work which unfortunately was too little 
known and understood by those who criticized the safeguards system for presumed 
ineffectiveness. 
29. The Agency played a significant role in international economic development 
and in maintaining peace and security. He wished it success in its endeavours 
and personally congratulated Mr. Keblusek on his election to the post of 
President of the General Conference. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


30. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that much had happened since the last 
session of the General Conference had closed in acrimony and confusion. 
Confrontation had gradually given way to a calmer climate, which he hoped could 
be preserved, so that all attention might be concentrated on the promotion of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the prevention of further proliferation. 
31. The most recent important event was the decision of the People's Republic 
of China to seek membership of the IAEA, a decision which would take the Agency 
further towards the goal of universality. At a time when misgivings existed 
about nuclear power in some of the industrially most advanced States, it was 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 7 


encouraging that China, after long and careful consideration, should have 
concluded that nuclear power must in time become one of its chief sources of 
energy. He was confident that China would both benefit from and contribute to 
global co-operation within the Agency. 


32. In May 1983, an international conference on radioactive waste management 
had been organized in Seattle by the Agency in co-operation with the United 
States Department of Energy. The conference had showed no uncertainty in 
concluding that the technology was now available for the siting, design, construction 
and operation of waste management systems. Evidently, considerable 
efforts would need to be made to convey that message to the public in many 
Member States. 
33. In the past year the Board of Governors, under the skilful and energetic 
chairmanship of Ambassador Keblusek, who had just been elected President of the 
General Conference, had undertaken several important policy reviews. Safeguards 
had been the object of searching discussion during the Board's February session 
and new policy guidelines for technical co-operation had been laid down during 
the June session. The Administrative and Budgetary Committee had conducted 
important discussions on the allocation of resources to the Agency's various 
activities; from those discussions there had emerged a greater awareness that 
the budget was one of the most important policy documents of the Agency and 
that active participation of all Member States in its development was needed. 
It was important for the interests of different States and groups of States to 
be satisfied in a balanced way. At the same time, the facile conclusion 
should be avoided that, for instance, technical assistance was mainly of 
interest to developing countries or that safeguards were mainly of importance 
to industrialized States. In a broad sense all the activities of the Agency 
were promotional. Regulations for the safe operation of reactors or the safe 
disposal of waste were indispensable for the acceptance of nuclear power. 
Without safeguards, nuclear trade would be crippled and the stigma attaching to 
nuclear weapons would be transferred even more indiscriminately to peaceful 
nuclear power. 


34. As a result of the discussion of the budget, the Secretariat was examining 
whether, in its preparation of the budget, it could better identify the 
specific needs to be satisfied in Member States through the various programmes 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 8 


of the Agency. Particularly during a period when Members wished the organization 
to maintain zero growth or near-zero growth, it was vital that a 
continuous critical examination should take place to determine which programmes 
were most important to Members. To be successful in that regard, and to ensure 
that the resources made available were used for needs which had high priority, 
continuous dialogue and guidance were necessary. 


35. Despite budgetary stringencies, the Agency's resources were gradually 
increasing to meet the growing need for international co-operation perceived by 
its Members. The technical co-operation programme had been expanding considerably, 
and safeguards operations were also becoming more extensive in order 
to keep pace with the expansion of the nuclear industry as well as being 
improved so as to achieve their purpose more thoroughly and credibly. Thanks 
to the Italian Government, the premises of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics were expanding, to the benefit of visiting scientists and 
with advantages in terms of easier administration. The Monegasque Government 
had provided additional premises for the International Laboratory of Marine 
Radioactivity, with the result that more laboratory space was now available 
and more fellows could be received for training. 
36. The staff of the Agency, its most valuable - and most costly - asset, was 
not increasing rapidly, but there had been some expansion. Indeed, if Governments 
wished more international collaboration in such fields as nuclear safety 
and waste disposal, if they wished to improve further the credibility of 
safeguards and to expand the volume and quality of technical assistance, there 
must be some continued increase in staff. 
37. Also, a gradual adjustment in the composition of the Secretariat was 
taking place: more posts were now held by staff from developing countries, 
especially at the higher levels, in accordance with requests made at earlier 
sessions of the General Conference. Out of 12 appointments which he had made 
at the level of Division Director or above, six had been of persons from 
developing countries. In addition, the training programme for young graduates 
and professionals from developing countries, which had just commenced, should 
facilitate recruitment from those countries. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 9 


38. The presence of staff of many nationalities was not only a matter of 
equity; it also helped in identifying and understanding the needs of Member 
States. It was important to stress, however, that the Members of the Agency 
would be best served if professional competence was accepted as the foremost 
criterion for staff selection in accordance with the Statute. The high degree 
of efficiency which Governments rightly demanded was possible only if that 
criterion was respected. But competence was not the only precondition for 
efficiency: an international civil service could not rely on long-standing 
national administrative traditions and loyalties, it must seek its own way. To 
manage and motivate it was a matter of human and, it was not inappropriate to 
add, humane relations. 
39. To work for the common good of the international community was a great 
privilege and a source of motivation in itself. But it did not obviate the 
need for good administration. The rotation of personnel to bring in fresh 
experience and new ideas was useful, especially in fields where scientific knowledge 
developed rapidly and government policies were continuously evolving. 
However, attention must also be paid to legitimate aspirations for advancement 
within the Secretariat, especially in the case of staff who remained with the 
Agency and contributed to its stability by their long and loyal service to it. 


40. Nuclear power had made slow but steady progress in the past year, and 
nuclear applications in other areas, such as food, medicine and industry, had 
continued to expand all over the world. In 1982, 21 power reactors had been 
newly connected to the grid, bringing the total number of operating units in 
the world to 297 at the end of the year. They accounted for a significant 
fraction - about 10% - of world electricity production, and that fraction 
might be expected to grow to at least 20% over the next decade and a half. 
41. On the other hand, a trend had continued in some countries towards 
reducing the number of nuclear reactors planned or delaying their construction, 
or even cancelling some units already under construction. A very important 
factor giving rise to cancellations had been the depressed state of the world 
economy and the consequent reduction in demand for electric power; interest 
rates and long lead times had also played a role. When the general economic 
situation in the world improved, however, the demand for electricity could be 
expected to increase again. Machines would continue to be substituted for 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 10 


manual labour, because - given the choice - people everywhere would want to 
make use of the power of physics rather than be made use of as physical power. 


42. Conservation and coal would undoubtedly be of great importance in the 
future, but far more nuclear power would be needed as well. The facts were on 
the side of nuclear power: its economic record, its safety record and, not 
least, its environmental record. The oceans were being harmed by oil pollution, 
lakes and forests were dying because of acid rain, and concern was spreading 
at the possibility of a greenhouse effect resulting from increased carbon 


dioxide in the atmosphere. Some of those ills, which were primarily due to 
the use of fossil fuels, must be reduced by technical means, but the simple 


fact remained that nuclear power was free from those adverse effects. 


43. One of the obstacles to increasing the use of nuclear power in developing 
countries had been that only large nuclear reactors were commercially available 
at present, although in many cases the existing electricity grids were not 
able to accept generation capacity increments of 600 MW(e) or more. Hence 
there might be a fairly large market for small and medium power reactors. 
Some interest in such reactors had been voiced during the last session of the 
General Conference, and since then the Secretariat had taken steps, in 
co-operation with interested Member States, to initiate the first phase of a 


study of the general case for small and medium-size reactors. At a recent 
meeting on that subject, it had been pointed out that such reactors might also 
find a market in industrialized countries where load growth was slow or where 
there were isolated grids, or where better economic risk management was 
desired in expanding electric power systems. 


44. Turning to the important field of nuclear safety, he said that by the end 
of 1982 a total of more than 2800 reactor years of operating experience had 
been accumulated by nearly 300 reactors in 25 countries. During 1982 alone 
some 280 reactor years had been added to the existing experience base. 
Safety-related operational events due to equipment failure or human error had 
continued to occur, but in all instances the safety systems had been able to 
cope with them. There had not been any incidents in nuclear power plants that 
significantly affected the neighbouring population or the environment and 
there had not been any substantial releases of radioactive materials traceable 
to accidents in 1982. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 11 


45. Furthermore, the total radiological impact from the nuclear industry was 
tending toward a steady decrease in terms of collective doses per unit of 
energy generated. That was a record which the nuclear community could be justly 
proud of. At the same time it should not be a source of complacency. The 
Agency's second Annual Report on Nuclear Safety described a variety of international 
measures taken under Agency auspices to help improve safety even more. 
46. One was the world-wide Incident Reporting System, which the Agency was 
seeking to establish and which would enable States to draw lessons from each 
other's experience. The responses received so far indicated that there would 
be broad participation in the system, including the participation of developing 
countries and of Member States of the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) and 
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). Guidelines for national 
incident reporting systems had been prepared. Furthermore, reviews were foreseen 
for those reported events that were of joint interest to Member States. 
But the information channelled into the system had to be judiciously handled 
to avoid being misused. Another important aspect was that the exchange should 
be truly multilateral so that all participants could derive real benefits 
from it. 
47. The suggestion he had made at the General Conference's 1982 session with 
regard to nuclear safety missions had met with a favourable response, and 
"operational safety review teams" available to Member States on request could 
now be set up. Such teams, consisting of about ten experts, both in-house 
staff and external consultants, dealt with general safety requirements as well 
as issues specific to the type of reactor visited. Their task was to assist 
national regulatory bodies in ensuring that safety was maintained at the 
required level during all phases of the operation of a nuclear power plant. 
The first such mission had been to the KNU-1 Power Plant in the Republic of 
Korea this summer. 
48. The Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme, under which a comprehensive 
set of codes of practice and guides for the safety of nuclear power plants was 
being developed, had reached an advanced stage. The enterprise appeared to 
be very helpful. Considerable effort was now being devoted to disseminating 
information on NUSS and to assisting Member States in using the codes and 
guides through seminars, training courses and missions. 

GC(XXVII)/0R.247 
page 12 


49. The revised edition of the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection, 
issued immediately after the Conference's previous session, was an important 
milestone in establishing international standards. It incorporated the new 
system of dose limitation recommended by the International Commission on 
Radiological Protection (ICRP). 
50. While preventing the occurrence of nuclear accidents was the fundamental 
task in nuclear safety, there also had to be a readiness to mitigate the 
consequences of a serious nuclear accident, should one occur. 
51. To assist in planning and preparedness for radiation emergencies, training 
programmes had been arranged and special assistance missions were being sent 
to Member States on request. They had proved to be an effective combination 
for developing, improving and testing emergency plans. A comprehensive exercise 
carried out in 1982 by a Member State had successfully demonstrated the excellent 
results that could be achieved in improving a country's capability to 
handle a nuclear accident. In a related area, a document had been prepared 
which could serve as a model for the negotiation of bilateral or regional 
agreements between Member States for mutual assistance in connection with 
nuclear accidents. 
52. At the Conference's previous session he had brought up the question whether 
there would be advantage in adopting universally applicable standards to 
strengthen nuclear safety, to increase public confidence and to facilitate 
trade. Comments indicated that, while some rapprochement in nuclear safety 
philosophies was regarded by many as desirable, aiming for binding international 
standards was too ambitious. 
53. During the past year a somewhat more modest idea had been discussed, 
both in the IAEA Secretariat and within the International Nuclear Societies 
Group. It was a commonly held view that an international mechanism might be 
of help in achieving a greater measure of concordance between the nuclear 
safety philosophies and the basic safety criteria on which States based their 
nuclear safety regulations. While work on specific regulations would remain 
outside such an international mechanism, the discussions might, in due course, 
have the effect of reducing some of the differences now existing in 
regulatory approaches. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 13 


54. To some extent, the International Commission on Radiological Protection 
(ICRP) had inspired those ideas. However, while ICRP had great authority and 
influence, safety in nuclear power was also related to so many institutional, 
economic and political factors that another high-level commission of worldwide 
composition ought perhaps to be established through the IAEA. Scientific 
societies could be helpful in identifying and nominating candidates of high 
calibre to serve on such a commission; they might also offer scientific 
comments on the commission's reports. The independence of the commission 
vis-a-vis Governments and industry - important for its credibility and 
authority - could be partly assured by rules specifying that members would 
serve in their personal capacity and that the commission had complete authority 
over the contents of its own reports. 
55. There was no need at the present juncture to discuss the size, the 
nomination procedures required to ensure competence and a balanced geographical 
composition, the duration of the mandate, or the Secretariat arrangements. 
If the basic idea met with interest, all aspects would be examined and the 
result submitted to the Agency's Scientific Advisory Committee for comment 
before further steps were taken through the Agency's normal budgetary processes. 
56. When devoting so much attention to the safe operation of peaceful nuclear 
power facilities, it would be paradoxical not to show concern as well about the 
possibility of belligerent attacks against nuclear facilities. Enough calculations 
had been made of the possible, effects of such attacks to show that 
concern was justified. It was, furthermore, a matter that had relevance for 
the public acceptance of nuclear power. The question of prohibiting attacks 
against nuclear installations was attracting attention in the Committee on 
Disarmament in Geneva. One proposal had been to devise an international legal 
instrument that would afford protection for all nuclear facilities to which 
IAEA safeguards were being applied. 
57. It should not be forgotten, however, that Additional Protocol I to the 
Geneva Convention of 1949 - an agreement that had been signed by 62 States, 
including the Soviet Union and the United States - already contained an 
article (Article 56) prohibiting attacks on peaceful nuclear electricity 
generating stations. Although there might be different views on how satisfactory 
the scope of such a provision might be, it had the great merit not 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 14 


only of existing but also of having been adopted by consensus. Early ratification 
of the protocol would go at least some way towards achieving the 
protection needed in that field. 


58. Another important legal instrument was the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material. So far 36 States had signed and 8 States had 
ratified it. Since 21 ratifications were required for its entry into force, 
all Member States were urged to speed up the process of ratifying that 
important convention. 
59. On the subject of spent fuel management and the safe disposal of radioactive 
waste, the conference on radioactive waste management held in Seattle 
in May had been attended by more than 500 participants from 29 Member States 
and eight international organizations. A report on that conference and on 
the Agency's work in the waste management field had been circulated to the 
General Conference (document GC(XXVII)/INF/214). 
60. It had been recognized at the conference that, while further research and 
site-specific activities were still necessary, there was no need for any technological 
breakthrough. Also, it had been shown that, contrary to popular belief, 
several countries had already moved from the technology development stage to the 
stage of large-scale industrial projects for waste management systems. In 
the case of high-level waste, fully feasible concepts had been developed. It 
was clear, however, that internationally accepted generic criteria for the 
safe disposal of wastes would be most useful. The Secretariat had held consultations 
with experts and regulatory organizations in a number of countries 
with advanced programmes for nuclear waste management and had found broad 
support for work on such criteria. 


61. An area of more immediate concern was that of spent fuel storage, already 
a problem for some power plants which were running out of storage capacity for 
spent fuel. That situation would be further aggravated during the next decade 
owing to inadequate reprocessing capacity, the high costs of reprocessing and 
the lack of a market for plutonium. For the intermediate term, several 
countries were now planning central storage facilities designed for 30 to 
50 years of storage. In that area intergovernmental co-operation could be most 
useful in giving plant operators in smaller countries where domestic back-end 
services were not economically justifiable assurances that the needs of their 
nuclear power programmes could be met. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 15 


62. The report of the Expert Group on International Spent Fuel Management had 
been well received by the Board of Governors. The next step would be to put 
into effect some of the practical suggestions in that report. For its part, 
the Agency would soon be publishing a technical guidebook on spent fuel 
storage. Governments should now consider what co-operative action would be 
appropriate on their part. 
63. The dumping of radioactive material in the sea was a controversial subject 
much in the news during the past year. At the Seventh Consultative Meeting of 
the Contracting Parties to the London Dumping Convention, held in February 1983, 
a number of decisions had been taken that required the IAEA to review its 
activities with respect to the Convention. Proposals had been made to prohibit 
the dumping of radioactive wastes into the sea. Many States had called for 
the suspension of all sea dumping of radioactive wastes pending a report 
on the matter by experts. The IAEA, with other interested international 
organizations, would assemble relevant information for the. experts. In conformity 
with its responsibilities under the London Dumping Convention, the 
Agency was also reviewing the definition of "high-level wastes unsuitable for 
dumping at sea" and recommendations related to other radioactive wastes. 


64. There was one final point relating to international co-operation in the 
handling of high-level waste that should be mentioned. There might well be 
countries without any geologically acceptable sites for the final disposal of 
high-level waste or which had too small a nuclear power programme to justify 
construction of a large terminal disposal repository. The question was, 
should they refrain from using nuclear power or could there be international 
co-operation to solve the problem? It was time to consider possible international 
co-operation in the ultimate disposal of high-level waste. It would 
be useful to work towards regional and international solutions affording an 
opportunity of limiting the total number of disposal sites, thereby also 
achieving economies of scale. Such an undertaking could obviously encounter 
political difficulties in some countries today, but that only confirmed the 
need for careful study of the potential problems and solutions. 
65. Trade and technology transfer in the nuclear field had always been subject 
to intergovernmental co-operation agreements, safeguards, physical protection 
requirements, and other special arrangements. Suppliers' policies had at times 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 16 


given rise to friction and frustration. The need for a general consensus on 
what might reasonably be required from recipients in return for long-term 


supply assurances had led to the creation of the Committee on Assurances of 


Supply (CAS) in 1980. 


66. The most prominent item on CAS's agenda dealt with the principles of 
international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy, but progress had 
been only modest. On more specific items, however, such as revision mechanisms 
and emergency and back-up mechanisms, there had been some headway. Discussions 
on the Agency's role in emergency back-up mechanisms suggested that it could 
serve as a clearing house for information on where substitute supplies could be 
obtained. CAS had adopted the structure for such a scheme and the recent 
progress made in CAS, which provided a forum where both suppliers and recipients 
could bring forward their concerns and work together on what could eventually be 
a mutually acceptable code of conduct, was encouraging. 
67. Another potential forum for discussing issues of international co-operation 
was the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). The Preparatory 
Committee for the Conference had held its fourth session in April but had not 
been able to agree on an agenda or on the timing of the Conference. The IAEA 
Secretariat would continue to provide relevant material in close co-operation 
with the Secretary-General of the Conference and would be prepared to make 
substantial contributions specific to the final agenda items. 
68. One important application of nuclear technology for Member States of the 
Agency, which were mainly developing countries, was the preservation of 
food by irradiation. While that technique had been proven to be generally 
safe and effective, it had not yet been widely applied. Important new perspectives 
would open up if full-scale industrial application proved feasible 
and economic. 
69. There had recently been authoritative international action which might 
help to create public confidence and interest in the technique: in July 1983, 
the Codex Alimentarius Commission had adopted a revised International General 
Standard for Irradiated Foods and an International Code of Practice for the 
Operation of Radiation Facilities for the Treatment of Food. That development, 
one of the most important in the field of food irradiation in the past decade, 
stemmed from the work of a Joint FAO/IAEA/WHO Expert Committee on the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 17 


Wholesomeness of Irradiated Food, which had recommended the acceptability of 


food irradiated up to a specific average dose. The revised Standard provided 


countries with the means necessary for formulating national legislation on the 


radiation processing of food and its control, and it should facilitate 


international trade in irradiated food. 


70. That was the background against which the Agency maintained an active programme 
in the field of food irradiation. The World Health Organization (WHO) 
had decided earlier that year to co-operate with the Agency on a food irradiation 
project aimed at improving the health and nutrition of populations in 
developing countries. There was also a food irradiation project within the 
framework of the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific. 
71. Nineteen eighty-two had seen the start of a large-scale project for the 
eradication of the Mediterranean fruit fly in Egypt. The ultimate purpose of 
the project, which would involve the expenditure of more than US $20 million 
over four years, was to eliminate the significant losses occurring each year in 
the production of fruit and vegetables in Egypt. Personnel from the very 
successful medfly eradication project conducted by the Mexican Ministry of 
Agriculture in collaboration with the Agency were being enlisted for it. The 
training of Egyptian personnel had started at the Agency's Laboratory in 
Seibersdorf and would shortly start in Mexico as well. 
72. Another project worth mentioning, in the area of life sciences and human 
health, was a project on cervical cancer radiotherapy recently launched in 
co-operation with WHO. 
73. In 1982, technical assistance to the Agency's developing Member States had 
continued the steady growth it had shown over the last 14 years. The Agency had 
handled some 500 technical co-operation projects involving expert services, 
equipment and manpower training worth close to US $40 million. Technical 
co-operation through the Agency had become a major vehicle for technology 
transfer to developing countries at all stages of their development, and its 
growth had taken place despite a general shrinkage of funds for multilateral 
assistance programmes. 
74. More than 90% of the 1982 target of US $16 million for voluntary contributions 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund had been met. 
Pledges received for the current year amounted at present to about 84% of the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 18 


US $19 million target, representing slightly more in absolute terms than 
what had been pledged by that time last year. At the present relatively 
late juncture, more than 30 Member States had still made no pledge at all 
against the 1983 target. For the target system to be fully effective, it was 
essential for all Members to contribute their share. But late pledges led 
to late payments, and by the end of July less than 60% of the pledges made 
had actually been fulfilled, the amount paid representing only about 45% 
of the 1983 target. 


75. At the previous Conference session the Agency had appealed to developing 
countries to pay outstanding assessed programme costs. Unfortunately the 
arrears, which the previous year had reached the US $1 million mark, had 
increased to US $1.7 million by July 1983. 
76. On a more positive note, it was heartening that the Government of the 
United States of America had just announced that it would continue its traditional 
support of footnote a_/ projects. For footnote a/ projects in the 1983 programme, 
the United States had pledged a total amount of US $1.8 million. That generous 
contribution had raised the funding level for 1983 footnote a/ projects 
to about two-thirds of the total requirements. The Secretariat had also 
just been informed that the Soviet Union, in addition to its voluntary contribution 
of 1 900 000 roubles for 1984 to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, 
would make a contribution for the period 1984-85 of 1 million roubles for 
the financing of footnote a_/ projects. Six countries had now made contributions 
for footnote a_/ projects since the beginning of 1983, as compared to ten 
countries in 1982. Efforts were being made to bring in more donors, and 
it was hoped that more of the 1983 footnote a/ projects would be financed 
between now and the meeting of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Committee in December. 


77. The Board of Governors had concluded a review of the policies guiding 
the Agency's technical co-operation programme. The new policies should 
enable the Agency to respond more quickly to the changing needs and priorities 
of developing Member States: 
Consideration would accordingly be given to the planning of projects 
extending for several years ahead when needs that could not be met 
through short-term projects had been identified; 



GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 19 


Countries with limited experience in nuclear energy matters, and which 
therefore were especially in need of the Agency's assistance, would 
be eligible for special assistance in project identification and project 
planning; 


There would be more projects in which all available inputs were fully 
integrated into a package of measures designed to solve a particular 
problem; 


Increased consideration would be given to the possibility of including 
regional and interregional projects in the annual programme; and, finally, 


Through the introduction of dynamic programming, the Agency would be 
in a position to use its technical co-operation resources more effectively 
and to adapt the assistance rendered more closely to the changing needs 
of developing countries. 


78. In the past year the Technical Co-operation Evaluation Unit had started 
its work and had already developed a basic methodology that was ready to 
be tested out in initial evaluation exercises to be carried out in partnership 
with recipient countries. 
79. The Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) 
had now entered its second decade and continued to provide an excellent 
vehicle for technical co-operation, the promotion of applied research and 
technology transfer. Useful results which could lead to large-scale practical 
applications had been achieved in the areas of radiation processing, food 
preservation and animal husbandry. The large RCA-UNDP project on industrial 
applications, started in 1982, was now beginning to yield tangible results. 
New activities relating to biomedical applications of nuclear techniques 
had been initiated. Furthermore, India had now joined Australia and Japan 
as an RCA donor country. 


80. There had also been further discussion concerning the development of 
a similar arrangement in Latin America, and five countries of the Andean 
group had informed the Agency of their desire to undertake several projects 
involving Agency assistance on a joint basis. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 20 


81. The activity of the Agency which attracted most public and political 
attention was the operation of the safeguards system. During the past year 
there had been a great deal of discussion about it both inside and outside 
the Agency. To some, safeguards operations appeared too costly - absorbing 
money that might be used for other Agency programmes; to others, safeguards 
even seemed to be an invention of the nuclear "haves" for making sure that 
no more countries joined "the club". To yet others, safeguards were not 
sufficiently thorough and extensive. In the last analysis, however, most 
States conceded the value of safeguards in creating a climate of international 
confidence. 
82. It might be appropriate to reflect on why the unique system of Agency 
safeguards had emerged. There were several reasons. Although nuclear supplier 
States were willing to sell nuclear installations and material to other States, 
they had come to the conclusion that they would do so only if they felt assured 
that they would not thereby contribute to a nuclear weapons capability in 
the recipient State. For the recipient State which had no intention of 
acquiring nuclear weapons, it was not a very onerous obligation to undertake 
to accept safeguards. While trade in conventional weapons had escaped all 
forms of international restriction, the nature of nuclear weapons had made 
suppliers of nuclear material, equipment and technology - whether or not 
nuclear-weapon States themselves - wary of exporting without some assurance 
that the use of what they were exporting would be exclusively peaceful. 
Indeed, even in nuclear trade between nuclear-weapon States such assurances 
were sometimes sought. Agency safeguards could not provide an absolute 
guarantee that the exported items would not, one day, be used for non-peaceful 
purposes; but they did constitute an alarm system and helped to create 
confidence sufficient to permit the export of nuclear material, equipment 
and technology. It is doubtful whether, without safeguards, there would 
be any significant international nuclear trade today. 


83. But that was looking at safeguards from the view point of the supplier, 
whether or not a nuclear-weapon State. If one viewed them from the standpoint 
of the non-nuclear-weapon State embarking on a nuclear power programme, 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 21 


either by importing material, equipment and technology or through indigenous 
means, one saw that such States often found that by inviting safeguards they 
could create, among neighbours and in the world at large, the desired confidence 
that their programmes were serving solely peaceful purposes. By acceding 
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, by becoming part of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone such as the one in Latin America created by the Tlatelolco Treaty, ,or 
by otherwise entering into full-scope safeguards agreements with the Agency, 
States formally committed themselves not to acquire nuclear weapons. To 
invite safeguards increased the credibility of the commitment, created 
confidence in their intentions and facilitated the nuclear trade in which 
they might wish to engage. 


84. The Agency had been entrusted with the important task of administering 
the safeguards system. That was a unique international responsibility. 
The first requirement was that the Agency's safeguards should be credible. 
Their sole purpose was to create confidence, and to do so they had to be 
thorough. If they did not create confidence, they were a waste of resources 
or worse. 
85. The rapid development of the Agency's safeguards operations over the 
past ten years had been an achievement in which the Agency could take some 
pride. In a best-selling book that had appeared a few years before, a minister 
was quoted as saying that Agency inspectors were not able to distinguish 
a screwdriver from a monkey wrench. Agency inspectors rarely used either 
of those tools, but he was confident that in the Safeguards Department the-e 
was a highly qualified group of people who had been appropriately traine i for 
the work they were going. IAEA safeguards were not an amateur operation, 
A highly professional job was being done and, with the development of new 
techniques, with the latest equipment and with further training of the staff, 
the Agency would be able to do that job even better. 
86. During the year that had passed, the safeguards system had helped to 
increase confidence with regard to the material and installations safeguarded 
by it. Some difficulties faced in the operation of it had been overcome 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 22 


with the co-operation of the States concerned. In the past year there had 
also been a searching debate in the Board of Governors, in the Secretariat 
and in the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) on 
the goals and objectives of safeguards, on the resources needed in order 
to implement them and on their transparency. Such discussions were essential 
from time to time. 


87. Safeguards operations had to be organized and directed in such a way 
that they aroused confidence, but had also to be carried out in an efficient 
and economic manner. Thirty million United States dollars, which was the 
present Agency expenditure for one year of safeguards operations throughout 
the world, was only about one per cent of the cost of a single modern 
1000 megawatt (electric) nuclear power plant, and should be thought of as 
part of the normal costs of nuclear power. Just as insurance against accidents 
entailed a certain cost, so did assurances of exclusively peaceful use. 
It was the Agency's obligation to seek the most economical way of administering 
safeguards consistent with the goal of creating confidence. Advice as to 
how such could be done was valuable, but before any advice was acted on, one had 
to be completely sure that any modification would not impair confidence. 
Improved economy at the expense of impaired confidence was no real gain. 


88. New safeguards equipment, developed in co-operation with Member States, 
was being put; into use on an ever increasing scale. Greater use was also 
being made of permanently installed equipment, including that required for 
the safeguarding of on-line refuelled reactors. 
89. During the past year, there had been considerable progress in defining 
and developing safeguards approaches for a number of facilities which were 
about to or had recently come under safeguards. Especially noteworthy was the 
development and acceptance of a safeguards approach for gas centrifuge 
enrichment plants, based on limited-frequency, unannounced access by inspectors 
to the cascade halls. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 23 


90. Lastly, it was gratifying to be able to report to the General Conference 
that the Agency had entered into negotiations with authorities of the 
Soviet Union on the implementation of their voluntary offer to place some 
of their civilian nuclear facilities under safeguards; two meetings had already 
been held. The acceptance of IAEA safeguards by four nuclear-weapon States 
was significant both in itself and also within the context of wider acceptance 
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
91. Looking to the future, one saw that the Third NPT Review Conference 
was to take place in 1985. The IAEA Secretariat would be beginning next 
year to prepare its contributions. Those would be contributions in relation 
to several of the Articles of NPT. First, under Article III of the Treaty, 
the Agency was carrying out safeguards and had a duty to report on its experience 
in their implementation. Second, with Article IV providing for the fullest 
possible transfer of technology for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
the Agency should report on contributions made through it to that end. 
92. In relation to the commitment in Article VI to pursue negotiations for 
nuclear disarmament measures, the Agency could contribute some thoughts on 
the possible lessons that the safeguards system could offer in a broader 
disarmament perspective. For instance, could the verification of an agreement 
to halt the production of fissionable material that was going into ever greater 
stocks of warheads be achieved by safeguards or similar techniques? That 
was a question which Governments would be examining. The experience gained 
by the Agency in operating the safeguards systems should be at their disposal. 
One thing was clear - namely that, if Agency safeguards were to be of use in 
the field of nuclear disarmament, whether directly or as a model for 
verification measures, they must be organized, developed, managed, financed 
and supported by Member States in such a way that the world was sure they 
could be relied upon. To ensure that was a vital task for everyone. 


93. It was perhaps inevitable that some international political problems 
of an overriding character and which to some extent bore on the Agency's 
mandate spilt over into its work, although the major international action 
on them had to be elsewhere. Issues relating to the Middle East and to South 
Africa were of that kind. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 24 


94. Since the last session, the General Assembly of the United Nations had 
expressed concern about South Africa's nuclear programme and about its participation 
in certain Agency activities. Some of those activities were now coming 
to an end and more were due to finish shortly. The politically and practically 
more important question of South Africa's attitude to full-scope safeguards 
remained, however, and constituted a key to the question of a nuclear-weaponfree 
Africa. 
95. In conclusion he hoped that in addressing those difficult issues, it 
would be possible to avoid placing the Agency's valuable international 
co-operation in jeopardy and to promote and protect the peaceful development 
of nuclear power and to help prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684) 


96. Mr. HODEL (United States of America) read out the following message 
to the Conference from President Reagan: 
"Mr. President, Mr. Director General and delegates, 1 am delighted 
to join Secretary Hodel in greeting you once again as you attend the 
twenty-seventh General Conference of the IAEA. 


"The United States has always taken the position that the Agency 
has a singularly important role to play in fostering the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy. Most importantly, we are encouraged that most nations 
agree that the Agency should be able to function in a businesslike 
manner, that its predominantly technical and scientific orientation 
should be preserved, and that it be insulated, to the extent practicable, 
from divisive political debates or regional conflicts. 


"Similarly, we are very pleased that most IAEA members share our 
view both that the Agency is essential to the preservation of peace 
and stability in the world through its non-proliferation safeguards 
programme, and that nuclear energy is making a continued and increasing 
contribution to economic and social progress throughout the world. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 25 


"The technical co-operation programme of the Agency is crucial 
to this continued progress and we ask others to join us in a rededication 
to the principles that have made the IAEA one of the most effective 
international bodies. 


"It is vital that we continue our efforts to ensure that nuclear 
energy fulfils its promise to ease the burdens on mankind while continuing 
to protect the technologies involved against misuse. 


"We look forward to a new era of closer collaboration within the 
Agency and I send you my sincere best wishes and hopes for a successful 
meeting. 


Sincerely yours, 


Ronald Reagan" 


97. At a time when the Agency was completing the first year of its 
second quarter-century of service to the world, he believed that Member 
States should take the opportunity of renewing their dedication to its principles, 
and of demonstrating again their willingness to work together to achieve 
its goals. 
98. If the promise of nuclear energy was to be realized, nations had to 
resolve that the potential benefits would not be lost to them as a result 
of efforts to misuse scientific and technical developments. That meant that 
support had to be given to institutions that provided for effective international 



GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 26 


safeguards and gave meaning to the IAEA - namely, the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (NPT) and regional treaties such as the Tlatelolco Treaty. It also 
meant that nations had individually and collectively to accept responsibility 
both for reaffirming and strengthening their commitment to the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy and for guarding against its misuse. 


99. For those reasons, President Reagan had committed the United States, 
and sought the commitment of others, to worldwide safeguards administered 
by the IAEA. 
100. Since the founding of the IAEA, most of its Member States had proved 
that they were able to work together to develop an unprecedented international 
safeguards and inspection system. That system served as a foundation for 
the global non-proliferation regime, and provided a basis for civil nuclear 
co-operation throughout the world. 
101. Together, the Agency's Members had launched numerous scientific meetings, 
conferences, symposia, and information and training programmes designed 
to enhance the peaceful uses and transfer of nuclear technology. They had 
established guidelines and developed codes of practice to assist peaceful 
nuclear programmes throughout the world. They had conducted technical assistance 
programmes that had been the key factors in ensuring that the benefits of 
nuclear energy in the fields of power, agriculture, health and medicine 
served the developing nations in their striving for social and economic 
betterment. 


102. Those had been impressive achievements, which had not happened by 
accident, but rather were a reflection of the statesmanship and spirit of 
co-operation that had long distinguished the activities of Member States 
and the Secretariat. 
103. Common to most - if not all - IAEA Member States, regardless of their 
political persuasion, was the recognition that nuclear energy simply had 
to be treated differently from other technologies, and that man's basic 
survival as well as his ability to profit from the atom depended on an effective 
non-proliferation regime coupled with an imaginative approach towards international 
co-operation. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 27 


104-- In the past, Governments had been guided by the common ideal of sharing 
the atom's potential bounty, together with a basic understanding that everything 
to do with the atom was a serious matter. Indeed, they had known then as they 
did now that the world's security depended on developing ways of securing 
the benefits of nuclear energy while protecting humanity against its destructive 
potential. While there had been political differences, in general they 
had been kept within bounds and had been subordinated to the need to do 
substantive work. 


105. The United States was attending the Conference because the effective 
functioning of the Agency was of crucial importance to the entire world, 
and because it wanted to help it maintain the dedication and sense of purpose 
that was, and would continue to be, its greatest strength. 
106. The Agency was also needed as a strong and vital organization because 
the world still had chronic and potentially devastating energy problems. 
It had had a respite from the shortages and price escalations of a few years 
earlier, but it had to be recognized that that was only a respite, and not 
a sign that the problems had disappeared. Everyone recognized the fragility 
of the world's energy supply systems and knew that in order for countries 
to maintain and accelerate their progress towards increased social and economic 
health, a reasonably priced, adequate and reliable supply of energy was 
essential. 
107. Along with minimization of government interference in the market place, 
development of such a supply system was one of the key goals of United States 
energy policy, and he wished to mention one or two aspects of that policy 
of relevance to the work of the Agency. 
108. An essential element of United States plans to develop an adequate 
and reliable energy supply was its efforts to diversify the sources of energy 
and to reduce dependence on unreliable sources. In that process, it would 
of necessity reduce its consumption of oil, thereby making supplies available 
to nations that were heavily dependent on imported petroleum and reducing 
the pressures on world prices brought about by demand. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 28 


109. Although it considered that only a balanced approach to the problem 
of meeting energy needs would be successful, the United States believed 
that electricity was a particularly versatile and valuable form of energy 
and that, if the necessary energy supplies were to be available to the world, 
there had to be a steady growth in electricity generation. It was convinced 
that nuclear power was an essential part of energy supply- The United States 
had the world's largest nuclear power programme and, by 1990, the contribution 
of that programme would reach some 20 per cent of the country's installed 
electrical capacity. However, it also intended that fossil fuels, the 
various renewable energy sources, promising advanced technologies, and 
improvements in efficiency and conservation should play their roles in its 
energy supply scheme. 
110. The United States Government knew that nuclear power would continue to 
play an important part in the world's energy supply system, one that was even 
more important than at present, when nuclear power supplied almost 200 000 MW(e), 
with nearly another 200 000 MW(e) of capacity under construction. His 
Government wanted to continue to play a substantial part in making sure 
that that rate of progress was maintained through its co-operation with 
and assistance to others. 
111. It believed that the benefits of nuclear energy, for power and other 
peaceful purposes, had to be fully and fairly available to any country that 
had both the need and the capacity to utilize it and had demonstrated its 
understanding of the obligations that nuclear energy entailed. 
112. That sharing of knowledge and experience was one of the key reasons for the 
existence of the IAEA. However, in order for such a sharing to take place, 
it was necessary to retain the co-operative spirit that was so important 
to the work of the organization. 
113. During the past two years, major efforts had been made by the United 
States and others to restore the confidence and trust between suppliers 
and consumers that had so long distinguished international nuclear commerce. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 29 


114. It should be clear to all that the Reagan Administration had little 
enthusiasm for making unilateral changes in the conditions of export supply, 
and his Government was continuing to search for new ways to improve relations 
between it and its partners in co-operation, between the various parties 
to NPT, and between parties to NPT and those that were not party to the 
Treaty. He emphasized, however, that the United States viewed NPT and an 
effective international safeguards regime as being essential to the continued 
contribution of nuclear energy to the entire world. 
115. It also recognized the nature of the original bargain that was the 
basis for NPT and considered, therefore, that so long as such co-operation 
was consistent with the spirit and intent of the Treaty and so long as it 
fostered the goals of arms reduction, the nuclear-weapon States party to 
the Treaty had an obligation to co-operate with others to ensure that the 
benefits of nuclear energy would be made widely available. 
116. it viewed the 1985 NPT Review Conference as an event of fundamental 
importance and looked forward to co-operating actively with other nations 
to make it a success. The common desire of every State for improvements 
in the non-proliferation regime, and for more effective technical assistance 
programmes, made that Conference important to all. 
117. His Government wanted to ensure that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
were further developed and it looked forward to the day when the atom was 
utilized solely for peaceful purposes. 
118. jn his statement, the Director General had discussed the possibility 
of increased international co-operation with regard to nuclear safety. 
The United States' Government welcomed that initiative and wished to encourage 
him to proceed with a further examination of his proposal. There were many 
questions that needed to be considered, and a careful examination of the 
proposal would make that possible. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 30 


11" Every State had an interest in nuclear safety throughout the world. 
That interest had been most recently examined by the International Nuclear 
Societies Group at a meeting in Vancouver, Canada. Their report had 
encouraged a consistent approach to nuclear safety so that nations pursuing 
peaceful nuclear activities could rely, if they so desired, on internationally 
developed recommendations concerning nuclear safety matters. 


120. He hoped that the Director General would consider that matter further 
and develop a programme for a review by the Secretariat in conjunction with 
nuclear societies that could be considered by the IAEA's Scientific Advisory 
Committee and the Board of Governors. 
121. The United States, for its part, was prepared to work diligently with 
nations in the developing world, both bilaterally and through the IAEA, 
to ensure that they could benefit from its experience in reactor development, 
operation and safety. 
122. He wished to add that the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
had been especially active in co-operating with others in training, in providing 
technical advice, and in sharing in other ways the results of United States 
safety studies and his country's extensive experience in building and operating 
light-water reactors. 
123. There was likely to be continued strong interest among nations in collaborating 
in the field of nuclear waste management. In the past year, the 
United States Congress had passed the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, 
which President Reagan had signed on 7 January, 1983. That important piece 
of legislation established a demanding schedule and a procedure for the 
financing, siting, licensing, and operation of geological repositories for 
the permanent disposal of high-level radioactive waste. During the past 
nine months, the United States had made significant progress in working 
with the relevant State authorities, Federal agencies, utilities and other 
interested parties in implementing the Act. 
124. In 1982, his Government had also hosted the IAEA Conference on Radioactive 
Waste Management in Seattle, Washington. The United States intended, furthermore, 
to introduce a resolution at the present session of the General Conference 
on the subject of waste management, which he hoped would help to strengthen 
the Agency's work in that field. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 31 


125. He also noted that the Nuclear Waste Policy Act explicitly instructed 
both the United States Department of Energy and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
to co-operate with non-nuclear-weapon States for technical assistance in 
the areas of spent fuel storage and disposal. Expressions of interest in 
such co-operative activities were being received. 
126. Turning to some of the Agency's main programme areas and their importance 
to Member States, he said that it was unproductive to try to impose an artificial 
equality on resources provided for the IAEA safeguards system and those 
for Agency activities related to technical assistance. Similarly, it would 
be unrewarding for Member States to divide themselves into two factions, 
with one being interested mainly only in technical assistance and the other 
in safeguards. The fact was that both areas of endeavour were important 
to the national interests of all countries and, although each must be viewed 
and judged on its own merits, both warranted the strong and balanced support 
of all. The Agency must be supported as a whole, not only in a particular 
aspect of its work. 
127. it was hard to imagine what would become of the civilian nuclear world 
in the absence of IAEA safeguards. He suspected that, without them, international 
nuclear co-operation would be severely curtailed and that there 
would be a myriad of overlapping, competitive and confusing bilateral control 
arrangements. More broadly, the world would lose a vitally important international 
mechanism which, however imperfect, was crucial in helping to assure 
nations that their neighbours were acting responsibly and were not attempting 
to acquire the capacity to manufacture nuclear explosive devices. If there 
was a nuclear war on earth, no-one would be immune, regardless of where 
he lived or of the size or innocence of his country. 


128. Thus, all shared a common self-interest in strengthening the global 
non-proliferation regime and in preserving the crucial role that IAEA safeguards 
played in that framework, and safeguards must be of concern to everyone. 
The whole world was a nuclear world, and it was vital that all Member States 
should unite their efforts to ensure that the IAEA safeguards system remained 
credible, that it was continuously subject to rigorous examination, and 
that the system maintained its technical credibility and kept pace with 
advances in nuclear technology. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 32 


129. In his message, President Reagan had mentioned the importance that 
the United States attached to insulating the Agency, to the extent practicable, 
from divisive political debates so that it could focus on the substantive 
issues so vital to the orderly, safe and productive use of nuclear energy. 
As he had stated, the United States had been encouraged by the fact that 
many other nations shared the same view. It was his profound hope that 
a new consensus might be evolving on that matter. Nations had come to realize 
how much was really at stake in endeavours to preserve a healthy and effective 
IAEA. All Members suffered when its operations were disrupted. 
130. In the area of technical assistance, the IAEA had played a crucial 
role in assisting the developing nations. It was necessary to work harder 
to reduce the gap between needs and resources and, where applicable, to 
co-ordinate the Agency's activities with programmes of bilateral aid that 
might be carried out with either governmental or private resources. 
131. As evidence of the continued importance that the United States attached 
to that activity, he announced that his Government had pledged $2 150 000 
for fellowships and $1 800 000 for so-called "footnote a/" projects in 1983, 
in addition to other in-kind and extrabudgetary assistance to the IAEA. 
That served once again to emphasize the United States' commitment to the 
Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme, to NPT and to 
the special needs of the developing countries. 
132. When considering what was at stake at the Conference, it should be 
recognized that many of the programmes now funded under the Regular Budget of 
the IAEA were of considerable relevance to the developing countries. The 
nuclear power, fuel cycle and safety programmes were fundamental to the role the 
IAEA played in helping to introduce and to expand nuclear power in an orderly 
and safe manner. In his view, the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme 
had been particularly effective and well received. It was obvious that 
a serious nuclear accident could have very far-reaching effects on the continued 
use of nuclear energy. Thus, the IAEA was playing a vital role when it assisted 
nations to acquire the capacity to deal with reactor safety issues in an 
effective manner. 



GC(XXVII)/0R.247 
page 33 


133. Because of the urgency of the need for nuclear power in some nations, 
the important role that was already being played by other applications of 
nuclear energy in fields such as agriculture and the life sciences was often 
overlooked. Those were contributions of unquestionable benefit and importance 
to many countries. Radiation techniques were being used, or were being 
developed with IAEA support, to increase soil fertility and the efficiency 
of water use, to improve crop production through induced mutations, and 
to help control chronic pests such as the screw worm and the tsetse and 
the Mediterranean fruit flies. 
134. in medicine and biology, radiation had long made invaluable contributions 
in both diagnosis and therapy, and wider applications of such techniques 
as the sterilization of pharmaceuticals would make their mark in improving the 
world's health. 
135. Thus, nuclear energy was providing new approaches to the problem of 
feeding the world. Advances in nuclear medicine were producing new and 
highly effective weapons in the common fight against disease. In those 
vitally important areas, the benefits of the atom were rapidly, although 
frequently without loud publicity, being spread throughout the world. 
Information on such IAEA programmes should be the subject of more vigourous 
dissemination work all over the world. 
136. His delegation believed that the achievement of a truly effective 
international non-proliferation regime would very much depend on the active 
participation of all members of the international nuclear community. It 
particularly welcomed the announcement by the People's Republic of China 
that it intended to join the IAEA. That decision by the world's most populous 
country, a nation with a growing nuclear programme, was of great significance. 
The United States' Government looked forward to the time when the People's 
Republic of China joined the Agency, and to working with it in a co-operative 
and constructive manner. 


137. In conclusion, the United States was optimistic about the future of 
the Agency and believed that Member States would be able to meet the challenges 
that lay ahead if they all worked together. It was to be expected that 
the vast majority of Members would fully respect the conventions that had 
enabled the Agency to achieve so much over the years. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 34 


138. Unfortunately, some non-nuclear-weapon States still stood apart from 
the majority and had either not foresworn nuclear explosives or had not 
submitted all of their civil nuclear programmes to IAEA safeguards. One 
of the main challenges over the next decade would be to deal effectively 
with the sense of insecurity and other factors that induced such nations 
to go their separate ways. That would be achieved only if all nations believed 
that they would be treated fairly and objectively in the conduct of IAEA 
matters and that their national self-interest would be satisfied rather 
than the reverse through full participation in the Agency. The United States 
would do what it could to make that possible. 


139. Examination of the accomplishments of the past showed that there were 
ample grounds for optimism about the future. He had already commented upon 
the IAEA's achievements regarding nuclear energy and other beneficial uses 
of nuclear technology. It was also worth remembering that only two decades 
earlier people had been becoming more and more fatalistic about the prospect 
of further proliferation with many nations possessing nuclear weapons. 
140. He believed that it was now clear that the vast majority of nations 
emphatically rejected the acquisition of nuclear explosives and were willing 
to co-operate constructively in reducing incentives to proliferation. His 
Government was, therefore, enthusiastic about the opportunities for peaceful 
uses of the atom and about the future of the Agency, and it viewed the challenges 
the Agency faced as presenting exciting opportunities, as long as all were 
prepared to work together. 

GC(XXVII)/0R.247 
page 35 


141. Mr. YASUTA (Japan) said that his country, as an Asian Member State, 
welcomed the application of the People's Republic of China to join the Agency. 
He firmly believed that China's participation in the Agency's activities would 
enhance the latter's universality and importance, thus enabling it to carry out 
its mission more effectively. 
.142. in order to sustain world economic growth it was necessary to assure the 
supply of energy at an appropriate price and to maintain, in formulating energy 
policies, a balance between ensuring a long-term stable supply of energy and 
introducing economy measures. Despite the temporary decrease in the supply of 
and demand for crude oil, it was essential to develop alternative energy 
sources in general and nuclear energy in particular in order to keep pace with 
long-term increases in energy requirements. 


143. Japan, which had insufficient indigenous energy resources to meet its own 
economic needs, was working ceaselessly to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
144. The development of nuclear energy in Japan had begun at almost the same 
time as the Agency's foundation. It now had 24 commercial nuclear power 
plants in operation with a total generating capacity of approximately 
17.18 million kW of electricity. Nuclear plants therefore accounted for 
approximately 127c of its total electricity generating capacity and about 207o 
of its total electricity supply. In addition to those reactors, 13 nuclear 
power reactors, with a total capacity of 12.9 million kW, were under construction 
and eight additional nuclear power reactors with a total capacity of 
6.33 million kW were planned. 
145. If nuclear power was to play a major role as an energy source, the 
potential energy of uranium had to be exploited to the greatest possible 
extent. In order to pave the way for the use of plutonium, efforts had been 
made in Japan to develop the advanced thermal reactor and the fast breeder 
reactor, and to develop the recycling of plutonium in light-water nuclear 
reactors. 
146. Another important element in the effective use of uranium resources was 
the establishment of a nuclear fuel cycle. The pilot plant at Ningyo-Toge 
had been producing enriched uranium since 1982, thus preparing the ground for 

GC(XXVII)/0R.247 
page 36 


the enrichment of uranium on a commercial scale. Progress had also been made 
towards the construction of a prototype enrichment plant. 


147. With respect to spent-fuel reprocessing, a reprocessing plant had been 
built at Tokai-Mura and preparations were under way for a larger reprocessing 
plant to meet Japan's future domestic needs. 
148. In promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and thus contributing 
to the development of mankind, it was necessary to prevent its diversion for 
military purposes. Here, international co-operation directed towards ensuring 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was essential. 
149. The Non-Proliferation Treaty was an extremely important international 
legal framework for promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy while 
preventing nuclear proliferation. It was pleasing to note that Papua New Guinea, 
Nauru, Viet Nam and Uganda had become parties to the Treaty in 1982. In 1983, 
however, no new countries had joined. He appealed to all countries that had 
not yet joined NPT to do so as soon as possible. 
150. The NPT could not be truly effective until the inequality between nuclearweapon 
States and non-nuclear-weapon States had been corrected. Japan had 
strongly urged all nuclear-weapon States to promote nuclear disarmament and to 
conclude voluntary submission agreements covering their nuclear facilities used 
for peaceful purposes. He sincerely hoped that nuclear-weapon States other 
than the United Kingdom, the United States of America and France would conclude 
agreements as soon as possible. 
151. The Agency's safeguards played a key role in ensuring nuclear non-proliferation, 
while at the same time promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Constant improvements should be made in the safeguards system to enable it to 
keep pace with the latest technological developments. It was a source of 
great satisfaction that the Board of Governors had been discussing the question 
of the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards at a fundamental level ever 
since that question had first arisen. 


152. The Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) was 
conducting a study aimed at establishing more effective safeguards systems, 
taking fully into account the nuclear fuel cycle of each country. He hoped 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 37 


that in 1984 the Board of Governors would give further consideration to that 


matter in the light of the recommendations from SAGSI and the reports of 


various relevant expert groups. 


153. Japan would continue to co-operate with the Agency through the Japan-IAEA 
Joint Committee on Safeguards and various other exchanges, with a view to the 
effective and efficient operation of the safeguards system. 
154. Through its Support Programme for Agency Safeguards (JASPAS) Japan was 
in close co-operation with the Agency in the field of research and development, 
in particular with regard to important facilities such as reprocessing and 
enrichment plants. In that field, too, Japan was determined to intensify 
its co-operation with the Agency. 


155. With the experience and expertise gained by Japan in developing its 
safeguards system, features of which were used by the Agency in applying its 
own safeguards in Japan, it hoped to strengthen its co-operative relationships 
internationally. Japan had recently entered into negotiations with the Agency 
regarding the Facility Attachment for the Ningyo-Toge Uranium Enrichment Pilot 
Plant following the conclusion of the Hexapartite Safeguards Project (HSP) on 
commercial gas uranium enrichment plants. 
156. In order to utilize the Agency's safeguards inspectors effectively and 
efficiently, Japan had agreed to their staying for longer periods of time and 
to a system of rotation among Operations Sections. In that connection, it was 
planned to open an Agency Safeguards Field Office in Tokyo. 
157. While non-proliferation measures played an essential role in the promotion 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, they should not be unnecessarily 
restrictive. Japan, for example, had recently concluded with uranium supplier 
countries nuclear co-operation agreements establishing the predictable and 
comprehensive exercise of the right of prior consent. 
158. Regarding the compatibility of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
nuclear non-proliferation, it was to be hoped that the Board's Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS) would be able in the months to come to continue 
its most constructive and substantive discussions. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 38 


159. Another matter of importance in nuclear energy development was that of 
nuclear safety. Ever since the first commercial nuclear power plant in Japan 
had started operation, in 1968, Japan attached the greatest importance to 
that issue. Since that time, thanks to the authorities' belief that safety 
was a basic prerequisite for the development of nuclear energy, there had not 
been a single accident which had jeopardized the safety of workers or the 
neighbouring public through radiation. His country was determined that 
nuclear power facilities should be made even safer and that operation control 
and supervision be further strengthened. 
160. At the same time, Japan was firmly committed to promoting nuclear safety 
through international co-operation: it participated in the work of the Agency 
and other international organizations on establishing safety standards, and 
was involved in exchanging information with other countries. 
161. The Agency was also playing an important role in nuclear safety by establishing 
radiation safety standards for nuclear facilities and for the transport 
of nuclear material. Moreover, it had taken a useful initiative by setting up 
arrangements for the dispatch of operation review teams to requesting Member States. 
162. The publication of the second IAEA Nuclear Safety Review was highly 
commendable since it helped to improve public understanding of the Agency's 
activities and to promote public acceptance in Member States. 
163. Noting with satisfaction the Agency's work on standards for the ocean 
dumping of radioactive waste and in organizing the International Conference on 
Radioactive Waste Management held in Seattle, he expressed the hope that the 
activities on radioactive waste disposal, especially scientific studies on 
the safety of ocean dumping, would be further developed. 
164. As regards technical co-operation with developing countries, he considered 
that the benefits of the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
should be available equally to all countries in accordance with their science 
and technology policies and energy requirements. In that context, the technical 
assistance provided by the Agency to developing countries was of great 
significance. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 39 


165. Japan would welcome an expansion, on an appropriate scale, in the 
Agency's technical co-operation programme in response to such an appeal by 
developing countries. He wished to express his appreciation to the Board 
and to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee for the technical 
co-operation policy review which they had conducted. 
166. Recognizing the importance of the Agency's activities in that field, 
Japan had always paid its full share of the voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund and would try to do so in future 
in spite of the stringent fiscal situation faced by it. As in the past, it 
would be willing to provide experts, donate equipment and award fellowships, 
and hoped that the potential of those activities would be fully utilized. 
167. Referring to the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA), he noted with 
satisfaction that the RCA projects were being implemented with the active 
participation and co-operation of the RCA member countries. 
168. His country had co-operated in the Food Irradiation Project and the 
UNDP Project on Industrial Applications of Isotopes and Radiation because it 
wanted to help in solving the most important and urgent problems facing the 
participating countries in such fields as food and industry. Japan had 
acted as the host for the regional office of the UNDP Project on Industrial 
Applications until June 1983. Moreover, it had started co-operating in the 
project on the medical and biological applications of nuclear techniques. 
169. He hoped that the RCA activities would be further diversified and strengthened. 
While Japan would continue to support those activities, having regard to 
the financial aspects it attached great importance to the selection of viable 
projects which responded to the needs of recipient countries and in which 
those countries were prepared to co-operate. 
170. Co-operation in the development of human resources was one of the basic 
approaches to assisting developing countries, which principle should be borne 
in mind in promoting further co-operation with those countries. 
171. He felt that establishment of other regional co-operation groups would 
be useful in satisfying the needs of developing countries. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.247 
page 40 


172. Referring to the Agency's budget he pointed out that Japan, like many other 
countries, was facing a very serious financial situation and that for several 
years his Government's general administrative expenditures had been declining 
in real terms. As the difficult financial circumstances in Member States 
limited the human and financial resources available to the Agency, he urged 
both the Secretariat and Member States to continue their efforts to 
restrain budgetary increases, to achieve a balance in allocations and to make 
effective use of the financial resources available. In doing so, it was 
necessary to remember that the main activities - namely, technical co-operation, 
safeguards and safety - should have priority in the allocation of funds and that 
the basic research activities, insofar as they supported those main activities, 
were also important. 


173. In conclusion he observed that in the Agency differences or conflicts of 
interest among Members had never reached the stage of confrontation and that, 
in solving problems, the spirit of co-operation had always prevailed. At a 
time when the Agency was facing so many diverse problems on an unprecedented 
scale, that valuable tradition was its greatest asset. 
174. If the Member States, aware of the fact that the Agency's purpose as an 
international organization was to foster the prosperity and welfare of mankind, 
made a united effort, he had every confidence that the difficulties confronting 
the organization could be overcome and the Agency would serve as a truly 
useful and indispensable instrument for the progress of mankind. 
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
January 1984* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 10 October 19 83, at 3.10 p.m. 
President: Mr. KEBLUSEK (Czechoslovakia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
Election of the Vice-Presidents of 
the General Conference and of the 
Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole; Appointment of the 
General Committee 
General debate and annual report 
for 19 82 (continued) 6-85 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Argentina 
Federal Republic of Germany 
India 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
6-37 
38 - 49 
50 59 
60 - 85 

 A provisional version of this document was issued on 21 October 1983. 


**/ GC(XXVII)/683. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 


84-0082 


010 6E 



GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 2 


ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS OF THE GENERAL CONFERENCE AND OF THE CHAIRMAN 
OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE; APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that under Rules 34 and 40 of its Rules of 
Procedure the General Conference had to elect, on proposals of the President, 
eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and the five 
additional members of the General Committee. He proposed that the provisions 
of Rule 4 0, relating to the election of the additional members of the General 
Committee, be suspended and that instead a total of six additional members be 
elected. 
2. He proposed that the delegates of the following Member States be elected 
as Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: Australia, India, Japan, 
Morocco, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Venezuela. 
3. He further proposed Mr. Ajit Singh, the delegate of Malaysia, as Chairman 
of the Committee of the Whole and the delegates of the following States as 
additional members of the General Committee: Egypt, France, German Democratic 
Republic, Federal Republic of Germany, Iraq and Paraguay. 
4. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
5. The General Committee was thus duly appointed. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 19 82 (GC(XXVII)/684) (continued) 


6. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina) said he first wished to give the 
General Conference an account of developments in the Argentine nuclear 
programme over the last year. 
7. With regard to the generation of electricity of nuclear origin, the 
Atucha I power station had produced 1 553 00 0 MWh in the first eight months of 
1983. Although the load factor had been slightly lower than in previous 
years (79.6%), that had been due not to operating problems but to the fact 
that electricity generation by the major hydroelectric power stations had been 
exceptionally high as a result of very heavy rainfall. The availability 
factor of the nuclear power station for that period had been 92.3%. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 3 


8. The second nuclear power station, Embalse, had gone critical in 
March 1983, and had been connected to the grid the following month. Its 
power level had then been increased gradually, reaching 10 0% in September 1983. 
9. Economic and financial difficulties had delayed other projects which had 
been planned, but none of the objectives had been abandoned. 27.5% of the 
construction work on the third nuclear power station, Atucha II, had been 
completed, which meant that it was eighteen months behind schedule. He 
recalled that the Argentine National Atomic Energy Commission (CNEA), through 
the Argentine Nuclear Power Plant Company (ENACE) (of which it held 7 5% of the 
share capital) had been the architect engineer for Atucha II and was also 
supervising its construction. That nuclear power station, unlike the first 
two, was not being built on the basis of a turnkey contract. The feasibility 
study for a fourth nuclear power station was almost complete. 
10. 75.4% of the building of the Arroyito heavy-water plant, with a design 
capacity of 250 tonnes a year and based on Swiss technology, had been 
completed and the plant was due to be completed at the end of 19 85. The 
pilot heavy-water plant, built without foreign technical assistance, was to be 
finished by the end of 19 84. 
11. The fuel element fabrication plant inaugurated in 1982 and operated by a 
joint company with minority CNEA participation was providing a regular supply 
of fuel for the Atucha I power station. The CNEA had also developed, without 
foreign aid, fuel elements intended for the Embalse power station, where the 
first prototypes would be used in a few months' time. It was also continuing 
to develop fuel elements needed for Atucha II when it became operational. 
Thus, the fuel elements for Argentina's nuclear power stations would all be 
produced domestically. Another joint company was being formed to operate the 
plant manufacturing the special alloys for the Ezeiza atomic centre currently 
being built. 
12. In November 19 82 a production plant for sinterable uranium dioxide of 
nuclear grade had gone into operation: consequently, Argentina now possessed 
all the facilities for the front end of the fuel cycle. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 4 


13. With regard to the back end of the fuel cycle, work was continuing on the 
construction of a fuel reprocessing plant due to begin trial operation in 
1985, and full-scale operation in 1986. 
14. In the field of research and development, the RA-6 training and research 
reactor had gone into operation, at the Bariloche Atomic Centre, in October 
1982; it was entirely of Argentine design and 95% of it had been built in 
Argentina. Construction of a 20-MeV tandem accelerator had also been 
completed and tests conducted had proved very satisfactory. The accelerator 
was due to begin operation at the end of the year. 
15. Argentina had also been very active in the field of international 
co-operation for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, at both the multilateral 
and the bilateral level. 
16. Within the Agency, Argentina had, despite its financial difficulties, not 
only maintained but increased its involvement in the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme, through fellowships, training courses and missions by 
experts, without any imposed conditions or discrimination. Mention should 
also be made of the holding, in collaboration with the Agency, of the 
interregional course on radiological protection and nuclear safety, which had 
been attended by 18 fellows from Latin America and other areas. Argentina 
had, moreover, undertaken to organize in 1984, again in collaboration with the 
Agency, an interregional course on energy planning. 
17. In addition, the Argentine Government had pledged a voluntary 
contribution in national currency equivalent to Argentina's calculated share 
of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1984. 
18. Within the Organization of American States (OAS), the Argentine 
Government had pursued its active support of the Inter-American Nuclear Energy 
Commission (IANEC) by following up the offers it had made to it during the 
Commission's twelth regular session in 1981. His country had also 
participated actively, at Havana in April, in the second regular meeting of 
the Group of Non-Aligned Co-ordinating Countries. 
19. Argentina had also taken part in the work of the Preparatory Committee of 
the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation 
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy for Economic and Social Development. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
paqe 5 

He hoped that certain supplier countries would abandon their attempts to 
exploit that conference in order to strengthen their political, technoloqical 
and trade monopoly in nuclear energy, under the pretext of avoiding horizontal 
proliferation, and that they would not deflect it from the aims with which it 
had been planned: to increase transparency in technological exchange and to 
guarantee security of supply in the nuclear field. 


20. On a bilateral level, Argentina had co-operated with many countries, 
particularly in Latin America, under the 16 bilateral agreements to which it 
was party. It was encouraging to see, in particular, the progress made in 
building the Huarangal nuclear research centre, in which Argentina was 
collaborating with the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute (IPEN) and which was 
due to be completed in 1985. He also welcomed the results of Argentina's 
co-operation with Brazil, Colombia, Uruguay and the Federal Republic of 
Germany, which would be increased still further. Furthermore, the negotiation 
of four new co-operative agreements with countries in different geographical 
regions was well advanced. 
21. Argentina, which was participating unreservedly in world-wide efforts to 
avoid both horizontal and vertical nuclear proliferation, believed that the 
best way of avoiding nuclear proliferation was to intensify international 
co-operation through technology transfer without discriminatory conditions and 
linked with safeguards on what was transferred. It also believed that the 
Agency's safeguards system was the appropriate means for ensuring 
non-proliferation. The transfer, under safeguards, of technology and material 
led naturally and smoothly to the establishment of a monitoring system which 
would gradually cover all facilities of countries with nuclear programmes and 
would also ensure the transparency necessary to guarantee the use of nuclear 
energy for exclusively peaceful purposes. All attempts to impose additional 
conditions unilaterally (for example, attempts to restrict the transfer of 
technology in certain areas, tendentiously called "sensitive areas", or to 
insist on "prior consent") introduced an aggravating note of discrimination. 
His country was convinced that the question of non-proliferation safeguards 
could not be divorced from that of the security of nuclear supplies. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 6 


22. A co-operation agreement with Chile had been ratified on 1 September 
198 3. The entry into force of that agreement and the satisfactory results of 
the assessment of co-operation between Argentina and Brazil belied all 
malicious rumours regarding an alleged nuclear arms race in the south of the 
continent. 
23. Negotiations with the Secretariat to finalize a safeguards agreement 
under Article 13 of the Tlatelolco Treaty were continuing. The Argentine 
delegation was convinced that those negotiations could be concluded, provided 
that the principles which it stood for were duly respected. 
24. He recalled that in 1982 the Board of Governors had unanimously approved 
a request by the Argentine Government that the Secretariat should look into 
the extent to which certain safeguards agreements concluded by the Agency were 
compatible with its Statute. 
25. The Secretariat's study (GOV/INF/433), despite its superficial nature and 
its deficiencies, contained some significant points with regard to the 
Agency's safeguards system. It could be concluded from that study that 
although a safeguards agreement had to satisfy the Statute requirement 
regarding "the peaceful use of items while they are under safeguards", the 
other conditions, in particular those concerning the lifting of safeguards, 
their non-application and their duration, could legitimately be negotiated by 
States voluntarily submitting their facilities or nuclear material to the 
Agency's safeguards system; such States did not necessarily have to abide by 
the two model agreements in force (INPCIRC/66/Rev.2 and INFCIRC/153), nor did 
they have to adhere to agreements based on offers of voluntary submission 
already concluded by the Agency with different nuclear Powers. Consequently, 
any State which decided in the future to submit its facilities or nuclear 
material to Agency safeguards on a voluntary basis would enjoy that right. 
26. In the absence of any clear response by the Agency, the conclusion had to 
be drawn that the nuclear propulsion of warships constituted a permissible 
military application, compatible with the commitments of States as Members of 
the Agency. All States which used nuclear energy for peaceful purposes should 
draw the obvious conclusions. 
2 7. Reviewing the Agency's activities since the previous session of the 
General Conference, he expressed his satisfaction at what had been done to 
make the most of limited technical co-operation resources: multi-year 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 7 


programming, over-programming, the prior and subsequent evaluation of 
projects, the encouragement of co-operation between developing countries and 
of regional co-operation, and dynamic programming. 


28. The maintaining in force of the Revised Guiding Principles and General 
Operating Rules for the Provision of Technical Assistance by the Agency was to 
be deplored, as they imposed political conditions which were so unacceptable 
that some Member States with significant nuclear programmes had decided to 
stop requesting Agency assistance. The Argentine delegation also disapproved 
of the conditions imposed for the use of certain extrabudgetary funds for 
technical assistance, which it believed to constitute a violation of the 
spirit of the Statute. On the other hand, it welcomed the fact that during 
that year there had once again been no evidence of any failure by Member 
States to fulfil undertakings made to the Agency. 
29. As his delgation had told the Board of Governors, it was vital to 
increase the internal transparency of the safeguards system. To that end, it 
was necessary that the Members of the Agency and, in particular, the Board of 
Governors, be kept fully informed of the way in which the safeguards system 
operated. That condition was essential for the external transparency which 
had been called for by various Member States. 
30. The Argentine delegation also felt that the Board of Governors should not 
simply "take note" of the considerations and opinions which the Secretariat 
submitted to it, but should, on the contrary, express its own opinion and lay 
down the rules by which the Secretariat should abide. 
31. He re-emphasized the need to take steps to guarantee the confidentiality 
of information given to the Secretariat. 
32. A positive note to be observed with regard to Agency safeguards was that 
several Member States had abandoned their stance of the past few years and no 
longer discriminated between safeguards inspectors according to whether or not 
their country of origin was party to a particular international treaty; 
regrettably, one Member State still maintained its negative attitude. Lastly, 
Argentina had agreed to open the Embalse nuclear power station to routine 
inspections, even before the conclusion of negotiations on subsidiary 
arrangements to the relevant safeguards agreement. It had also agreed to 
conditions for implementing a programme of tests for a containment and 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 8 


surveillance system at that nuclear power station. Finally, it had 
voluntarily submitted to Agency safeguards 7088 kilograms of heavy water which 


it had acquired in 19 72 without such conditions. 


33. With regard to the final report of the Expert Group on International 
Plutonium Storage, he wished to recall the view already expressed by his 
delegation in the Board of Governors: the way in which the Group had worked 
and the results obtained were an obvious example of a badly designed project 
whose objectives had not been clearly defined. The large amount of money 
spent on it and the efforts made during four years had not yielded any 
positive results. That was why three interpretations of paragraph A.5 of 
Article XII of the Agency's Statute had been proposed. Yet it would not be 
difficult to establish an adequate mechanism for depositing surplus plutonium 
with the Agency and for returning it promptly for use when required. 
Argentina believed that only proposal B was practical, realistic and in line 
with the commitments made by Agency Members. In any case, it was legitimate 
to ask whether so much effort was justified in view of the small quantities of 
plutonium placed or likely to be placed under safeguards in the near future. 
34. The work of the Expert Group on International Spent Fuel Management, on 
the other hand, deserved praise. The document submitted was clear and showed 
the efforts made to place the problem in its true perspective. The Expert 
Group had tried to define possible practical solutions. Since the question 
was important only in certain very specific cases, those practical solutions 
could, for technical and economic reasons, only be formulated in detail by 
those faced with the problem. The Agency could play a very useful role in 
gathering information, making recommendations and promoting dialogue between 
all those concerned. 
35. The Agency's nuclear safety and radiological safety programme was 
remarkable. Implementation of the criteria set forth in the Basic Safety 
Standards for Radiation Protection and in the relevant codes of practice and 
guides was of obvious interest in protecting the quality of life and 
eliminating non-quantifiable risks. Argentina was therefore convinced that 
all countries, whether developed or developing, should support those 
activities of the Agency. The proposal to formulate recommendations at the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 9 


international level regarding nuclear safety should be studied closely. In 
embarking on that new task, account should be taken of the experience gained 
in the neighbouring field of radiological protection. The results obtained in 
that respect by the International Commission on Radiological Protection 
(ICRP), independently of any outside influence and bureaucratic hindrance, 
demonstrated the effectiveness of that approach. 


36. The Agency had also undertaken to promote international co-operation in 
the event of emergencies. Such collaboration would be valuable but it was 
essential to be realistic: such collaboration could never be a substitute for 
sound national organization nor for the proper training of staff responsible 
for the operation of nuclear facilities. International co-operation could 
only serve as a back-up. 
37. His delegation also wished to mention the very good results achieved in 
other areas of the Agency's activities, especially food and agriculture, 
biological and physical sciences, and the work of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics. In that connection he expressed his delegation's concern 
at the fact that some of those programmes, which were of a promotional nature, 
continued to dwindle in real terms when they were in fact a very useful form 
of technical assistance for developing countries. Whilst it was true that the 
Agency's budget had to be kept as tight as possible, it was the safeguards 
programme where economies should be made: it would be possible, for example, 
to abolish expenses incurred in applying safeguards to materials and 
facilities used for peaceful purposes in nuclear-weapon States. The present 
level of the promotional programmes which he had mentioned could then at least 
be maintained. 
38. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) said that since the 
previous session of the General Conference world nuclear energy production had 
made further headway and now accounted for 10% of the total production of 
electricity. Nuclear energy had thus demonstrated once again that, despite 
changing energy scenarios, it was capable of steadily being integrated into 
the world energy market. That trend could be expected to become more marked, 
and the Agency should pursue the successful efforts that it was making to 
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 10 


39. In the Federal Republic of Germany, the construction of nuclear power 
plants and fuel cycle technology had made great advances, which was an 
indication, in some cases, of a reversion to the normal situation after a 
period of uncertainty and delay. In 1982, total nuclear generating capacity 
had reached 10 400 MW(e), with nuclear energy accounting for 17% of the total 
electricity produced. Twelve power plants were currently under construction 
and the installed nuclear capacity would pass the 24 000 MW(e) mark by 1990. 
The last three projects, launched in 1982, were based on a standardized design 
and a streamlined licensing procedure. Again, in 1982, the Government had 
decided, despite a considerable increase in cost, to continue building 
the 300-MW(e) prototype power stations with a high-temperature reactor (HTR) 
and a fast breeder after the possibilities that such reactors could offer in 
the long term had been thoroughly re-assessed. It had proved possible to 
adopt that decision in view of the fact that the manufacturing industry and 
the utilities had agreed to increase significantly their financial 
contribution, amounting now to 17% for the HTR and 2 8% for the fast breeder, 
thereby demonstrating their confidence in the future of those advanced reactor 
types. 
40. The past year had also been marked by an upswing in European co-operation 
in breeder development. The close collaboration between industries, utilities 
and research centres in France, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands and the 
Federal Republic of Germany, which had been going on successfully for a number 
of years, would now be extended to cover the United Kingdom and thereby 
reinforced. 
41. Headway had also been made in the nuclear fuel cycle. The first 
centrifuge enrichment plant of the trilateral enterprise URENCO was being 
built in the Federal Republic of Germany and a storage centre for spent fuel 
would start operation in the immediate future. Preparations for the 
construction of a reprocessing plant were advancing; the decision where to 
site it - in Bavaria or Lower Saxony - would be taken in 1984. The 
construction at Mol (Belgium) of a demonstration plant for the vitrification 
of high-level waste, based on a German design, was proceeding according to 
plan. The creation of nuclear waste depositories in a former iron ore mine 
and in a former salt mine was also progressing well. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 11 


42. His delegation welcomed the decision taken by the People's Republic of 
China to join the Agency; that step would reinforce the Agency's international 
role and universal status. 
43. Turning to the Agency's activities, he recalled that, in the view of his 
country, the Agency's safeguards system was an essential element of 
non-proliferation policy. Despite occasional growing pains, the system was 
rapidly being adapted to handle the increasing number of nuclear facilities; 
the Board of Governors was currently discussing ways in which it could improve 
not only the effectiveness, but also the efficiency of safeguards. Since a 
large part of the Agency's inspection effort was spent in the Federal Republic 
of Germany, his country was in a position to contribute to the discussions by 
virtue of its practical experience in that field, which, just as in the case 
of other EURATOM Member States, involved co-operation between two 
independently international inspectorates. 
44. It was heartening to see that in 1982 there had been no diversion of a 
significant quantity of nuclear material. Furthermore, the conclusion of the 
"hexapartite" discussions regarding the proper safeguards approved for 
centrifuge enrichment plants had shown that the system could also cope with 
the complex problems raised by a full-scale nuclear fuel cycle. The Federal 
Republic of Germany welcomed, once again, the Soviet Union's intention to 
place some of its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards and he hoped that 
an agreement to that effect would shortly be concluded between the Soviet 
Union and the Agency. 
45. Like some other Member States, his country had concluded an agreement 
with the Agency for the implementation of a safeguards support programme. In 
the same spirit it was conducting, together with the Agency, a programme for 
training experts from developing countries in the safeguards field. 
46. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had been meeting for three 
years; a great deal of time and effort was required to reach a consensus, but 
CAS, which was the only international forum with the task of formulating 
general rules to govern international nuclear co-operation, should keep up its 
efforts. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 12 


4 7. During the second International Conference on Technology Transfer, held 
in November 198 2, he had been struck by the importance that developing 
countries attached to nuclear energy and to bilateral and multilateral 
co-operation in that field. On that occasion a large number of delegations 
had paid tribute to the Agency which, through its technical co-operation 
programme, had helped Member States to put their nuclear programmes into 
effect. For its part, his country was happy to see that the technical 
co-operation programme had been consolidated, streamlined and expanded. 
Considering the budgetary austerity prevailing at the present time in numerous 
Member States, an increase in 1983 of some 50% in the activities geared to the 
developing countries was quite remarkable. The Federal Republic of Germany, 
moreover, had been able to make a further contribution of some size to the 
Agency's programme. Subject to approval by Parliament, it was willing to 
continue its support by contributing to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund and by making additional aid available in the form of 
fellowships, experts and equipment, training courses, scientific meetings and 
co-ordinated research programmes. The proposal to undertake a study on small 
and medium power reactors was a good illustration of the way in which the 
Agency's experience and the know-how of its Member States could be pooled in 
order to benefit decision-makers, more especially in the developing countries. 
48. Nuclear safety should continue to play an important role in the Agency's 
activities. The presentation of the Nuclear Safety Review was now 
satisfactory and enabled the Agency to describe and explain its activities and 
to circulate information on programmes in Agency Member States and in 
international organizations. Furthermore, the gradual introduction of an 
incident reporting system was a step in the right direction? it should 
facilitate the reciprocal exchange of information. Close co-operation with 
the Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD), which itself possessed a reporting system, 
should make it possible to avoid duplication. With regard to the proposal to 
set up a new, high-level commission on nuclear safety, his delegation was not 
convinced - in view of the manifold existing international bodies and efforts 
in that field - that there was a real demand for such a new group. 
49. Close international co-operation was essential if all countries were to 
benefit from the advantages of nuclear energy. At the same time, firm 
international commitments had been made as a guarantee to the international 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 13 


community that nuclear energy would be used only for peaceful purposes. 
The Agency was playing a central role in the operation and development of 
that complex network and would only be able to discharge that function in 
a spirit of co-operation and mutual trust. The Federal Republic of 
Germany was sure that a spirit of that kind would prevail and it would 
continue to support the Secretariat in all its efforts to attain that 
goal. 


50. Mr. RAMANNA (India) said he wished to associate himself with the 
ideas expressed by the Director General, who had identified several fields in 
which co-operation between Governments was necessary - for example, nuclear 
safety and the development of generic criteria for the safe disposal of 
wastes. International assurances against attacks on nuclear facilities in 
particular were a matter which the Agency could look into. The support given 
by India to the Agency's promotional activities in developing countries had 
taken the form of additional contributions for activities undertaken within 
the framework of the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) of particular 
interest to countries in the region of Asia and the Pacific. He had pleasure 
in announcing that his country would pay its full share - US $81 000 - of the 
target fixed for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1984 in 
order to help ensure that the Secretariat had funds available for continuing 
its good work. 
51. With regard to the admission of China to the Agency, the Indian 
representative at the plenary meeting of the conference on the Statute had 
pointed out that the Agency could not and should not ignore the existence of a 
quarter of the world's population; he welcomed China's membership, which would 
certainly serve to make the Agency a more representative body. 
52. The adoption of the Agency's Statute and all that it implied could not be 
wished away or forgotten. As all were aware, India had taken an interest in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy from the very beginning, long before most 
developing or even some developed countries. Nuclear energy represented for a 
country the size of India a prime method of meeting the energy needs of 
industry and the economy, which were rapidly expanding. The first unit of the 
Madras Atomic Power Project, indigenously designed and constructed, had gone 
into service in July 1982 and would shortly attain full power. Five 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 14 


similar units were currently under construction. It was India's aim to have 
by the year 2000, nuclear power plants with a total capacity of 10 000 MW(e), 
or 10% of the country's total installed electricity-generating capacity. 
A thermal research reactor of 100 MW, entirely indigenous in design and 
construction, was to be put into service early next year. It would be used 
for basic and applied research work and the production of radioisotopes. 
A low-energy research reactor operating on uranium-233 and built under the 
thorium utilization programme would also be operational within a year. Fuel 
from the Rajasthan Atomic Power Station had been reprocessed in the presence 
of Agency inspectors and the system had operated satisfactorily. The fast 
breeder test reactor in Kalpakkam was expected to be ready next year. India 
thus possessed the industrial and technological base required to sustain and 
support the entire fuel cycle for all peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


53. The development of the national nuclear power programme had been positive 
despite the international climate. But India had been exposed more and more 
to regrettable restrictive and discriminatory policies pursued by major 
suppliers of nuclear material and equipment. Policies discriminating between 
countries seemed to have become common although they ran counter to the norms 
of international trade and behaviour. Nuclear technology and nuclear 
materials were being denied to countries with a proven record of 
self-restraint and dedication to the purely peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
while countries - like South Africa - which were flouting all United Nations 
resolutions got all the support they wanted from a variety of countries. 
54. His delegation was hard put to understand the restrictions imposed on his 
country, which had consciously decided to use nuclear energy for solely 
peaceful purposes - a voluntary decision and commitment by which it was 
consistently abiding. Recent examples of retransfers showed that the supply 
of sensitive materials was possible when the political will was present. The 
discriminatory restrictions applied to certain countries had merely forced 
them to rely on themselves, even when such materials or technology were 
internationally available. 
5 5. The Agency could not - and did not - remain insulated from the realities 
of international life. The voluntary renunciation by non-nuclear-weapon 
States of part of their sovereignty, as embodied in the safeguards agreements 
concluded with the Agency, had not in practice been matched by the nuclear 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 15 


supplies and international co-operation promised in return. Many provisions 
of the Agency's Statute, such as Article IX, remained mere words. The 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was trying, as best it could, to reach 
a consensus on principles of international co-operation which could serve as a 
basis for assuring nuclear supplies. It was within that context that the idea 
of a United Nations conference to promote international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy had attracted so much attention throughout the 
world. India hoped that that conference, held at a favourable moment, would 


indeed promote international co-operation, but it understood that efforts were 
being made, outside the Agency, to further restrict international co-operation 
and trade in the nuclear field. 


56. The Agency's annual report for 1982 showed that 98% of the nuclear power 
plants of non-nuclear-weapon States were under Agency safeguards. It omitted 
to mention, however, that those facilities only represented a small proportion 
of all the nuclear plants existing in the world. Safeguards were applied 
under so-called "voluntary offer" agreements to the facilities of States which 
manufactured and deployed nuclear weapons. The nature of those safeguards and 
their application were limited. They were therefore meaningless and 
irrelevant to the prevention of the real and actual proliferation of nuclear 
weapons still carried out by those States. The nuclear-weapon States had in 
1983 alone conducted over 30 nuclear tests. In one particular case six tests 
had taken place one after the other on the same day. One could only hope that 
the nuclear explosions involved were peaceful, and it would be useful if the 
experience thereby acquired could be shared on an international basis. As the 
Director General had said. Agency safeguards could play a part in preventing 
vertical proliferation, and the Indian delegation believed that the 
non-aligned countries should encourage him in those efforts. He would like to 
see signs of the same idealism in Secretariat documents such as the annual 
report and the Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR). India, for its own 
part, had made known its views on those documents in the Board of Governors. 
57. It should be recalled that, back in 1956, one of the founding fathers of 
the Agency, Dr. Homi Bhabha, had expressed certain apprehensions in the 
context of nuclear power promotion which, unfortunately, had proved to be 
justified. Some countries even believed that those apprehensions had been 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
paqe 16 


increased by the haves, who wanted to continue controlling, even exploiting, 
the have-nots. Fissionable material might be the life-blood of a country's 
future economy and the withholding of such material by mechanisms such as 
those proposed for international plutonium storage and control could easily 
halt the economy of such a country and expose it to all manner of pressures. 


58. Not to be overlooked in that regard was the fact that many Asian and 
African countries had gained the impression, during colonial rule, that the 
role assigned to them was simply one of providing raw materials; former 
colonial powers had felt that industrial production was beyond the capacity of 
those countries. Underestimating the capacity of countries was fraught with 
risks; there were several examples of countries once considered to be 
incapable which had been able to prove the opposite. If nuclear supplies were 
hampered by unduly onerous conditions, countries would be forced to develop 
their own capabilities and might be tempted to abandon their self-imposed 
restraints. 
59. Referring in conclusion to a speech made by Mrs. Indira Gandhi, the 
Indian Prime Minister, at the recent opening of the World Energy Conference in 
New Delhi, he recalled that Dr. Bhabha had pointed out, three decades 
previously, that India could not continue to remain dependent on the expansion 
of hydroelectric and thermal energy sources. He had initiated at that time a 
nuclear energy programme, but it had met with opposition from numerous 
countries which had claimed that his approach was an imprudent and impractical 
one. The opposition continued and the obstacles were considerable, but in the 
meantime India had learned to design, fabricate and build nuclear power plants 
by itself. India was turning to science as a way out of its economic 
backwardness and it would not give up any means that helped to achieve that 
aim. Its nuclear programme had no military objective; it was dictated by the 
needs of the country's development; it dealt with agriculture and medical 
applications of nuclear energy and was aimed at meeting the country's energy 
requirements. India was opposed to nuclear weapons and had none of its own. 
60. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) pointed out 
that the General Conference was meeting at a time when the international 
situation had clearly deteriorated and when the threat of a nuclear war with 
catastrophic consequences for all States had increased. The situation had 
become worse because those who sought to inflame the international atmosphere 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 17 


in order to satisfy their ambitions had stepped up their activities. The arms 


race had now reached an unprecedented level as a result of the policy and 
actions of Western imperialist forces. Programmes for the production and 
deployment of new strategic nuclear weapons were being put into effect and 
military space systems able to strike targets both in space and on the ground 
had been developed. Activities aimed at the deployment of new American 
medium-range nuclear missiles were being stepped up in Western Europe. 


61. All the countries of the world were faced with a task of extreme 
urgency - to prevent a further deterioration of the international political 
climate, to avoid being dragged into a nuclear catastrophe, to check the 
unrestrained nuclear arms race and to bring the world back onto the path of 
detente. The proposals made by the Member States of the Warsaw Pact, the new 
and important Soviet initiatives put forward by Mr. Andropov, 
Secretary-General of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, 
and the proposals made by the Soviet Union for the condemnation of nuclear war 
and the freezing of nuclear weapons, made at the thirty-eighth session of the 
United Nations General Assembly, were aimed at dealing with those vitally 
important problems. 
62. Another issue had given rise to a Soviet proposal in the United Nations: 
the Soviet Union had suggested that further efforts be made to diminish the 
threat of a nuclear war and to ensure the safe development of nuclear energy 
so as to prevent any attack on civil nuclear facilities. There was no doubt 
that the proposal was a timely one. According to data provided by the Agency, 
by the end of 1982 there were already 297 nuclear power plants in operation in 
the world, representing a total generating capacity of 175 GW, and the number 
of nuclear plants, research reactors and other nuclear fuel cycle facilities 
was on the increase. The destruction of such facilities, however, could have 
catastrophic consequences. 
63. It was clear that genuine international co-operation in the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy could only develop in circumstances likely to prevent a 
nuclear war, to limit the arms race, especially in the case of nuclear 
weapons, and to re-create and reinforce mutual trust among States. The 
Agency, for its part, would have to help find a constructive solution to those 
problems. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 18 


64. He was happy to note that the main concern of the Agency was still the 
aim of fruitful co-operation between States in the sphere of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. For its part, the Soviet Union would continue to do 
everything in its power to maintain a normal working atmosphere within the 
Agency so that the responsibilities incumbent upon it could be successfully 
discharged. 
6 5. His delegation was in favour of strengthening international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, which could not be a channel for the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, and highly appreciated the part played by 
the Agency in international efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction. The Agency would have to be successful in the conduct of 
its non-proliferation activities if it wished to fulfil its mission of 
promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy in Member States. 
66. The Soviet Union assigned great importance to the Agency's safeguards 
system - a basic area of Agency activities promoting the non-proliferation 
regime. With the development of nuclear activities throughout the world and 
the emergence in a large number of countries of new fuel cycle facilities, it 
was essential to continue developing the whole of the Agency's safeguards 
system in order to make it more effective and to see that inspection efforts 
provided full coverage of the nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon 
States. There was need to further improve the organization of the Department 
of Safeguards - and especially to pay greater attention to inspection 
activities, to make better use of equipment and personnel, to optimize the 
choice of inspection goals, and to ensure improved co-ordination in safeguards 
support activities. In view of the Agency's limited resources, it should 
focus its efforts on the "sensitive" stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
67. Anxious to improve the authority and credibility of the Agency and its 
safeguards system, the Soviet Union had offered, as a gesture of goodwill, to 
place under Agency safeguards part of its peaceful nuclear activities namely, 
a number of nuclear power plants and research reactors. Two rounds of 
negotiations between the Soviet Union and the Agency had already taken place, 
in a very constructive atmosphere. The Soviet Union's decision would help to 
improve the effectiveness of Agency safeguards and to build up trust between 
States. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 19 


68. The Soviet Union was continuing its programme of support for Agency 
safeguards - in the past year, the support work of Soviet scientific organizations 
and research institutes had been worth about one million roubles. It 
had presented the Agency with 500 kg of heavy water for research in the 
safeguards field. Each year Agency specialists underwent training at Soviet 
nuclear facilities. 
69. The Soviet Union was also actively supporting other Agency activities 
related to non-proliferation. It was taking part, for example, in the 
conceptual studies of international and regional nuclear fuel cycle centres, 
especially international storage facilities for plutonium and irradiated 
fuel. That useful work should continue with a view to achieving a consensus 
on practical arrangements. 
70. His delegation commended the Agency on its efforts in connection with the 
drafting of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, 
which was now open for signature, and hoped that the Convention would enter 
into force soon, since its application would help to strengthen the 
non-proliferation regime. States which had not yet ratified the Convention 
should do so without delay, especially States which were engaged in the 
international transport of nuclear materials or through whose territory such 
transport was effected. 
71. In the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), his country was 
advocating an international system of assured supplies which would be 
co-ordinated with non-proliferation efforts. The Committee had made some 
headway at its last session, an agreement having been concluded on the 
Agency's role in implementing an emergency and back-up mechanism. He hoped 
that the Committee would be successful in discharging the functions assigned 
to it. 
72. The General Conference was meeting at a time when a large number of 
Member States of the Agency were making preparations for the NPT Review 
Conference scheduled for 19 85. He hoped that the Agency would once again 
assist with the preparations and the holding of that important meeting, the 
success of which would strengthen the non-proliferation regime and help to 
improve the effectiveness of the Agency's activities. 

GC (XXVII)/OR.248 
page 20 


7 3. The Agency Secretariat had recently started on a new task - the 
preparation of the draft programme for 198 5-1990. His country was convinced 
that the Secretariat should be guided in its work by the need to devise 
programmes presenting the greatest value to Member States. 
74. The main scientific and technical activities of the Agency were keyed to 
problems connected with the development of nuclear energy. The importance of 
those activities was increasing with the increasingly important role being 
played by nuclear energy in the present world. The problems concerned were 
extremely varied, relating as they did to the technology of power reactors, 
the use of low-temperature heat from nuclear plants, the economics of nuclear 
energy and its fuel cycle, the technology of reactor fuel fabrication, spent 
fuel management, and the handling and disposal of radioactive wastes. 
75. The Soviet Union supported the work of the Agency in those fields, the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS) and the co-operation 
encouraged by the Agency in the field of nuclear data. Those activities were 
of great importance not only for the development of nuclear power, but also 
for other peaceful uses of nuclear energy in all Member States. 
76. The Soviet Union actively supported the Agency's activities in the area 
of nuclear fusion. As was known, it was the Soviet Union which had taken the 
initiative in the case of the INTOR project. The INTOR working group had 
completed the conceptual design phase and a report on that phase had been 
prepared. The important results obtained fully justified the efforts devoted 
by the participating countries and by the Agency to the INTOR project. The 
work could now be stepped up and, more important, future deadlines and phases 
could be defined more clearly. His country was convinced that thermonuclear 
fusion would take its rightful place in the Agency's new programme. 
77. More stress would have to be given in the Agency's draft programme to 
forecasting the development of nuclear power generation and defining its 
optimal structure. There was a need to analyse the extent to which it was 
possible to improve the technical and economic characteristics of nuclear 
power plants, to develop reactors on the basis of new physical and 
technological concepts, and to introduce new techniques for utilizing nuclear 
energy sources. 

GC (XXVII) /OR.248 
page 21 


78. Among the Agency's scientific and technical programmes the one relating 
to the safety of nuclear facilities, more especially power plants, was 
particularly significant. He favoured the establishment within the Agency of 
a system for reporting incidents that occurred at nuclear power plants. It 
would enable international experience in the operation of nuclear power plants 
to be analysed and utilized in a more effective manner. 
79. The technical assistance and co-operation programme occupied a special 
place in the Agency's activities. The Soviet Union considered it of great 
importance and believed that its main objectives were to assist in training 
national specialists and in promoting scientific research in developing 
countries. The Agency's activities in that area responded to those 
objectives. The practice of fixing a target for the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund, established in accordance with decisions taken by the 
General Conference, provided for a considerable planned increase in the 
resources. Special contributions were also becoming more and more important. 
In view of the importance of such activities for developing Member States, the 
Soviet Union wished to confirm its agreement to the target for the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1984 being set at $22.5 million, on the 
assumption, of course, that the principle of voluntary contributions in 
national currency remained unchanged. In line with the policy that it still 
pursued in the matter of co-operation with developing countries, the Soviet 
Union had decided to raise its voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1984 to 1.9 million roubles. Those 
resources would be used to finance the supply of equipment and instrumentation 
and also for training courses and study tours in the USSR. In 1984 and 1985 
the Soviet Union would also earmark 1 million roubles for financing 
footnote a/ projects. That should be regarded as a form of additional 
assistance, through the Agency, to non-nuclear-weapon States party to NPT. 
Furthermore, his country would be providing 140 000 roubles in 1984 and 198 5 
for individual training for specialists from developing countries. 
80. At the Agency's Conference on Nuclear Power Experience in 1982 detailed 
reports had been given on the status of, and outlook for, the development of 
nuclear energy in the USSR; during the brief period that had elapsed since 
then, however, the Soviet nuclear industry had made further progress. The 
installed capacity of nuclear power plants had risen by 13%. New units 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 22 


were under construction at 20 sites and the first unit of the Ignalinsk power 
station, which - with a capacity of 1500 MW(e) - would be the biggest reactor 
in the world, was just about to be completed. The total electricity output of 
the country in 198 5, i.e. by the end of the eleventh Five-Year Plan for 
economic development, would rise to 1 555 000 million kWh/a, of which 
220 000 million kWh (about 14%) would be accounted for by nuclear energy; the 
percentage for the European part of the country would be as high as 20%. The 
rate at which nuclear power plants were being commissioned was already 


2.5 times higher than for fossil fuel power stations. Between now and 1985 
the pace would be stepped up even more and almost all (98%) of the increase in 
electricity demand in the European part of the USSR would be met by nuclear 
energy. The commonest reactors in the Soviet Union were thermal PWRs and 
uranium-graphite pressure tube reactors. It should be noted that the Soviet 
Union was the only country in the world where three power plants with fast 
reactors (BOR-60, BN-350 and BN-600) were in operation. The BN-600 plant was 
at present the biggest in the world, having a fast neutron reactor with a 
capacity of 600 000 kW(e). 
81. Long-term plans for the construction of nuclear power plants intended for 
district heating had been drawn up. The construction of the two first pilot 
plants, at Gorky and Voronezh, was actively under way. According to general 
estimates, nuclear plants were safer than plants using fossil fuels. At the 
1982 Conference in Vienna, representatives of countries operating nuclear 
power plants built with the aid of the Soviet Union had confirmed in their 
reports the reliability and safety of such plants. His country had set up a 
State Committee for the supervision of safety in the nuclear power industry, 
with the task of maintaining the existing level of safety at a time of 
expansion in the construction and operation of nuclear power plants. 
82. Within the framework of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) 
the socialist countries were putting into effect an ambitious programme for 
the construction of nuclear power plants, based on an unprecedented degree of 
international co-operation in the production of equipment, components and 
instrumentation. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.248 
page 2 3 


83. The Soviet Union was continuing to promote the use of nuclear techniques 
in various branches of the national economy and science. It was happy to 
share its knowledge and experience in that field with all interested 
countries, particularly through the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
84. The Soviet Union welcomed the admission of the People's Republic of China 
to the Agency and hoped that, by taking an active part in the Agency's 
activities in accordance with the high principles of the Statute, China would 
help the Agency to discharge its functions in an effective manner. 
8 5. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation wished to join other delegations 
which had expressed appreciation of the Agency's annual report for 1982. He 
was sure that the Agency would remain a reliable instrument in the service of 
the development of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy while continuing to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
The meeting rose at 5.5 p.m. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
January 1984* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Tuesday, 11 October 1983, at 10.20 a.m. 


President: MR. KEBLUSEK (Czechoslovakia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
Paragraphs 
agenda** 


4 
Arrangements for the Conference 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
of items for initial discussion 1 -6 
(b) Closing date of the session and 
opening date of the next session 7 -8 


5 Application for membership of the Agency 9 - 10 


(a) Application by the People's Republic 
of China 11 - 31 
6 
Voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1984 32 


7 General debate and annual report for 1982 
Statements by the delegates of: 


Italy 33 -60 
France 61 -93 
Belgium 94 -102 
Iraq 103 -112 
Denmark 113 -126 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 14 October 1983. 
**/ GC(XVII)/700. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 


84-0087 



GC(XXVII)/0R.249 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXVIl)/683 and Add.1 and 2) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee, at 
its meeting the previous day, had authorized him to report on the result of its 
consideration of the agenda and the allocation of items for initial discussion. 
The General Committee recommended that the agenda should consist of all the 
items contained in the provisional agenda, as set out in document GC(XXVII)/683, 
and of the two supplementary items contained in documents GC(XXVII)/683/Add.1 
and 2. 
2. The inclusion of supplementary item A (document GC(XXVII)/683/Add.1) had 
been opposed by the representative of the United States of America on the 
grounds, inter alia, that the item was substantially similar to items which had 
been disposed of at the 1981 and 1982 sessionsof the General Conference and 
that the same item was still under consideration by the United Nations General 
Assembly. The representative of the United States of America had added that 
the Board of Governors, the General Conference and the General Assembly had 
confirmed their confidence in the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards 
system. The representative of Paraguay had supported the statement by the 
representative of the United States of America. The representative of Iraq 
had expressed doubt whether it was true that no threat existed, as the statements 
by the other two Members who had spoken implied, and had therefore 
supported the inclusion of the item in the agenda. 
3. The General Committee further recommended that those items should be 
allocated for initial discussion as indicated in documents GC(XXVII)/683 and 
Add.1. 
4. With regard to supplementary item B, contained in document GC(XXVII)/683/ 
Add.2, the General Committee recommended that the application for membership 
by the People's Republic of China should be taken in plenary meeting without 
being referred to any Committee, and that the draft resolution contained in 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 3 


document GC(XXVII)/697, dealing with the introduction of Chinese as a working 


language of the Conference, should be allocated for initial discussion in the 


Committee of the Whole. 


5. Finally, the General Committee recommended that, subject to the 
desirability of making the best use of the time available, the items listed in 
document GC(XXVIl)/683 should be taken in the order in which they appeared 
there, but with supplementary item A being included immediately after item 6 
and supplementary item B being included immediately after item 4, all the other 
items being renumbered accordingly. 
6. The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
7. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee had 
authorized him to report that it recommended fixing Friday, 14 October 1983, 
as the closing date of the twenty-seventh regular session and Monday, 
24 September 1984, as the opening date of the twenty-eighth regular session of 
the General Conference, to be held as usual in Vienna. 
8. The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY 


9. The PRESIDENT said that there were two documents under item 5 of the 
agenda before the Conference, one concerning the application for membership by 
the People's Republic of China (document GC(XXVII)/696) and the other, 
proposed by Romania, concerning the adoption of Chinese as a working language 
of the General Conference (document GC(XXVII)/697). Since the latter had 
financial implications and would involve an amendment of the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference, a report thereon from the Committee of the 
Whole would have to be awaited before it could be dealt with in plenary. He 
therefore suggested that the plenary should follow the General Committee's 
recommendation and for the moment consider only the document concerning the 
application by the People's Republic of China, which contained a draft 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 4 


resolution already approved by the Board of Governors, deferring further consideration 
of the item until a report of the Committee of the Whole on the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIl)/697 was available. 


10. It was so agreed. 
(a) APPLICATION BY THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (GC(XXVII)/696) 
11. The PRESIDENT invited delegates to comment on document GC(XXVII)/696, 
which contained a recommendation by the Board of Governors that the Conference 
should approve the People's Republic of China for membership of the Agency and 
a draft resolution to that effect. 
12. Mr. GROZA (Romania) said that the application for membership of the 
Agency by the People's Republic of China was a question of historic importance 
for the life of the Agency. Romania had requested the inclusion of that 
question in the agenda and had presented a paper explaining that the importance 
of China, in view of its vast resources and extensive nuclear programmes, was 
such that the accession of China would constitute a valuable enrichment of the 
Agency, bringing it closer to the ideal of universality and strengthening its 
role of promoting international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy for the good of all the world's people. The Romanian delegation was 
therefore convinced that the General Conference would follow the recommendation 
by the Board of Governors to approve China for membership and wished that 
country much success as a future Member of the Agency. 
13. The PRESIDENT asked the Conference whether it wished to adopt the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/696 and approve the admission 
of the People's Republic of China to membership of the Agency by acclamation. 
14. The admission of the People's Republic of China to membership of the 
Agency was approved by acclamation. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 5 


15. Mr. MIYAZAWA (Japan), speaking as representative of one of the 
Agency's Asian Member States, expressed a whole-hearted welcome of the 
participation of the People's Republic of China in the Agency and his 
conviction that China would contribute signally to the Agency's efforts to 
promote peace, health and prosperity throughout the world by spreading the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and strengthening the regime of non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
16. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), speaking 
on behalf of the Eastern Europe group, recalled that his country's position 
had always been to favour the restitution of the rights of the People's 
Republic of China to be represented in the United Nations and other international 
organizations. His delegation noted with satisfaction that by joining the 
Agency China was committing itself to fulfilling the obligations of membership 
laid down by the Statute and accepting the principles of the Charter of 
the United Nations, and hoped that, as a country with a large scientific 
and technical potential in the nuclear field, China would contribute to 
the solution of the problems of preventing nuclear war, halting the arms 
race, and strengthening the international non-proliferation regime and would 
help to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as defined by the Statute. 
17. Mr. SINGH (India), speaking on behalf of the Middle East and South 
Asia group, welcomed the newly admitted Member of the Agency and recalled 
that his country had held that the People's Republic of China was the rightful 
representative of the people of China ever since the Agency's inception. 
He had no doubt that he was expressing the feelings of the peoples of the 
non-aligned world in saying that the admission of China could be expected 
to give a new impetus to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and power throughout 
the world. 
18. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), speaking on behalf of the 
North American group, said that the accession of China underscored the vitality 
and importance of the Agency, whose efforts to strengthen international cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the world-wide safeguards 
regime would be enhanced by the support of a country that possessed such major 
potential for technical assistance, nuclear science and nuclear power programmes 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 6 


as China did. Moreover, the accession of China would not only increase the universality 
of the Agency in general, it also meant that for the first time 
all countries with significant nuclear programmes would be Members of the 
most important international organization in the field of the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. 


19. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77, welcomed 
the admission to the Agency of the People's Republic of China, a great and 
powerful country with vast human resources and remarkable achievements in 
nuclear technology. As an ally of the developing countries, moreover, China 
would support and strengthen the position of those countries within the Agency. 
20. Mr. M0LIT0R (Luxembourg), speaking on behalf of the Western European 
group, associated himself with previous speakers in welcoming the accession 
of China to the Agency, which would strengthen the principle of universality 
and lend new impetus to international co-operation. It also showed that China 
had confidence in the future of nuclear power as a source of energy. The 
countries of Western Europe were convinced that both China and the Agency 
would benefit from China's accession and were ready to co-operate fully with 
the new Member in a spirit of friendship and mutual confidence. 
21. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina), speaking on behalf of the Latin 
American group, welcomed the Conference's decision to approve China for membership 
of the Agency, as that country had much experience in nuclear science 
and technology and would be able to contribute significantly to the Agency's 
efforts in the fields of technical assistance and non-proliferation. 


22. Mr. MANOUAN (Ivory Coast), speaking on behalf of the African group, 
extended a warm welcome to China as a Member of the Agency and expressed his 
conviction that China, which, in spite of owning nuclear weapons, had always 
stood for peace and international co-operation and for the principles of equality 
and sovereignty of States, would fulfil all the obligations of membership 
and play a major role in the future activities of the Agency. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 7 


23. Mr. BRENNAN (Australia), speaking on behalf of the South East Asia 
and the Pacific group, welcomed China's admission to membership and looked 
forward to co-operation with China in supporting the Agency's programmes and 
activities. He hoped China's decision would consolidate international confidence 
in the future of nuclear power and the value of the Agency's safeguards system. 
24. Mr. WANG SHU (People's Republic of China) expressed his delegation's 
sincere gratitude to all the countries participating in the Conference for 
their unanimous support for the resolution concerning the admission of China 
into the IAEA. In particular, he thanked the Socialist Republic of Romania 
and 12 other countries which, back in 1971, had put forward at a meeting 
of the Board of Governors a draft resolution demanding the expulsion of 
Chiang Kai-Shek's representatives and the recognition of the representation 
of the People's Republic of China in the Agency. Lastly, he thanked the Director 
General for facilitating his country's admission into the Agency. 
25. In its 26 years of existence, the Agency had made a great contribution 
to the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. China therefore 
regarded it as an honour to be a Member of the Agency. 
26. China had entered the nuclear arena way back in the 1950s. Thanks to 
the joint efforts of all the departments concerned, a relatively complete 
nuclear fuel cycle system had been evolved over the past 30 years, incorporating 
uranium ore prospecting, mining and processing, fuel-element production, reactor 
technology, spent-fuel reprocessing and radioactive waste management. In 
order to achieve the great strategic goals of Four Modernizations and quadruple 
its gross annual industrial and agricultural product, China was working hard 
to strengthen its transport and communication as well as energy sectors. 
While China was rich in hydro-electric power and coal resources, their uneven 
geographical distribution restricted their availability to the coastal areas, 
thus hampering the latter's industrial and economic development. China therefore 
needed to develop nuclear power as well. At present, preparations were under 
way for the construction of the first units of nuclear power plants in East 
and South China. In developing nuclear power plants, China was largely selfreliant, 
but at the same time it sincerely looked forward to co-operating 



GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 8 


extensively with other countries on the basis of mutual respect for the principles 
of sovereignty, equality, mutual benefit and non-interference in internal 
affairs. It was also prepared to share its experience with other countries 
and to learn, in turn, from their experience so as to contribute to the cause 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in all countries. China was confident 
that it would benefit from the Agency's assistance and make its own contribution 
to the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


27. China would accept the Statute of the Agency and duly meet its consequent 
obligations. Its membership did not imply, however, any change in its position 
regarding the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. While remaining 
critical of the discriminatory nature of the Treaty, China respected the desire 
of a great many non-nuclear-weapon States not to test, use, manufacture, produce 
or acquire nuclear weapons. He solemnly declared that China neither stood 
for nor encouraged the proliferation of nuclear weapons. International cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy involved various sensitive 
issues which should be dealt with cautiously. China had consistently taken 
a conscientious and responsible attitude towards such co-operation and would 
continue to do so after becoming a Member of the Agency. It would take account 
of the relevant provisions of the Statute, including safeguards provisions, 
in its future international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and in its transfer of nuclear materials, technology and equipment. Since 
the latter was a sensitive area of co-operation, the adopting of certain necessary 
but appropriate measures by consensus would be understandable and acceptable 
to all the Members. However, China could not condone any attempt to widen 
arbitrarily and unilaterally the scope of restrictions and controls ostensibly 
for the purpose of strengthening the non-proliferation regime. Such a practice 
would hamper the world-wide development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
the economic and scientific development of various countries and the peace 
and security of the world. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 9 


28. Taiwan had become a Member of the Agency and signed NPT by usurping 
China's name after the founding of New China. It was common knowledge that 
Taiwan was an integral part of the People's Republic of China and that the 
measures taken by the Taiwan authorities were absolutely illegal and null and 
void. The resolution entitled "Representation of China in the Agency", 
adopted by the Board of Governors of the Agency on 9 December 1971, also 
explicitly recognized "that the Government of the People's Republic of China" 
was "the only Government which had the right to represent China in the 
International Atomic Energy Agency" and requested "the Chairmen and the 
Director General to take all the actions" resulting from that resolution. 
China believed that the Agency would respect the above-mentioned resolution 
and China's consistent principled stand and take practical steps to rearrange 
its safeguard relationship with Taiwan in such a way as to make it 
non-governmental. 
29. Upon becoming a Member of the Agency, China would strengthen its ties 
with Members of the Agency and strive to make the Agency's work more productive 
and to contribute to the expansion of its international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
30. The PRESIDENT thanked the representative of the People's Republic of 
China for his statement and suggested that further consideration of item 5 
should be postponed until a report from the Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole in respect of the Romanian proposal was available. 
31. It was so agreed. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1984 


32. The PRESIDENT said that in 1982 the Agency's Board of Governors had 
agreed to continue - for the years 1984, 1985 and 1986 - the practice of 
recommending indicative planning figures to serve in fixing targets for 
voluntary contributions to the Fund in order to provide for a certain degree of 
predictability as far as the financing of technical assistance was concerned. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 10 


As it was extremely helpful for the Secretariat to be able to make an early 
assessment of the total funds that would be available for the provision of 


technical assistance, all delegations in a position to do so were urged to 
notify the Secretariat, before the end of the current session, of voluntary 
contributions to be made by their Governments to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund in 1984. He hoped that he would be able to report, towards 


the end of the current session, that a large percentage of the target figure 


for 1984 had been pledged. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684 and Corr.l) (resumed) 


33. Mr. BORGA (Italy) expressed his appreciation for the Director 
General's statement to the Conference. His analysis of the main international 
nuclear issues and of the Agency's role offered insights and ideas which the 
Italian Government would study very carefully. 
34. Unfortunately, the hopes his delegation had expressed in the previous year 
had not come to fruition. In the present year as well, the General Conference 
was being held at a time when the world situation was marked by grave 
uncertainty and dangerous tensions. Legal and ethical standards that were 
essential to peaceful and secure coexistence among nations were yet again being 
undermined by episodes constituting a patent violation of the principles of 
the United Nations Charter that had provoked unanimous condemnation from 
the civilized world. 
35. That situation had certainly worked against the establishment of a climate 
of mutual international trust, which was not only an indispensable prerequisite 
for the elimination of dangerous conflicts in many troubled areas 
of the world and for a negotiated equilibrium between the world's main power 
blocks on security and arms limitation, but would also provide impetus for 
every form of international co-operation, including co-operation in the 
development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He believed, however, that 
international co-operation with a view to improving the social and economic 
conditions of mankind, especially in developing countries, was essential for 
the promotion of international detente, rather than being only a result of it. 

GC(XXVII)/0R.249 
page 11 


36. 1982 had been marked by widespread economic stagnation, even recession. 
The gross domestic products of the member countries of the Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) had dropped, for the first time 
in a number of years, by an average of 0.5%, while the number of workers 
unemployed in those countries had been a record 30 million. Furthermore, the 
debt of the developing countries had reached unprecedented levels, and some of 
those countries were even finding it difficult to pay the interest on their 
loans. A secure supply of energy and the economic security that went with it 
would increasingly become the mainstay of overall security that could also 
foster an international climate of mutual trust. 
37. It was in that perspective that the functions and role of the Agency, for 
which no substitute could be found, seemed to him destined to assume growing 
importance for the international community. There was no doubt, however, that, 
in carrying out its functions, the extent to which the Agency could meet the 
expectations of public opinion and of Governments depended on its ability to 
prove its credibility and effectiveness. That could be accomplished if the 
Agency could effectively eradicate the excessive political manoeuvring in its 
own midst that could undermine its foundations and patently obstructed its 
essentially technical functions and aims. By virtue of those functions and aims , 
the Agency had a universal vocation to bring together the greatest possible 
number of nations, instead of discriminating against them for purely political 
reasons. For that reason, Italy wished to express the wish that in the future, 
both near-term and long-term, excessive politicization would not again occur in 
the Agency, since in the past it had negatively affected its credibility and 
efficiency. 
38. But what did "credibility" mean for the Agency? First, it meant full 
allegiance to its primary role, that of promoting and guaranteeing the progressive 
expansion of international co-operation for the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, with special regard to the needs of developing countries. It 
was clear that attainment of those objectives could not take place except in 
conditions of absolute security. Consequently, such primary objectives could 
in no way be separated from the Agency's second fundamental task, that of 
effectively preventing any possible diversion of atomic energy towards nonpeaceful 
uses. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 12 


39. The experience of recent years had shown that the present Agency safeguards 
system adequately met its objectives as regards horizontal 
non-proliferation. In practical terms, inspections had also proved satisfactory 
- in both quantitative and qualitative terms - in the countries in 
which they had taken place. Italy noted, therefore, with very great satisfaction 
that in 1982 none of the nuclear material in plants under safeguards 
had been diverted. 
40. Every efficient organization needed to set its priorities from time to 
time, and it was in that light that he suggested that there was a need for 
better distribution of the Agency's financial resources. The safeguards 
system had to keep in step with technological evolution, and should be made 
as transparent and sophisticated as possible. Nevertheless, the percentage 
of the Agency's budget allocated to safeguards at the moment reflected a 
rather unbalanced interpretation of its statutory functions. 
41. That observation was consistent with the position Italy had always taken 
as a signatory of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and also with the need 
for complete and balanced application of all provisions of the Treaty. Such 
application must be free of discrimination concerning the rights and duties of 
the States party to the Treaty. With that in mind, moreover, Italy had always 
looked forward to the universal extension of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, 
which should be pursued and attained not by imposing NPT on sovereign States 
but by enabling them to make a free choice. The objective of a universal and 
comprehensive safeguards regime was designed to achieve the maximum level of 
protection against the risks of horizontal nuclear proliferation. 
42. In Italy's opinion it was precisely by following that universal approach, 
aimed at the non-discriminatory, full and responsible involvement of all 
interested countries - whether industrialized or developing, nuclear exporters 
or importers - that the groundwork would gradually be laid for the establishment 
of a "code of principles" for guaranteeing the widespread and harmonious 
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a genuine framework of 
security and non-proliferation. The Agency and, in particular, its Committee 
on Assurances of Supply (CAS) represented a suitable institutional and 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 13 


legal framework for the search for such a new international consensus. Despite 
the somewhat slow progress made in CAS, which was due to the extreme complexity 
of the problems it dealt with, Italy believed that CAS now represented the most 
appropriate institutional basis for a painstaking and difficult search for the 
solutions required. Both the reconfirmation of the credibility and effectiveness 
of the Agency and an improved atmosphere in the North-South dialogue on 
matters of nuclear co-operation depended to a large extent on further positive 
developments within CAS. In particular, such improvements could be the key to 


the satisfactory and beneficial outcome of two imminent events of capital 


importance where that most sensitive of issues was concerned, namely the 
Third NPT Review Conference, scheduled for 1985, and the planned United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy (PUNE). 


43. In his earlier reference to the need to set priorities, he had been 
thinking specifically of Agency technical assistance, to which Italy attached 
the greatest significance, as the considerable commitment of his country to 
that activity confirmed. Through extrabudgetary contributions, Italy was 
financing, first of all, projects amounting to a total of some $18 million in 
the five-year period 1981-1985 alone, which placed it in the very forefront 
among contributing Member States in that sector. In addition, scholarship and 
training programmes were being offered by Italy to developing countries, and 
in 1984 the Italian National Atomic Energy Authority (ENEA) would award 
scholarships for a total of some 200 man-months for such programmes. Finally, 
an extremely important role was being played by the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste, which was supported by Italy with an annual 
contribution of $3 million. The Centre pursued objectives which fully 
corresponded to the policy of providing technical assistance which his country 
had espoused. The Centre trained experts from developing countries in order to 
enable them to run national programmes directly and to choose the most suitable 
technologies with a view to meeting economic and social objectives in those 
countries. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 14 


44. In that framework, the bodies responsible for technical co-operation in 
his country would continue to examine new ways of furthering co-operation with 
the developing countries in order to modify and to improve their economic 
structures permanently. It was precisely because of the present political 
situation and because of the related difficulties to which co-operation with 
developing countries had generally been subject - as the disappointing results 
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) in Belgrade, 
held in June 1983, had proved - that technical assistance programmes must be 
given greater priority in the Agency's budget, since that activity was an 
essential instrument for re-balancing social and economic conditions in 
variously endowed areas of the world. 
45. Among the activities of the Agency most deserving of attention and development 
were, in particular, those concerning nuclear safety and protection of the 
environment. Nuclear energy - tainted as it was by the original sin of its 
military uses - was the only source of energy the peaceful uses of which had 
been gradually and satisfactorily expanding in step with the most advanced 
arrangements designed to reduce its hazards. Nevertheless, the misgivings 
of a large portion of the public about nuclear power could not and should not 
be ignored. Consequently, Agency initiatives in the field of safety, whether 
independent or in concert with other international bodies or with individual 
Member States, must be strongly supported and encouraged in order to make 
nuclear power inherently safer, and also to help overcome understandable, 
albeit irrational, suspicions on the part of broad sectors of the less wellinformed 
among the public. 
46. Furthermore, Italy hoped that the work conducted by the Agency on 
International Plutonium Storage (IPS) would be resumed and that progress 
would be achieved with the establishment of a simple, automatic system which, 
above all, responded to the twofold need for the widest participation by user 
countries and for the prevention of large quantities of unused plutonium from 
accumulating. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 15 


47. He also wished to mention the principal forms of international co-operation 
engaged in by his country with other prominent bodies in the fields of energy, 
technology and science, such as the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
and the European Nuclear Research Centre (CERN). Important research work was 
being carried out with those organizations, whereby Italian scientific 
participation and financial support made a decisive contribution. 
48. On a bilateral level Italy had, at the same time, joined in a number of 
concerted efforts pertaining to the exchange of information and the 
implementation of programmes in the most important sectors for the development 
of nuclear power. In that connection he recalled the ENEA-CEA agreement on 
2/ 


fast breeder reactors; the ENEA-NRC agreement on nuclear safety and the 
training of research workers and technicians from developing countries; and 
the establishment in those countries of research infrastructures specifically 
intended for the nuclear sector but also useful in a broader technological 
sense as provided for under the bilateral agreements Italy had concluded with 
Brazil, the People's Republic of China, Iraq and Indonesia. 


49. Turning to the current energy situation in his country and to the most 
recent developments in nuclear power in Italy, in which the research, promotion 
and development activities of the sector headed by ENEA figured prominently, he 
said that in 1982 the domestic consumption of primary sources of energy had 
declined by 2.2% as compared with 1981. In particular, the trend whereby a 
reduced role was being played by oil had continued. There had been an increase 
by 5.2% in the consumption of solid fuels, while the percentage of gas consumed 
had remained virtually stationary. In 1982, both primary electrical energy, 
including hydro, geothermal and nuclear power and the balance of payments had 
remained practically at the same levels as in 1981: nuclear power production 
had increased by 150%, thereby offsetting a 3% decline in hydroelectric power 
production and a 24% drop in the balance of payments. 
1/ French Commissariat a l'energie atomique. 

2/ United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 


GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 16 


50. There had been a considerable reduction (5.9%) in energy consumption by 
national industry, accompanied by a more modest decline in industrial 
production. That confirmed the trend seen in recent years towards a reduction 
in energy consumption per unit produced. That trend was being strengthened by 
the savings measures adopted and by the effect of similar trends in sectors 
which were heavy energy consumers and in sectors with smaller consumption but 
high consumption per unit produced. 
51. The data available for the first six months of 1983 confirmed the tendency 
for primary energy consumption to decrease, and oil consumption had decreased 
by 5.17. 
52. In 1982 gross electrical energy production had increased by 1.5% over the 
previous year's total, reaching a level of 184.4 billion kWh. The proportion 
of primary energy represented by electrical energy had been 30%, in 1982, as 
compared with 29.3% in 1981. That showed that recourse to electrical energy 
was increasingly becoming a feature of the energy system, particularly in the 
industrial sector. 
53. The 150%, increase in nuclear power was attributable to the Latina power 
station (0.9 billion kWh) and of the Caorso power station (5.9 billion kWh), in 
which the first refuelling operation had taken place at the beginning of the 
year. In 1982 decommissioning operations had begun at the Garigliano plant 
while technical operations aimed at the reactivation of the Trino Vercellese 
plant had continued. Construction of two boiling water reactors of 1000 MW(e) 
each was continuing on schedule at Montalto di Castro, and completion was 
expected in 1987-1988. During 1982 and in the first few months of 1983, 
Parliament and the Government had taken the necessary steps to make the nuclear 
energy programme operational as soon as possible. 
54. The financial situation of the Italian National Electricity Generating 
Authority (ENEL) had improved considerably, thus enabling it to allocate the 
necessary resources to investment in, among other things, six new nuclear power 
plants. 
55. Moreover, in accordance with a new version of the siting law, on 
22 February 1983 the Interministerial Committee on Economic Planning (CIPE) had 
indicated the areas most suitable for nuclear plant construction in Lombardy, 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 17 


Piedmont and Apulia. The site selection procedures for those three regions 
should last no longer than 22 months, after which the ENEL could proceed with 
initial site preparation. 


56. During 1983, ENEA activities had developed in accordance with the new 
tasks assigned to it under the reform law approved by Parliament in March 1982. 
In the nuclear field, a particularly important part had been played by activities 
aimed at examining technical and economic problems relating to work on two 
major plants being constructed by ENEA, namely the PEC and CIRENE reactors. 
According to the latest estimates, PEC, a test reactor built by NIRA as part of 
a long-established collaboration programme between ENEA and the CEA, should be 
completed by the end of 1987 and over the period 1983-1987 would cost approximately 
900 billion lire (value as of 1 January 1983). The CIRENE project for 
a 40 MW(e) heavy-water-moderated light-water-cooled plant was already well into 
the construction phase. The plant assembly phase was expected to finish by 
mid-1985 and the expenditure involved from 1983 on would amount to approximately 
290 billion lire. 
57. In fuel cycle activities, particular emphasis had beenplacedon the back 
end. Work had gone ahead with the reprocessing of CANDU fuel from the Canadian 
Pickering station. 
58. Work had been stepped up on the selection of suitable processes for 
treating and processing high-level wastes. In that connection, four vitrification 
campaigns had been carried out, and satisfactory performance had been 
achieved with processes which would seem particularly suited to small or mediumsized 
reprocessing plants (100-200 tonnes per year). Finally, research was 
continuing on Italian clay deposits for disposing of high-level wastes. 
59. In the field of controlled nuclear fusion, where initial research had 
concentrated on strictly physical aspects, the technological side had begun to 
assume growing importance. In that context, the completion of the design for 
the Frascati Tokamak Upgrade plant, which was expected to be started up in 1987, 
was of particular importance. 
60. In conclusion, he expressed Italy's great satisfaction with and interest 
in the forthcoming move by the People's Republic of China to join the Agency. 
That would be an event of the utmost importance and would contribute towards 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 18 


the general involvement of the international community in the responsibilities 
associated with the development, in conditions of complete security, of the 
peaceful uses of a source of energy which could make a decisive contribution 
to the balanced social and economic progress of mankind. At a time of grave 
uncertainty and dangerous tensions, that event augured well for the credibility 
of the Agency as an important factor in promoting orderly economic and social 
progress and world peace. 


61. Mr. RENON (France), welcoming China as a Member of the Agency, 
expressed his confidence that its membership would enhance the Agency's 
credibility and efficiency. His Government, for its part, was willing to 
co-operate extensively with China in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
62. The IAEA had in recent years made renewed and dynamic efforts to 
fulfil its statutory function of promoting nuclear energy. Those efforts were 
amply justified by the world energy outlook and the difficulties faced by the 
development of nuclear power. 
63. As a result of the Agency's activities it was recognized that nuclear 
power had reached industrial maturity and that it was reliable, safe and economical. 
Those conclusions had been demonstrated at the Conference on Nuclear 
Power Experience held in 1982. In summing up the work of that conference, the 
Director General had pointed out that psycho-political factors accounted for the 
somewhat slow progress of nuclear power in developed countries and had stressed 
the risks involved in that situation. That assessment was fully shared by 
France, whose experience had shown the need for vigorous and objective public 
information work on the energy options available and for a democratic dialogue 
on what specific activities should be conducted. 
64. Since the problem was a difficult one, whose solution was essential to the 
harmonious development of nuclear power, and especially as the back end of the 
fuel cycle and spent fuel management worried public opinion, his Government had 
recently conducted an exhaustive expert study and made its results available to 
the public. Its policy and options had been based on those results. 

page 19 ' 0r-j.vB,, 

65. dM't^-te^ml&ih^&Qjys,^ $?>?ffen5f. 
held ,at;. ^at^le^a.dj.^hp^ij, ^iem/^s^s^aa^ ^,n,4u.s,t.^i,ali^t^^re^d, :^ a | f0 ^ r f xifrfs Of 
no insoluble ttecl]^iqalirpEO,^l^i5..ais^Q3C;i1a.ted0w^t(^ sat j.s.a,ct!C?r-yv!ad,kqa%t|ve. ;V.fjS,t^,);,rfw 
management.,-, rHi;s9Qqvi;nme^t(^e JfC;om^d j^be ^td^a 0qf r.hp.,ldya^-..a^qv|nd j\a&l e ^3X s^S-M^ty 
on tkat^inipqptajrtj subject ,c|vjrii3ig.,^b^f.Co^|e^^ele ..jane^ae} {depi^gd,,^ ,tJ,?an; ^Aur^x,,. 
Secretary of State for Energy, to present(j|he,JFr;en^hi,.Yiewsj2aiqd, poli,6v iq t,||3|JT,a, ._ 
area. He wished to emphasize that the Agency's activities on the promotion of 
--:r.,.j -j-Ax, rf.:i b'3-s_ od bJucv- J'.oj iv :riadu.' Ivrsl Jis^oi :;n av; ::>!!i ;!o s;i? ,

('!..) f\ 
nuclear power were innovative and fruitful. 
-j MJ-.-J.VJ L'iaoj wi ? , t '. ? f eei 9rl':' ..ooi J'^^PfO) 'i-Xf.iit a.inr-I'.; -IOXOC; :'fj i o f/oljafq 

66. Nuclear^Dqwer,, already had an^imo^es siy^ s.r.e,G.<3r;d? ,< ,it, ha^a.qcpun^ed. for, ^OT^of 
wor.l,d:. .elect ricity... product; ion. ip, 1982 which,figure -wasT likely .tJ:prise to. - 20% ,  
in 199^n-ther,^7were;i3|Q0r reactors n,.C;pjerat;fQn..^n.^2!? countries,, w^tl^ .;ai(_total. ,.,_ . . 
cap^fjiy.jojf ;;73fGW(^^.,and;^2^. under gqnstruct.^gn whic;h woy.ld have a^totalj.^. ^ 
capacity. p,abput, t20ft <3W(.e ).... However., the, econpmip_crisis,,made/. it, difficult,. tq^s 
predict the energy needs for the following 10 years. There was not only a fal.l 

in consumption but also the large funds required, the high interest rates and 

a: :.-.;>> !ovi -f&f~ L;o!5< .ioin^o?6 fo'.'coi :*/'> ;.''".r>-"-i;J , .en J > 3i?,fis i>-f ; ?/.
 .>!;.;. -~ ' ,*' 
recession were working against heavy investment in nuclear power. 
Jiil ^f(->fi''-" f:5,-i v .ffi'fiM"* liboiiJ? S1'I . "J-UWi'.'J.CriV-i g.'I f t", 1 0C r .'{IjHObni 

j'.-fd 1 B

67. QfIn, Jt^va,t. p.qnte^l^, t^.ej:^ were-, a, numbjsr, of .points wh,ich sjhou^d. be borne, in .^ 
mind,....  Ait. energy .pqlicy. was., based. pn, long-term., .trends, ajrid shou Id not be ajFfected 
by v^ria^iqnsjjn, P|a;ck^. qq^d^tipl^ .^^^ t^^ri^e ,pfD a J^arr^l q,(q.^1. _ Nup^ar 
indepead.enJce.^,.esp.eGiaLlY,,in,.jthe..tqase,.pf.,countries wi^h- Aoq-r f assil, -fuel, respurces . 

68. . fMpird^ementW'ltl>''i?;i'^^ -heb^sfeaTi%i^ >2i.'bni 
involve-a7 M'igher '^rfgf^^cbh^iiffiplti^'nV 'Mtfd 4'hy 'rfiMibu^-tjPlifl^.fti suppfee^^f fifec*3*d 
them'!aMv'ef seJly*;fii&th lVieV:'of!tlftf ^cb^eiit--^"entiPftowa'rdTysff*ea^tfe~'e^tidmTc ltme">v iJ 
dpen'drfc?e ?M6'ng:S't''>e;s,' ftft"%1fxieVe?lppie'tf Vc6Ut?t#ie'^ 'Imiit r^'d'O'ce^^'heir o'ila -%itip&mw<oD 
requirements. In that connection, it was desirable "tha^t'^hqfe^^tountr^iVs"-'-'OHo ::au> 
shoW^^Hiy8 :if ^5 /f^e rAos,^. ^.M;-An -j^Wsi^1" ;.P;0^^ 4&vJeIM1"^^a%4/ r^^M^S , T 

coalcTO^^MR^P^mgas^ySiub^^tu^ 0x^1^.., sir,oJsa>m,noo ortT wiJjii a*,


69iH'/r;fhae"^s!JtKg*,-fernlraI^%f-r^eV6'rK1dit-h[Ft^hGB Wh'ii'd^ 

was being implemented with determination at all the stages of the fuel cy-el-e^'-^ 


GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 20 


70. France was at present the second-largest producer of nuclear power, with 
36 units in operation having a capacity of 26 GW(e) and 25 under construction, 
which would add another 29 GW(e). Nuclear power provided half of its 
electricity, which proportion was to rise to 70% by 1990. Furthermore, it 
planned to achieve 50% self-sufficiency in energy by the end of the decade, as 
compared to 38%, at present and 257 in 1975. 
71. The objective of fossil fuel substitution would be achieved with the completion 
of the power plants under construction. Thereafter, new commitments 
would cover replacement of the existing plants and the expected increase in 
electricity consumption. In the context of the general economic crisis, which 
hindered growth in energy and electricity demand, the French Government had 
decided on two 1300 MW(e) units for 1983 and 1984 respectively. That decision 
would cover the foreseeable demand, and took into account increased industrial 
and domestic use. 
72. At the same time, France had developed a complete nuclear fuel cycle 
industry, including enrichment at the Eurodif plant, which had reached the 
stage of industrial operation at its rated capacity. Spent fuel reprocessing, 
which was a very important component of a nuclear programme, was part of that 
industry. Those matters were of great urgency and would be dealt with at the 
Round Table discussion organized by the Agency. However, it was worth mentioning 
that the Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique had been recognized as possessing the 
industrial capability for reprocessing fuels from pressurized-water reactors, 
which formed the backbone of the French nuclear power programme. The French 
Government had approved expansion and modernization of the La Hague plant and 
commitments for a new one. Within a few years the annual reprocessing capacity 
was expected to reach 1600 t. 
73. Reprocessing also led the way to breeder reactors, in which field France 
was active. The commissioning in 1984 of the 1200-MW(e) Super-Phenix reactor, 
built with its European partners, would initiate the age of large breeder power 
stations. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 21 


74. The transition from an industrial prototype to a commercial reactor 
called for heavy investment in terms of finance and technology, but the stakes world 
energy supplies and the world energy balance - were high in the case of 
breeder commercialization. For that reason, a study group had been set up to 
consider the practical ways and means of commercial promotion of that reactor 
type from the technical, economic and industrial standpoints with a view to 
contributing to the security of energy supply in Europe. At present it 
included Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy and the 
Netherlands, and was open to other partners. 
75. France was sharing its nuclear experience with others and was in favour of 
transferring technology for the needs of its partners. 
76. Although nuclear power was being introduced in some developing countries, 
in many countries of the Third World the physical or economic characteristics, 
the size of electricity networks and their growth rates did not justify nuclear 
power. However, in most such countries, including the poorest, the use of 
nuclear techniques in agriculture, food preservation, medicine, etc., could 
have a great impact on the standard of living. That was an area where the 
Agency could play an important role. 
77. As regards the Agency's initiative at instituting a dialogue between the 
developing and the supplier countries about low-power reactors, he pointed out 
that French industry was ready to respond to any demand. 
78. Generally speaking, the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
activities in recent years had been characterized by a growth of funds allocated 
for the purpose and by reorientation in some activities. 
79. From that point of view France, as the fifth-biggest contributor to the 
Agency's budget, approved the emphasis placed on the financing of multi-year 
and regional projects and on the appreciable growth of activities relating to 
the use of nuclear techniques in medicine and agriculture. It welcomed the 
progress in programming and the establishment of a section for project evaluation 
and follow-up. It urged, in particular, that more emphasis should be placed 
than had been heretofore on the training of technicians, who were generally not 
available in sufficient numbers in developing countries. 

GC(XXVII)/0R.249 
page 22 


80. The growth in the technical assistance and co-operation budget, which 
would account for 28% of all programmes in 1984, bore testimony to the effort 
made in that field in spite of the difficult financial situation. The results 
obtained should now be evaluated and future budgets decided on their merits. In 
spite of the priority accorded to technical assistance and co-operation, such 
budgetary growth would no longer be accepted. 
81. The Agency was continuing its activity in the area of nuclear safety, 
where no laxity could be permitted. For countries involved in the use of 
nuclear energy it was necessary to draw on others' experience. In that regard, 
the Agency was playing a positive role. The Nuclear Safety Standards programme 
(NUSS), which was the very symbol of an efficient and beneficial activity, the 
recent initiatives regarding expert and advisory missions in connection with 
specific projects or general organization, and the preparation of guidelines for 
agreements between neighbouring countries on joint action in the event of 
nuclear accidents - those were topics which justified strong involvement of the 
Agency. Moreover, it was a forum where safety issues could be discussed 
constructively, as had been done after the Three Mile Island accident. In 
general, countries with different systems could hold an open dialogue on 
such matters under its aegis. 


82. The countries which were developing nuclear programmes had for a long time 
maintained fruitful relations, which had enabled them to arrive at an international 
consensus on the criteria, methods and, implicitly, objectives of 
safety and protection. Each country had to develop its own safety regulations 
and application procedures and no international co-operation could replace that 
function, which belonged to States. It was gratifying to note that the Agency 
had never transgressed the limits of its activity, which was deliberation, 
drafting of agreements on general safety criteria, guides, codes of practice and 
dialogue but in no case codification or regulation. 
83. In that connection, he pointed out that France had reservations about the 
suggestion, made in some quarters, concerning the establishment of a nuclear 
safety commission or institute, possibly in association with the IAEA. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 23 


84. The Agency had been entrusted by the international community with a" 
leading role in promoting nuclear energy and with the function of verifying 
that the undertakings given in connection with the development of nuclear power 
on a global scale were fulfilled. Such development covered activities ranging 
from the export of reactors to the sale of material, fuel and services, 
including technology transfer and training. France's exports to countries 
developing nuclear power were part of the activities verified by the Agency. 
85. Being familiar with the work of the Department of Safeguards, he wished 
to express his country's confidence in the Agency's safeguards system, which 
was technically reliable. 
86. He had noted with great interest that, after solving the technical problems 
relating to two nuclear facilities, the Agency was in a position to safeguard 
all facilities for which, from that point of view, it was responsible. Paying 
a tribute to the goodwill of the two countries concerned, he said that 
adaptation of safeguards techniques to progress should be a principle to be 
applied to the management of such important matters. 
87. The safeguards methods were at present satisfactory. However, his 
Government had often expressed its concern about the growing number and diversity 
of the facilities to be safeguarded in future. The safeguards strategies should 
perhaps be reviewed with a view to cutting costs. It might perhaps be useful, 
for example, to take into account the technical development of nuclear fuel 
cycles in the safeguarded countries rather than applying mathematical criteria 
to each facility. The matter was now under consideration and the Board of 
Governors would in due course decide on the merits of the suggestions to be 
submitted to it. 
88. The Agency's safeguards system was reliable, and was irreplaceable because 
of its universal nature and its qualities. The international community should 
at all times be assured of its credibility. 

GC(XXVII)/0R.249 
page 24 


89. The Agency's potential role in the regulation of the international flow 
and, more generally, storage of plutonium was of interest to the world 
community. France had consistently maintained that solutions should be defined 
internationally and assign a central role to the Agency. That was important in 
connection with nuclear power development. Generally acceptable solutions 
should be found, and the study of the matter should be resumed within the 
Agency's framework. 
90. Predictability of the conditions imposed by suppliers was essential for 
nuclear power development, which required large investment and involved long 
lead times. It must also be recognized that, in the interest of the world 
community as a whole, the rules of application of such a principle should 
take account of non-proliferation considerations. The Committee on Assurances 
of Supply, which was dealing with those difficult issues, had made some 
tangible progress. He hoped that further discussion on the subject would be 
conducted in a spirit of strictness and responsibility. 
91. It should be noted that the field was now open to international co-operation 
enabling interested States to have a nuclear programme. His country, for 
example, was willing to discuss, on a firm basis, the terms for assured supply 
of equipment and material for programmes in which it would co-operate. 
92. Although, in reviewing some of the essential activities of the Agency, he 
had considered the programmes on their merits, it must be emphasized that the 
Agency's work should be reviewed in the context of the very difficult financial 
situation in the world. All efforts must be made to restrain future budgets. 
He was sure that the Director General was making every effort to achieve 
savings and exercising care in defining priorities. 
93. In conclusion, he paid a tribute to the Agency's staff, whose quality, 
competence and devotion enabled the Agency to tackle its difficult tasks. It 
was they who ensured the Agency's efficiency and credibility. And that credibility 
must be maintained for it was essential for development in the nuclear 
field. 

GC(XXVII)/249 
page 25 


94. Mr. ERNEMANN (Belgium) recalled that the twenty-sixth session of the 
General Conference had ended on a sombre note, with the refusal to accept 
Israel's credentials and the consequent decision by the United States to 
suspend its participation in the Agency's activities. Since that time, 
however, the United States had reassessed its role in the Agency and had concluded 
that its activities benefited all Member States alike by ensuring, 
through the application of safeguards, that nuclear materials were not used for 
military purposes. He hoped that the inclusion on the agenda of the current 
session of a supplementary item on the possible consequences for the Agency of 
the Israeli military attack on the Iraqui nuclear research reactor would not 
once again lead to a rejection by the Conference of Israel's credentials. 
Such an action would jeopardize the vital principle of the universality of 
international institutions, and might have more serious repercussions than 
before. He welcomed China's admission to membership, which could not but 
strengthen the Agency. 
95. The Agency should be universal and should be open to all countries on a 
permanent basis, whatever their individual status and whatever their record in 
regard to possible violations of international law. It should also be 
universal in the sense that it should belong to all countries, and should not 
be dominated by the few who enjoyed nuclear superiority. That principle had to 
be reconciled with the need to ensure that the Agency continued to be wisely 
and properly managed. 
96. The Agency's scientific and technical activities had again been outstanding; 
its nuclear safety and waste management programmes, the conference 
it had held in Seattle in May 1983, and its promotion activities had all been of 
the greatest value. However, little progress had been made with nonproliferation, 
although three more countries had ratified the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (NPT) bringing to 121 the total number of States parties. Unless all 
States without exception were willing to open all their facilities to inspection 
by the Agency, non-proliferation policies and safeguards policies alike would 
be ineffective. 
97. On the other hand, little purpose would be served by increasing the number 
of controls where inspection was already perfectly adequate, merely for the sake 
of producing impressive statistical results. He was glad that the Board of 
Governors had refused to approve the Report on Safeguards-Related 

GC(XXVII)/249 
page 26 


Questions (GOV/2107), but had merely noted it. The report had revealed that the 
Agency's inspection goals were outdated, that the costs of safeguards application 
were unduly high for the nuclear industry in many countries, and that too large 
a proportion of inspections were concentrated in too small a number of States. 
There should be less emphasis on quantity of inspections, and more on quality. 
Until the report had been studied further and conclusions drawn, the burden of 
safeguards application should be reduced rather than increased. The nuclear 
Powers should be urged to open all their facilities to inspection by the Agency, 
since to refuse safeguards on some facilities gave their nuclear industries an 
unfair commercial advantage over those of other States. 


98. If a non-proliferation policy was to be credible, it should be consistent, 
particularly where the major nuclear Powers were concerned; to permit delivery 
of a reactor to one country while refusing it to another which accepted the 
same type of safeguards was to cast doubt on the credibility of IAEA safeguards, 
and even of NPT itself. The selective application of NPT had led some to infer 
that the policy of non-proliferation was a political and economic weapon for 
use against countries which did not possess nuclear weapons. Such an inference 
was of great concern to countries such as Belgium, which was rigorous in its 
respect both for the policy and for the Agency's safeguards. 
99. The previous year he had stated that he could not approve a budget that was 
not based on the principle of zero growth. Although there were some signs of 
improvement, Belgium's economic situation, like that of all other Western countries, 
was still a difficult one, and he could not agree that international 
organizations should be allowed to evade their responsibilities in that respect. 
100. The 2% real growth in the Regular Budget for 1984 was entirely due to an 
overall expansion of almost 14% in the Safeguards Department. The safeguards 
budget had risen steeply in recent years, and by 1984 would account for 357 
of programmes under the Regular Budget; such an increase could only be 
justified if there were to be a corresponding increase in the number of 

GC(XXVII)/249 
page 27 


countries subject to inspection and in the number of facilities subject to 
safeguards. The continued expansion of the safeguards budget was an indication 
of a change in the nature of the Agency, and of a tendency to step up inspection 
activities at the expense of promotion activities. That trend should be 
resisted, and he could not join in any consensus which gave the budget 
unreserved approval. 


101. In Belgium, nuclear power generation had now accounted for 45% of electricity 
generation as against 30% in 1982, and by 1986 it would account for 6570> so that 
Belgium would continue to be one of the leading nuclear-power-generating 
countries. Also, Belgium was continuing with activities at all stages of the fuel 
cycle. Of the two fuel fabrication plants at Mol-Dessel, the production 
capacity of one had recently been increased, and there were plans for a substantial 
increase in the capacity of the other. Plutonium technology had been 
under development in Belgium since 1958, particularly with a view to the 
recycling of plutonium in light-water reactors; research had indicated that such 
recycling might well be feasible. The recent reopening of the Dessel plant for 
the treatment of special recycled fuels in addition to traditional fuels would 
help to strengthen Belgium's co-operation with other countries of Western Europe. 
The country's nuclear programme called for sustained research and development, 
and here the Centre d'Etude de l'Energie Nucleaire at Mol was playing an 
important role. Also, studies were being conducted in an underground laboratory 
at Mol on the treatment and storage of radioactive waste. 
102. The Institut National des Radioelements (IRE) was continuing to grow; the 
installation of a 90 MW(e) proton cyclotron, the most powerful of its kind 
in Europe, would enable it to play a leading role in the production of shortlived 
radioisotopes. Belgian industry as a whole was playing an important 
part in the national nuclear power programme. Belgium was also making its 
contribution to the Agency by supplying experts, by offering training programmes, 
by carrying out research under contract, and through a support programme in 
the field of safeguards. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 28 


103. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that, especially in view of the friendly 
relations between his country and the People's Republic of China, he welcomed 
the approval of China for membership of the Agency. That country had 
been prevented from occupying its rightful seat in the United Nations and 
its subsidiary organs for over two decades by the same super-Power that now 
proclaimed its concern for the principle of universality. Iraq on the other 
hand, had vigorously campaigned for the admission of the People's Republic of 
China to the United Nations. 
104. The General Conference had before it several important issues related to 
the basic functions of the Agency as they had been for a number of years. 
Although those issues remained unresolved, he felt that a better understanding 
and clearer definition of the problems had been achieved. That, however, 
should not lead to a relaxation of serious endeavours to resolve those issues 
satisfactorily. In that connection, he fully supported the statement of the 
Group of 77 at the June meetings of the Board of Governors with regard to the 
Regular Budget. He wished to reiterate Iraq's position that a complete and 
satisfactory way of implementing resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388 lay in financing 
technical assistance from the Regular Budget. In addition, Iraq would 
continue to give its fullest support to all efforts aimed at achieving 
equitable geographical representation in the Board of Governors, because it 
believed that that was in the best interests of the Agency. 
105. In his address at the twenty-sixth session of the General Conference the 
Iraqi Foreign Minister had stated that twenty-five years after the IAEA had 
been founded with the aim of accelerating and enlarging activities relating 
to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, the situation was less than 
satisfactory since, while the needs of developing countries for various 
peaceful applications of atomic energy were increasing, the obstacles 
hindering the transfer of nuclear technology were mounting. A year later, 
there had unfortunately been no marked improvement in that situation. On 
the contrary, experience showed that some industrialized countries continued, 
on a unilateral basis, to exercise ever-tightening constraints on the transfer 
of nuclear technology for peaceful uses. In certain cases, export licences 
for conventional laboratory equipment were not being granted for reasons which 
did not stem from the control measures known to have been adopted by suppliers. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 29 


It seemed that in some instances certain States tended to replace internationally 
accepted control measures by other measures, based on speculative 
reasoning and subjective judgement. 


106. In his view, failure to convene the United Nations Conference for Promotion 
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy as 
scheduled could only be seen as a setback to the political will that had been 
behind the organization of the Conference. He urged all countries concerned 
to do what they could so that the Conference could be held at the earliest 
possible time and, in so doing,to comply with the fundamental principles that 
had been behind the consensus in the United Nations General Assembly which 
had given rise to the organization of the Conference. The goals of the 
Conference were clear from the title. The issue of non-proliferation, 
important though it might be, ought not to be allowed to overshadow its 
principal objectives. He believed that genuine acceptance of the needs of 
developing countries for peaceful uses of nuclear energy and their inalienable 
right to the development of such uses would greatly facilitate the reaching of 
an agreement that could also satisfy legitimate non-proliferation concerns. 
107. He welcomed the progress recently reported in the work of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS), notably in the area of emergency and back-up 
mechanisms. However, further progress on principles of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy needed to be achieved 
before any real optimism was warranted. His Government, like others, had 
hoped that positive results might emerge from the work of CAS in time to serve 
as input to the United Nations Conference. However, the progress achieved had 
been too slow to make that hope a reality. He was convinced, nevertheless, 
that it was in the interests of both developed and developing countries to 
reach a consensus on the matter. As a participant in CAS, Iraq would continue 
to work with others towards that end. It believed that the questions 
involved were of vital importance and would certainly be reflected at the 
United Nations Conference and at the Third NPT Review Conference. 
108. In his address to the Uranium Institute in London on 26 August 1983, the 
Director General had stated that promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, whereby the world's uranium resources were used as fuel, and helping 
to ensure that the atom was used only peacefully, were matters of interest 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 30 


to everyone and were, indeed, the tasks formally assigned to the IAEA by its 
Statute. The Director General had further said that, although a certain 
country had vast deposits of coal and much unexploited hydro power, it had 
come to the conclusion that nuclear energy must become one of its main energy 
sources and it was determined to start building its first power reactors. 
That statement also held true for Iraq, a country with vast oil resources, 
which had come to the conclusion that nuclear energy must become one of its 
energy sources; and, in fact, work on finalization of a contract for the 
commencement of siting studies for its first nuclear power plant was 
continuing. The same conclusion had been reached by many developing countries, 
which highlighted the importance of nuclear energy for their development programmes. 
Certainly the IAEA had an important role to play in facilitating 
the implementation of those programmes. 


109. The promotion of the utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
and the role of the IAEA in that connection had been seriously undermined by 
the Israeli aggression against the Iraqi Nuclear Research Centre in Baghdad. 
More general consequences of the Israeli attack had taken the form of damage 
to international norms and institutions. That aggression had demonstrated 
clearly the Israelis' disrespect for, and wish to challenge, the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty and the IAEA safeguards system; had undermined international 
legal constraints on acts of aggression, including the standards enshrined in 
the United Nations Charter; had introduced new hazards and uncertainties 
which posed a threat to further peaceful nuclear development and co-operation 
and to the promotional activities of the IAEA; and ran counter to the 
objectives set forth in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States 
and in the Declaration on the Establishment of and the Programme of Action for 
a New International Economic Order. 


110. That situation was being further worsened by the officially stated 
Israeli threat to repeat its act of aggression at any time and at any place 
in which it deemed that to be in its own interests, thus threatening not 
only international co-operation on the development of nuclear energy but also 
posing a very serious and continuous threat to the very existence of the Agency. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 31 


The International Atomic Energy Agency might have no power to prevent aggression 
directly, but it had moral authority which it could exercise together with 
other international bodies empowered to do so. It was therefore the duty of 
the Agency and of its General Conference to declare to the world at large, as 
explicitly and as clearly as possible, the gravity of the situation that it 
was facing as a consequence of the Israeli aggression and in view of Israel's 
standing threat to perform similar acts of criminal adventurism. It was 
also duty bound to take all measures within its statutory authority to punish 
the aggressor and to discourage such acts in the future. 


111. Moreover, Member States of the Agency should heed the repeated calls to 
put a halt to co-operation with Israel and to cease conniving with it in its 
nuclear threats and blackmail. In particular, he called on the United States 
of America to end its assistance to and protection of Israel, without which it 
would not have been possible for it to continue its aggressive and expansionist 
policies. Moreover, there were signs of increasing nuclear co-operation 
between Israel and South Africa, which gave rise to very grave concern since 
it posed a considerable and very real threat to peace and security in Africa 
and the Middle East. That danger would continue to increase as long as the 
nuclear activities of those two regimes were not subject to Agency safeguards 
and as long as certain States continued to ignore their duty to cease 
co-operating with them. 
112. Finally, his Government attached considerable importance to the issue of 
military attacks on nuclear facilities, since such attacks were no longer merely 
hypothetical. An act of aggression against nuclear facilities had already 
been committed and the threat to repeat it was still standing. It was, 
therefore, a matter that should be treated with the utmost seriousness. 
Attacks on nuclear facilities could result in the release of radiation of 
the same nature and having the same effects as that released bya nuclear 
explosion. 
113. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) said he welcomed and supported the application for 
membership of the Agency made by the People's Republic of China, an application 
which represented an essential step towards the universality of the 
organization. He looked forward to co-operating with the representatives 
of the People's Republic of China and was convinced that that country's membership 
would prove as fruitful for the Agency as for the applicant. 

GC(XXVII)/0R.249 
page 32 


114. Although the year that had passed since the Conference's last session had 
been one of the most critical in the lifetime of the Agency, the IAEA had 
proved itself to be one of the most vital and effective of international 
organizations. It had successfully reoriented its activities towards its 
statutory objectives, namely towards enlarging the contribution of nuclear 
energy to peace, health and prosperity, and towards efforts to prevent a 
further proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
115. Although growth in installed nuclear power capacity had slowed down, due 
in part to the world-wide low economic growth, a large nuclear industry already 
existed and would continue to exist for a long period of time, thus making 
international co-operation on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis a 
necessity. 
116. Safety, international trade in nuclear materials, technical assistance and 
non-proliferation were all areas in which the Agency had played and would in 
future play a leading role. Increasing international co-operation in those 
areas, both within the Agency and outside it, was of paramount interest to the 
Member States of the Agency. Denmark was strongly in favour of such international 
co-operation, and attached great importance to the role of the IAEA 
in contributing to international peace and stability. 


117. The Director General's statement gave a clear analysis of the present 
status of the Agency and of the results it had achieved. It confirmed the 
Director General's commitment to the Agency, and his belief in its ability to 
meet any demands on it that the future might bring. 
118. In the past year many Member States had been facing a situation of budgetary 
constraint, a sitaution which was reflected in the important decisions taken in 
the Administrative and Budgetary Committee and in the Board of Governors on the 
budget proposals for 1984. Those decisions placed a heavy burden on the 
shoulders of the Secretariat. He was pleased to learn from the statement by 
the Director General how well the Secretariat had succeeded in meeting the 
new challenges, and how it had endeavoured, in co-operation with Member 
States, to identify priority areas, in order to ensure that available resources 
were used to meet the needs of Member States. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 33 


119. Nuclear safety had become one of the Agency's most important areas, and 
he wished to congratulate the Secretariat on the efforts it had made to strengthen 
the activities being carried out under the safety programme. The Agency had 
now become the leading forum for international discussions on safety. The 
development of that area of the Agency's activities was clearly demonstrated 
in the Second Annual Report on Nuclear Safety, a report which deserved to 
be widely circulated among Member States. 
120. Contributions to the Technical Co-operation Fund had continued to 
increase during 1982. One of the most important events of the year had been 
the completion of the Board's review of the Agency's technical co-operation 
programmes, a review which had given valuable guidelines to the Secretariat 
when planning activities for the years ahead. A further proof of the success 
of the review was the Board's request that in future such reviews, together 
with seminars on the technical co-operation programmes, should become a regular 
event. He attached great importance to that side of the Agency's activities, 
and was glad to pledge Denmark's contribution for 1984. 
121. One of the issues on the Board's agenda for the coming year would be the 
question of implementing International Plutonium Storage (IPS) as a supplement 
to the Agency safeguards system. No agreement on that issue had been reached 
during the previous year, but he hoped that the discussions currently being 
held would make it possible for the Board to arrive at a solution in the 
coming year. 
122. During the past year the Committee on Assurances of Supply had succeeded 
in producing concrete results in the area of revision and back-up mechanisms. 
He hoped that the consensus achieved would facilitate the reaching of agreement 
on principles of international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. 
Some progress had been made in that direction during the last session of CAS, 
but it had to be admitted that the results so far had been modest. 
123. The transfer of nuclear materials, technology and equipment should not be 
based merely on a document but also on mutual trust between States. In that 
respect the Agency's safeguards system was unique, and was one of its most 
important promotional activities. It was of crucial importance to Member States 

GC(XXVII)/OR.249 
page 34 


that the safeguards applied by the Agency should be perceived as effective and 
credible, since only thus could they contribute to stability and peace. 
The safeguards applied by the Agency were in that respect equally important 
to all Member States. His Government attributed the highest importance 
to the expansion and continued improvement of the IAEA safeguards system. 


In that connection, he noted with deep concern that the annual report for 
1982 stated that there were four non-nuclear-weapon States in which only 
some installations were under safeguards and in which there were unsafeguarded 
nuclear facilities, either in operation or under construction, capable of 
producing weapons-grade material. 


124. He strongly supported the safeguards system, and was pleased to note the 
progress achieved during 1982. However, there was still room for improvement, 
and he urged all States who had not yet done so to join the NPT and accept 
full-scope safeguards, thus making the safeguards system truly universal. 
125. The question of the introduction of nuclear power generating capacity was 
still under consideration in Denmark. By the spring of 1984, government 
investigations into such questions as nuclear safety, the potential for 
disposal of radioactive waste in the salt domes and subsoils of Denmark, and 
the economy of nuclear power generation compared to generation by the use of 
coal would be concluded. On the question of the safe disposal of radioactive 
waste, he had noted the Director General's statement on the conclusions reached 
at the IAEA conference on radioactive waste management, and was confident that 
the Agency's continued studies would throw further light on the issue in the 
future. He supported the Director General's view that the time had come to 
consider possible international co-operation on the ultimate disposal of highlevel 
waste, and to work towards regional and international solutions which 
would make it possible to limit the total number of disposal sites. 


126. In conclusion, he hoped that the Agency would continue to lay stress on a 
high level of technical competence, and that it would maintain its efforts to 
find solutions to the sometimes conflicting needs of Member States. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
January 1984* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 11 October 1983, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. KEBLEK (Czechoslovakia) 
later: Mr. BRENNAN (Australia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of, the Paragraphs 
agenda** 


7 
General debate and annual report for 
1982 (continued) 1 - 85 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United Kingdom 1-10 
Pakistan 11 - 23 
Saudi Arabia 24 - 32 
Brazil 33 - 37 
Netherlands 38 - 47 
Syrian Arab Republic 48 - 55 
Egypt 56 - 67 
Hungary 68 - 84 
United States of America 85 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 4 November 1983, 


**/ GC(XXVII)/700. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 


84-00 092 



GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684) 


1. Mr. HENDERSON (United Kingdom) said he, too, was pleased to congratulate 
the People's Republic of China on its admission to the Agency, 
which had now become a truly universal organization. As a newcomer to the 
international nuclear scene, he wished to begin with some personal reflections 
on the positive aspects of the Agency. As an international organization 
entrusted with a mission of the highest importance for the welfare and peace 
of all, the Agency enjoyed an unparalleled reputation. It was run with the 
greatest efficiency, and the commitment of the staff and Member States to 
the Agency's cause was outstanding. 
2. In some respects, however, there was a gulf between the Secretariat on the 
one hand and the Board of Governors and its various fora on the other. The 
problem was due not to a lack of communication (the Secretariat kept the Board 
and Members fully informed and endeavoured to take the Members' interests 
into consideration), but rather to differing perceptions of the Agency's 
role. The Agency was quite rightly regarded as a technical organization 
with a well-defined and important mission which it carried out most effectively. 
However, to judge by its deliberations, the Board seemed to be less given 
to directing and guiding the Agency's work than to parading irrelevant political 
hobby-horses. Those hobby-horses were paraded with great panache and in 
a general atmosphere of enormous goodwill and friendliness, but took up a 
great deal of time quite out of proportion to the Board's business. Beneath 
that friendly exterior there seemed to lurk an iron determination to score 
political points. In itself that was harmless enough, but there seemed to 
be a readiness to press political issues, even to the detriment of the quality 
of the Agency's work, its good standing and its impartiality.N 
3. He did not wish to imply that politics had no part in nuclear affairs. 
Quite the contrary, the issues raised by civil nuclear power - the fear of 
proliferation and the need for assurances of supply and public acceptability were 
unavoidably political both in the national and the international sense, 
and the Agency was the appropriate forum for tackling the international political 
dimension of nuclear power. However, its capacity to deal effectively with 
such matters was bound to be seriously hampered if extraneous political considerations 
were allowed to interfere. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 3 


4. He proposed to state two simple and positive truths concerning that highly 
complicated subject. First, the Agency's membership had the mission 
of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear explosive devices. The first objective could 
not be attained if the public had no confidence in the likelihood of success 
in the second. They were not competing aims but, rather, complementary ones 
of great importance to each Member State. Secondly, while the Agency pre-dated 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the latter was the 
expression of collective world commitment to the Agency's objectives. In 
his Government's view, the nuclear community should build on the Agency and 
the NPT. Philosophical discussions as to the compatability of the Agency 
and the NPT should not be allowed to inhibit the Agency's effectiveness or 
dissuade further States from acceding to the Treaty. Such discussions were 
invariably initiated by countries which failed to see beyond the question 
of how their own interests would be affected to the broader issue of the 
advantages gained by the international community as a whole. His Government's 
policy was to encourage accession to the Treaty just as it encouraged membership 
of the Agency, and he hoped that both would attract more adherents. 


5. Without indulging in a lengthy catalogue of the United Kingdom's progress 
over the past year in its nuclear programme and policies, he wished to refer 
to one individual aspect of his country's nuclear policy in view of its 
importance and international scope. The United Kingdom had been among the 
countries which had pioneered the fast reactor for commercial application. 
As a result of its integrated fast reactor programme his country was able 
to proceed to full-scale commercialization when the time was ripe. However, 
a very substantial research and development effort was still needed. As 
the time when it would be possible to introduce the fast reactor on a commercial 
scale seemed to be receding, the United Kingdom had reached the conclusion 
that the best way forward was to seek collaboration with the European countries 
which were already co-operating successfully in that field. That decision 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 4 


had been announced at the beginning of September and should make it possible 
to pool existing knowledge, optimize research programmes and co-ordinate 
the construction of further demonstration reactors, while at the same time 
making earlier economies of scale with regard to the fuel cycle. 


6. With reference to the Director General's statement, he recalled the 
resolution, adopted in February at the meeting of the parties to the London 
Dumping Convention, on the suspension of sea disposal operations pending the 
outcome of a scientific review of their drawbacks and advantages. Because of its 
prominent role with regard to sea disposal, the United Kingdom felt it appropriate 
to clarify its position. It considered the disposal of low-level 
radioactive waste at sea to be a safe and enivronmentally acceptable method 
which was consistent with the international standards established in the 
London Dumping Convention and by international bodies such as the 
Agency. No authoritative scientific evidence had been adduced to show that 
sea disposal performed in accordance with those standards was unsafe. If 
such evidence were to emerge from the review, the United Kingdom would be 
prepared to suspend its disposal operations. In the meantime, it had been 
recognized by the delegates at the 1983 meeting of the parties to the 
Convention that the resolution on the suspension of disposal operations was 
not binding on members. Moreover, that resolution was not supported by the 
scientific evidence which would be necessary for the provisions of the 
Convention to be amended. 


7. The Director General had also referred to the idea of setting up an 
international body to give guidance on nuclear safety philosophies and basic 
safety criteria. The concept of international and independently agreed safety 
criteria was an attractive one. But before setting out on that course it 
would be necessary to examine very carefully whether such a concept was 
practicable. He wondered what the mandate of such a body would be and assumed 
that, by analogy with the ICRP, the body envisaged would be a group of independent 
experts who would draw on the results of research carried out throughout 
the world on nuclear plant safety with a view to giving guidance on acceptable 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 5 


levels of risk for various key plant characteristics. It would undoubtedly 
be neither possible nor desirable to go beyond such a mandate into the domain 
of regulatory philosophies, which were bound to vary widely according to the 
particular circumstances of each country. Even the establishment of a body 
to issue guidelines on acceptable levels of risk had its difficulties, and 
he doubted whether the analogy with the ICRP would, in fact, be helpful, 
given the considerable element of subjectivity and political judgement inherent 
in decisions regarding the safety of nuclear facilities. There was 
a serious risk that such a body would only be able to agree on guidelines 
reflecting the lowest common denominator of existing practices and that 
such guidelines would consequently earn minimum respect. Finally, the experts 
qualified to serve on such a committee would be certain to come from some 
part of the nuclear industry and might not, therefore, be seen as independent. 
In the light of those uncertainties, he feared that the ideal of a safety 
commission was an elusive one and that pursuit of it would bring more problems 
than benefits for the nuclear community. Having said all that, however, he 
strongly supported the safety initiatives taken under the Agency's auspices such 
as, for example, the International Incident Reporting System, the operational 
safety review teams mentioned by the Director General and the nuclear safety 
standards programme. 


8. With regard to nuclear supplies, the United Kingdom welcomed the recent 
progress made by the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), both in its 
search for mutually agreed principles of international co-operation and in 
the specific field of emergency and back-up mechanisms. The United Kingdom 
had supported the work of CAS from the outset and believed that, with the 
renewed commitment to resolving the problems facing the Committee, a general 
consensus would not be long in emerging. 
9. The ideas expressed regarding small and medium power reactors were of 
interest and it seemed clear that a number of sellers were willing to supply 
the market if it could be shown that a market existed. The decision taken 
at a recent Agency meeting to recommend a study of the conditions prevailing 
in potential customer countries seemed to be a sensible approach. The cost 
estimates provided demonstrated that it was possible to organize the preliminary 
missions envisaged within the budget recommended by the Board for 1984. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 6 


10. He was convinced that, after the recent admission of the People's Republic 
of China,all the States Members of the Agency would be keen to reflect on 
the universal character which the Agency had acquired and to concentrate 
their attention on the practical, technical and scientific tasks which it 
could and must accomplish in order to improve the quality of life and standard 
of living of the whole of mankind. 
Mr. Brennan (Australia), Vice-President, took the Chair. 


11. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) welcomed the admission of the People's Republic 
of China to the Agency, an historic event by virtue of which the Agency had 
become a truly universal organization. China would undoubtedly have a positive 
influence on the Agency's work and would be a great moral support for the 
developing countries. 
12. The nature of the Agency's mission and the effectiveness of its work, 
thanks to the devotion of its staff and the quality of its leadership, lent 
the organization a certain prestige; its task now was to take imaginative 
new initiatives in order to stimulate the growth of nuclear power. Despite 
a temporary reprieve due to adjustments in the price of oil and the slowing 
down in economic growth, the basic situation had not changed, i.e. reserves 
of fossil fuel were still limited. The world energy situation continued 
to be precarious and energy imports weighed ever more heavily on the frail 
economies of the developing countries. In its 1983 report, the World Bank 
had laid particular emphasis on the urgent need to make major investments 
in the energy sectors of developing countries so that they could attain a 
minimum level of economic growth. In particular, it had pointed to the important 
role which nuclear power could play in reducing energy imports; over 
the next decade the World Bank planned to allocate some 53 000 million dollars 
exclusively to the development of nuclear power in the developing countries. 
Pakistan was convinced that nuclear power had reached a stage of technical 
maturity and economic viability at which it could play a prominent role in 
the production of electricity in a large number of highly populated developing 
countries where energy resources were insufficient. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 7 


13. According to the statistics, the share of nuclear energy in electricity 
production was expected in the near future to reach a level of 507o in some 
countries. However, global estimates of the growth of nuclear power capacity 
were constantly slipping below previous targets. The countries which, only 
10 years before, had been leading the field and setting the pace for the rest 
of the world in the nuclear sphere were now finding that their nuclear industry 
was virtually paralysed, not because it had proved to be unprofitable, but 
as a result of other inhibiting factors. It was a paradoxical situation 
when, having for three decades concerned itself with the potential of nuclear 
power, the world was still unable to reap its benefits. The main reason 
for that development was the over-regulation of nuclear power, both domestically 
and internationally . Domestically, the increasing constraints imposed 
by regulatory bodies in a number of advanced countries had lengthened construction 
periods, increased costs and introduced an element of uncertainty which 
had definitely discouraged public services and reactor vendors and had thus 
suffocated the nuclear industry. The regulatory bodies seemed to be excessively 
senstitive to the alarmist and unrealistic scenarios concocted by 
certain groups, scenarios which had not been borne out by the facts. While 
no industry was entirely free of risk, the nuclear industry had a safety 
record which was far better than that of conventional industries such 
as transport, mining and chemicals. 


14. At an international level there seemed to be a parallel trend towards 
imposing increasing and arbitrary restrictions on the export of nuclear 
power plants as a result of the tendency to equate nuclear power with nuclear 
proliferation. A recent study conducted by prominent experts in nuclear 
technology and international relations in the nuclear sphere had concluded 
that nuclear power plants under safeguards constituted a slight or marginal 
risk of nuclear proliferation and that the idea that the development of 
nuclear power production for civil purposes would automatically lead to 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons was not only groundless, but actually 
misleading. It should be recognized that nuclear proliferation, both vertical 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 8 


and horizontal, was primarily a political problem,and an effort should be 
made to resolve the political issues involved rather than spending energy 
on erecting technical barriers and surrendering to the delusion that more 
restrictions on civil nuclear activities could eliminate the risk of proliferation. 
Such short-sighted measures would only serve to paralyse economic 
development throughout the world, exacerbate the existing energy crisis 
and create even greater insecurity and instability instead of promoting 
the cause of world peace and non-proliferation. 


15. Pakistan supported all measures aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the 
Agency, which was expected to play a leading role in stimulating economic 
development and strengthening world security. The need for such measures 
had been examined at the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sessions of the 
Agency's General Conference, which had in 1981 unanimously adopted 
important resolutions regarding the financing of technical assistance 
(GC(XXV)/RES/388), the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat (GC(XXV)/RES/386) 
and the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute (GC(XXV)/RES/389). Pakistan 
greatly regretted the lack of progress made over the past two years in the 
areas covered by those resolutions. 
16. Pakistan had repeatedly drawn the Secretariat's attention to the 
increasing imbalance in the allocation of resources to the two pillars on 
which the organization was founded: technical assistance and safeguards. 
That imbalance undermined the Agency's credibility and effectiveness. A 
little more generosity on the part of the developed countries would undoubtedly 
help to convince the majority of the Agency's Members that the rich countries 
took as great an interest in the progress of the Agency's promotional activities 
as its regulatory functions. Pakistan supported the Agency's safeguards 
activities, but could not understand why they had been allowed to outpace 
its technical assistance programmes. The share of allocations to safeguards 
had increased from 10% in the 1970 budget to 30% in 1983 and 1984, while 
the funds allocated to technical assistance in the same period had remained 
static around the 20%, mark. Pakistan appreciated the generous voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, but felt 
that, in accordance with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388, it was necessary to 
seek ways and means of financing technical assistance from resources which 



GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 9 


were as predictable and assured as those allocated to safeguards. By so doing, 
the Agency would demonstrate that it attached equal importance to the two activities. 
He agreed with the Director General that the Agency's promotional and 
regulatory activities were mutually reinforcing, but did not consider that its 
safeguards activities could be termed promotional or regarded as a form of 
technical assistance. 


17. Pakistan appreciated the efforts of the Director General to increase the 
representation of the developing countries on the staff of the Secretariat as 
indicated by the appointments made at the Director level. He wished to point 
out, however, that the overall increase in the representation of the developing 
countries on the Professional staff over the past two years had remained below 27. 
Resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 had requested the Director General to take the 
necessary action to bring about a substantial increase in the representation of 
the developing countries on the staff of the Secretariat with a view to redressing 
the existing imbalance by 1985. Clearly, 2% could not be regarded as a 
substantial increase, and it was to be hoped that a greater effort would be made 
in that regard. It was no longer a valid contention that there were not 
sufficient qualified candidates available from the developing countries, as a 
number of the latter had put forward excellent candidates and some of those 
countries with programmes which were almost 20 years old could now spare personnel 
who were widely experienced and highly qualified in areas of direct relevance 
to the Agency's programme. 
18. The need to increase the representation of the developing countries, 
and more specifically the areas of Africa and of the Middle East and 
South Asia, which were especially under-represented on the Board of Governors, 
had been the subject of extensive discussions within the Agency over the 
past six years. Despite the reluctance of various Member States regarding 
increased representation of those or other areas, most of the Member States 
had, in conformity with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/361, agreed to a compromise 
formula providing for a modest increase in the representation of Africa 
and the Middle East. As long as those two regions were not equitably represented 
on the Board, the effectiveness of the latter would suffer. Any delay in 
rectifying that injustice would only serve to aggravate the frustration 
felt by the countries in those regions which were playing an increasingly 
active role in the Agency's work. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 10 


19. The Board had established the Committee on Assurances of Supply and had 
assigned it the crucial task of evolving universally acceptable standards for 
regulating peaceful nuclear trade throughout the world. The establishment of 
that Committee had represented tacit recognition of the fact that arbitrary 
guidelines set by supplier States without consulting recipient States could not 
be enforced or sustained. Pakistan therefore believed that it was in the 
interest of both supplier and recipient States that the work of CAS should 
succeed because its failure would mean a slow-down in nuclear trade and the 
development of various forms of individual action for supplying nuclear 
materials, equipment and services, which would be far more difficult to regulate. 
It was regrettable that CAS had been virtually deadlocked over the issue of 
defining the principles of international co-operation. Some flexibility had 
been shown during the latest series .of discussions, which had resulted in the 
drafting of emergency back-up and revision mechanisms. It was to be hoped 
that that flexible attitude would grow stronger and lead to a genuine compromise 
on other important issues. It was in nobody's interest that reaching agreement 
in CAS should be delayed, because that would certainly postpone the time when 
the developing countries could benefit from nuclear energy and it would 
represent no gain for the advanced countries, since they could not sustain 
their monopoly in nuclear technology indefinitely. In fact, that monopoly was 
steadily decreasing. If an agreement was not reached fairly rapidly, many 
recipient States would be compelled to make the investments and efforts necessary 
for achieving greater self-sufficiency in key areas, and once they had gained 
the necessary technology at high cost they could not be expected to give it up. 
Pakistan deeply regretted the tendency of certain supplier States conveniently 
and arbitrarily to go back on their supply undertakings and commitments. It 
considered that irrevocable safeguards should be linked with equally irrecovable 
supply guarantees. 
20. The Government of Pakistan had consistently supported the Agency's safeguards 
activitites. It was convinced that the safeguards system was technically 
sound and adequate and it was gratified that there had not been a single 
instance of diversion of nuclear material from any facility under Agency safeguards. 
It was in favour of technical improvements in the safeguards system in 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 11 


order to enhance its effectiveness and to reduce the overall costs, but it 
believed that the real strength of the Agency's safeguards lay not in 
so-called technical measures but in universal acceptance of the system. 
The fact should not be overlooked that the greatest deterrent to diversion was 
the political cost which any country would have to bear in the event of an 
attempted diversion. A disturbing tendency had been noted on the part of 
certain Member States to introduce arbitrary changes in the safeguards system 
as set out in document INFCIRC/66/Rev.2, the wording of which had been adopted 
by consensus. Pakistan was opposed to any unilateral modification of that 
system, which was fully in keeping with the Agency's Statute. 


21. The Pakistan Government had expressed in no uncertain terms at 
meetings of the General Conference and the Board of Governors, its 
views on the Israeli attack on the peaceful nuclear centre in Iraq. It once 
again strongly condemned that premeditated, unwarranted and totally unjustified 
attack, which was in complete violation of accepted international principles, 
the Statute of the Agency and the Charter of the United Nations. That 
irresponsible attack had done irreparable damage to the cause of ;the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. The attack should not only be condemned wholeheartedly, 
but energetic measures should be taken to avoid a repetition of such' acts in 
the future. In that connection, Pakistan welcomed the proposal for adopting 
an international convention which would prevent such irresponsible attacks 
in future. It strongly believed that any attack on a nuclear facility in times 
of peace was fraught with great danger and could have most serious consequences 
for world peace. 
22. His Government had already submitted detailed comments to the Board on 
the programme and budget of the Agency for 1983-84. In general, it did not 
subscribe to the philosophy of zero growth in such essential ar'eas as technical 
assistance, nuclear safety, nuclear power and nuclear applications in agriculture 
and medicine. In its opinion, there was still considerable room for further 
reductions in the administration budget. Furthermore, it wished to express its 
appreciation for the increased emphasis on nuclear safety, because the safety 
of civilian nuclear power facilities was and should continue to be above all 



GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 12 


politics. It was necessary to avoid the occurrence of any incident in a 
peaceful nuclear facility, because that would be a serious setback for the 
nuclear energy programmes of all Member States. Pakistan approved projects for 
setting up safety review teams to increase the capabilities of individual 
countries to cope with nuclear accidents and for the development of safety 
codes and standards. 


23. The time had come to make serious and concerted efforts to encourage 
international co-operation in the development of small and medium power reactors, 
which were of interest not only to the developing countries but also to the 
advanced countries. Among the co-operation activities of particular benefit 
were the activities under regional co-operation agreements and the outstanding 
work which was being done at the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
at Trieste. Lastly, he wished to express his country's appreciation of the 
continuing improvements in the administration and financing of technical assistance 
and especially of the assistance which had been made available to 
Pakistan by the Agency under the technical co-operation programme. 


24. Mr. AL-KABBANI (Saudi Arabia) said his country's delegation recognized 
the importance and necessity of extending the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
and especially of increasing electric power generation so as to meet the increased 
demand for power in both the developing and the more advanced countries. The 
Agency could and should play an important role in that very vital area, and the 
Director General deserved congratulations for his efforts to promote the development 
of nuclear power, nuclear safety and activities in other parts of the nuclear 
fuel cycle, including nuclear waste disposal. The Saudi delegation approved the 
Board's report to the General Conference (GC(XXVII)/684) and the objectives 
set in the budget for 1984 (GC(XXVII)/686). 
25. Everyone realized that there was an urgent need for increasing the 
production of energy and of ensuring energy supplies to meet increasing 
demand, either by means of nuclear power or from renewable sources such 
as solar energy and wind energy. It was a fact that nuclear energy 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 13 


occupied an important position among energy sources, especially because of the 


increase in the price of oil and the depletion of oil reserves. The developing 
countries were, for various reasons, still facing great difficulties in 
obtaining the technology, equipment and nuclear material which they needed. 
They believed that, in order to prevent horizontal nuclear proliferation, the 


industrialized countries which exported nuclear equipment were creating 


technical, economic and commercial difficulties for countries which wanted 


to obtain nuclear facilities. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) 
had to solve problems and overcome considerable obstacles, and the fact 


that no solution had yet been found to those problems created a feeling of 
uncertainty among many of the developing countries which urgently needed energy 


for developing their industrial and economic resources. Saudi Arabia was 
paying careful attention to the discussions in CAS, the purpose of which was to 
establish principles that would ensure the supply of the required nuclear 
technology, material, equipment and services. It was to be hoped that those 
principles would help create an atmosphere of stability and confidence among 
exporting and importing countries. 


26. In his statement to the General Conference, the Director General had 
proposed creating a high-level commission which would be responsible for 
safety in nuclear power plants and would establish universally acceptable 
standards and regulations that were comparable with the rules of the 
International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP). While supporting 
the idea of the creation of such a commission, his country wished to stress 
that it should be institutionally independent and that its deliberations 
and recommendations should be based on scientific knowledge and experience, free 
of any political influence whatsoever. However, close scientific and technical 
co-operation between that commission and the Agency was necessary in view of 
the complementary nature of their activities. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 14 


27. The other important point in the Director General's statement concerned the 
risk of military attacks against nuclear installations, which could not fail to 
have adverse effects on the acceptance of nuclear energy by the public at large. 
To dissipate those fears it would be necessary to adopt constraining rules and 
standards, in the form of a convention or treaty. In that connection, the Saudi 
delegation welcomed the efforts of the Disarmament Committee. It also hoped 
that measures would be taken to prevent military attacks against civilian nuclear 
facilities, whether they were nuclear power plants, research reactors or fuel 
cycle facilities. 
28. Under the Agency's draft budget for 1984 (GC(XXVII)/686) the expenditures 
for 1984 would increase overall by approximately 107o compared with 1983. The 
Saudi Government was in favour of zero real growth, as long as that was not to 
the detriment of the Agency's promotional activities. A brief examination of the 
draft budget showed that the increase in expenditure under the programme of safeguards 
in 1984 would be nearly ten times as great as the increase in expenditure 
for technical assistance and co-operation. Furthermore, serious cuts had been 
made in most of the Agency's promotional activities (nuclear power, life sciences, 
food and agriculture etc). 
29. The Saudi delegation attached particular importance to technical assistance 
and co-operation activities and requested the General Conference to approve the 
amount of US $38 644 000 recommended by the Board. As that amount was not 
enough to finance the numerous projects requested by the developing countries, 
it hoped that the industrialized countries would provide more assistance for 
footnote a_/ projects. 
30. It was most regrettable that, in the present year once again, the Board was 
unable to reach agreement on the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, 
owing to the resistance of certain Member States for political reasons. The 
argument often put forward that increased membership of the Board would impair 
its efficiency was baseless. For more than six years Governors representing the 
countries of the Middle East and South Asia and of Africa had been 
requesting that their areas should be represented equitably on the Board. The 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 15 


Saudi Arabian Government hoped that the Board and the General Conference would 
find a legal solution which would satisfy that request. 


31. At the twenty-sixth session of the General Conference the Saudi Arabian 
delegation had submitted a number of suggestions concerning the Board and the 
General Conference. Among other things, it had proposed that the General 
Conference should meet only every second year. Unfortunately, the Secretariat 
did not appear to have made a detailed study of those proposals any more than it 
had of those put forward by the United Kingdom delegation at the same session. 
32. More than two years before, the Israelis had destroyed the Iraqi nuclear 
research centre, a facility which was under Agency safeguards. Despite 
unanimous condemnation by the international community, Israel was continuing its 
policy of resorting to force and aggression, in disregard of international 
treaties and in violation of the principles of human rights and international 
law. It was necessary for the General Conference to take effective action to 
compel that State to respect international law and to abide by resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/381 of the General Conference. Furthermore, although the Board had 
succeeded in preventing South Africa from occupying a seat on the Board, that 
country still participated in many technical and scientific meetings of the 
Agency. In keeping with the spirit of the decision, adopted at the twenty-third 
session of the General Conference, to reject the credentials of the South African 
delegation (GC(XXIII)/DEC/6), the Saudi Arabian delegation requested the 
General Conference to adopt a resolution recommending that the Secretariat 
not allow South Africa to participate in such meetings. 


33. Mr. ALVES (Brazil) said that the Brazilian Government, anxious to 
assure the well-being of all its citizens through economic and social development, 
was pursuing the implementation of its nuclear programme despite the 
financial difficulties involved because it was convinced that energy production 
based on its own resources was essential for the country. 
34. Brazil's uranium reserves now amounted to over 330 000 tonnes of Uo0o. 
J O 
The country was in the process of achieving self-sufficiency in the matter of 



GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 16 


uranium prospecting, mining and milling and yellow cake production. The construction 
of conversion and enrichment plants was well advanced and the first 
plant for the production of uranium hexafluoride and the first cascade of a 
jet-nozzel enrichment facility would go into operation in 1984. As the first 
phase of the commissioning of a fuel fabrication plant had been successfully 
completed, it had been possible to prepare the first reload for the Angra-I 
nuclear power reactor. The 626-MW Angra-I reactor would go into operation 
shortly. The construction of the 1300-MW Angra-II was proceeding satisfactorily 
and preliminary work at the site of Angra-lII was to start in 1984. Thus, 
although financial difficulties had made necessary some adaptation of the 
original schedule, the Brazilian nuclear programme was going ahead in accordance 
with the objectives that had been set at the start. 


35. With respect to the activities of the Agency, he had mixed feelings on the 
subject of safeguards. He appreciated the fact that no significant diversion of 
nuclear material had been observed thus far and that the provisions of agreements 
had been respected; he also supported the Agency's action in starting training 
programmes on safeguards for young specialists, an initiative which would 
enable Member States to participate more fully in the work of inspection. On 
the other hand, although the Brazilian delegation recognized the need for more 
funds for the Department of Safeguards as a consequence of the increase in the 
number and complexity of facilities to be inspected, analysis of the latest data 
indicated a disturbing imbalance between the increase in the number of facilities 
and the expenditures in manpower and equipment. 
36. Brazil was very much interested in the nuclear safety activities of the 
Agency and strongly supported the development of an incident reporting system, 
which would promote better dissemination of information of use to the entire 
international community. It was also deeply interested in research on 
probabilistic methods of assessing reactor safety. 
37. He was fully alive to the Agency's efforts to increase its capacity to 
provide technical assistance to the developing countries and its co-operation 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 17 


with those countries. That was one of its foremost tasks and much remained to 
be. done on that score. Brazil was fully prepared to receive trainees and to 
send to other developing countries experts on nuclear safety and radiation protection, 
as well as uranium prospecting, mining and processing. In 1983, 
Brazil was making a special effort to promote co-operation with other countries 
of Latin America in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In conclusion, he 
stressed that the Agency had a decisive role to play in the development of 
international co-operation in that sphere, in accordance with the spirit 
and letter of its Statute. 


38. Mr. VAN BARNEVELD KOOY (Netherlands) said that, like the Director 
General, he believed that all the Agency's activities were in a broad sense 
promotional activities. Contrary to what some critics asserted, there was no 
inconsistency between the two types of activities: nuclear co-operation 
without safeguards would not be realistic and, conversely, the system of safeguards 
presupposed the existence of concrete forms of nuclear co-operation. 
The combination of those two aspects - promotion and prudence - was to be found 
in many other Agency activities. For example, its regulatory activities, 
which were important in themselves, also served to create the necessary confidence 
in international co-operation and public acceptance of nuclear energy. 
The Agency's role was not just to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
as such; it also consisted in promoting international co-operation with a view 
to establishing the political, technical and social conditions which would 
ensure that such uses did not have harmful consequences. It was precisely 
because of that prudence in all its activities that the Agency deserved the 
unanimous support of all countries. It was in that perspective that the 
Netherlands welcomed the People's Republic of China as a new Member of the 
Agency. 
39. In the Netherlands, as in many countries, nuclear energy had often been 
the subject of conflicting opinions, the depth and intensity of which had led 
the Netherlands Government to decide in June 1981 to organize a broad public 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 18 


debate on the energy policy to be adopted for the 1990s. The results would 
be known at the end of 1983. Other important decisions had already been 
taken: for one thing, it had been decided to keep in operation the nuclear 
power plants at Borssele and Doodewaard, as a result of a thorough review 
carried out by independent experts of all the possible consequences of 
closing down those two plants. It had also been decided that the 
Netherlands would continue to participate in the Kalkar fast breeder project. 
In addition, the country was participating in the URENCO project, in 
co-operation with the United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany. 


40. In 1984, after completion of the public debate, decisions which were 
beginning to become urgent would be taken, since it would be necessary in the 
nineties to replace a number of conventional reactors, up to a total new 
capacity of 5-8000 MW. It was obvious that the problem of waste management 
would be an important element in the decision making. In a country as small 
and densely populated as the Netherlands, it was extremely difficult to find 
a suitable site for final disposal of nuclear waste. International cooperation 
in that matter was therefore essential. The Agency Conference on 
Radioactive Waste Management at Seattle (May 1983) had been very promising in 
that direction. The Netherlands also hoped that countries having better 
geological possibilities would consider bilateral co-operation in the matter 
of waste storage. In another area, it appeared that CAS, whose achievements 
thus far had been disappointing, had made slight progress at its last 
session and that there was justification for confidence in the future. 
41. As regards the prevention of proliferation, the Director General had 
stated that the Agency's safeguards constituted an alarm system. That system 
had again stood the test during the past year in cases where it was not 
absolutely certain that nuclear material had been used for peaceful purposes 
only. The Netherlands delegation wished to congratulate the Director 
General, the Board of Governors and all parties concerned for the way in which 
those situations had been dealt with. 

GG(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 19 


42. The Director General had looked at safeguards not only from the point of 
view of the suppliers but also from that of the receivers. Actually, it was 
in the interest of both to increase by means of safeguards the mutual confidence 
which would also favour international nuclear trade. As he (the 
Director General) had said, it was unjustified to conclude that technical 
assistance was mainly of interest to developing countries or that safeguards 
were mainly of importance to the industrialized countries. The safeguards 
system was of interest to all States Members of the Agency and industrialized 
countries and developing countries should continue to contribute to 
it. 
43. His Government had submitted a draft facility attachment to the Agency 
the week before in connection with the gas centrifuge enrichment plants at 
Almelo. It expected that the final wording would be formulated soon. 
44. The idea of an international plutonium storage system had made no progress 
since the appearance of the expert group's report. The Netherlands 
Government regretted that fact and hoped that the Board would soon take new 
steps in the matter. 
45. It had been said that the Agency was not a police force and that it was 
not able to defend by force civil nuclear installations against attacks which 
might be made against them. Nevertheless, it seemed worth while to try to 
establish within the framework of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva a 
legal basis for an interdiction of attacks against safeguarded nuclear 
installations. 
46. In spite of the shortcomings in Additional Protocol I to the Geneva 
Convention of 1949, the Netherlands Government would take the necessary steps 
for ratifying it as soon as possible. 
47. The Netherlands welcomed the intention of the Agency to participate in the 
preparations for the Third NPT Review Conference. Such participation appeared 
to be indispensable, especially as regards Articles III and IV of the Treaty. 
Later, the Agency could even play a role, however modest, in the implementation 
of Article VI. It would surely be worth while to consider the possibility of 
using safeguards as a means of verifying an agreement designed to stop the 
production of fissionable material for nuclear warheads. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 20 


48. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said it was astonishing that a real 
public opinion campaign could still be carried on in connection with a subject 
that had been settled democratically by the General Conference at its twentysixth 
session, namely, the rejection of the credentials of the Israeli delegation. 
The fact that the campaign was orchestrated by the United States made it 
necessary for the Syrian delegation to speak out since, when a major Power made 
a mistake, it was mankind as a whole that was endangered. 
49. At the twenty-sixth session of the General Conference, the question had 
been the subject of three votes: the first on the validity of Israel's credentials, 
requested by Iraq; the second on the interpretation given by the Legal 
Adviser, requested by the United States; and the third on the legality of the 
final decision and the acceptance of the credentials of all delegations, also 
requested by the United States. As the results of the votes had been 
unfavourable to it, the delegation of the United States, accompanied by some 
others, had withdrawn from the Conference. A number of questions arose in 
connection with the behaviour of the United States on that occasion. Was it 
appropriate for a country which wanted to be the champion of democracy to 
refuse to submit to the decisions of the majority as soon as they were contrary 
to its own? Why had the United States delegation not withdrawn after the first 
vote, thereby sparing the General Conference two votes? Would it have acted in 
the same way if the second vote had been favourable to Israel? Would the 
United States have shown the same zeal in defending Iraq after the Israeli 
attack against its nuclear reactor? If the United States delegation had wanted 
to protest against a decision of the General Conference, why had it not done so 
calmly, as at New Delhi in connection with the decision to reject the credentials 
of the South African delegation? 
50. But the main question was whether Israel deserved to be defended with such 
ardour. Created by the United Nations, that State was one which at present was 
violating United Nations resolutions most systematically. It was the first 
State, after the United States, to make use of a nuclear explosion against 
another country, since the bombardment of a reactor could be compared with the 
explosion of a nuclear bomb. In the case of the United States, it was at least 
at war with Japan when it dropped its bomb on Hiroshima. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 21 


51. The General Conference could no longer tolerate Israel's obstinate 
refusal to comply with its resolutions. As far as Syria was concerned, living 
in permanent fear since the Israeli authorities had threatened all Arab States 
with the destruction of their nuclear facilities, it had for two years been 
looking for a site safe from Israeli attacks for the installation of its first 
research reactor. It was normal for the international community to impose 
sanctions on States which confronted the world with threats to safety, and it 
was hard to see why Israel should be exempt from the application of that 
principle. 
52. The installation by the United States of 600 Cruise and Pershing missij.es 
in Western Europe represented another unjustifiable threat to a world in which 
international equilibrium and peaceful coexistence had prevailed for 20 years. 
The obstinacy of the United States in the matter of proliferation should be 
condemned by the international community, and in particular by the Agency. 
The escalation in which the United States was engaging deprived the Non-
Proliferation Treaty and the safeguards system of any value, for it was quite 
evident that the danger lay in the present policy of the United States and not 
in that of small countries. 
53. It was therefore necessary that the General Conference assume its role in 
full and denounce that policy of the United States: the future of humanity 
was at stake. The Syrian delegation proposed that the General Conference 
should issue an appeal to the leaders of the United States, inviting them to 
review their policies, and to the leaders of the USSR, urging them not to reply 
to the escalation by another escalation, and thereby eliminate the danger of 
war and thus guarantee peace, the supreme hope of mankind. 
54. Dealing briefly with various activities of the Agency, he expressed the 
view that technical assistance, whose value for all countries was beyond doubt, 
was not receiving sufficient financial and administrative support. The funds 
allocated to the safeguards programme could be used to better advantage in the 
form of technical assistance. The Syrian delegation urged that the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste should receive increased 
support and be expanded in such a way that it could become an international 
institute for the teaching of physics, chemistry and mathematics, entitled to 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 22 


issue diplomas, and provide scientific training for personnel from the 
developing countries; such a development would be particularly valuable at a 
time when the industrialized countries were limiting the access of students 
from developing countries to their universities. The Syrian delegation also 
asked that the Agency's laboratories should be expanded so that they could 
provide direct training for scientific staff from developing countries. It 
greatly regretted that the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy had not been 
able to take place in 1983. 


55. Lastly, the Syrian delegation wished to welcome the People's Republic of 
China, whose admission to the Agency represented an important event for the 
organization. 
Mr. Keblusek (Czechoslovakia) resumed the Chair. 


56. Mr. SHASH (Egypt) welcomed the fact that the Agency now included the 
People's Republic of China among its Members. From the start, Egypt had 
attached great importance to the activities of the Agency; it had participated 
in the Conference on the Statute and had been among the first countries to 
accept the instrument under which the Agency was established; since then, it 
had devoted itself on every occasion to promoting the action of the Agency. 
57. Since 1981, Egypt had embarked upon an ambitious nuclear power programme 
and, in that connection, had concluded co-operation agreements with France, the 
United States of America, the Federal Republic of Germany, Canada, Australia, 
the United Kingdom, Sweden and Belgium. It had undertaken a programme for the 
training of scientific staff in co-operation with the Agency and several 
friendly countries; moreover, having concerned itself since 1957 with nuclear 
problems, it already had an entire generation of specialists at its disposal. 
58. Since the twenty-sixth session of the General Conference, an important 
step had been taken with respect to technical assistance, in that the Director 
General had prepared and circulated a document in which various suggestions concerning 
technical assistance policies were presented: in the Board of Governors, 
the Egyptian delegation had participated actively in the formulation of ideas 
and initiatives on the subject. In its resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388, the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 23 


General Conference had specified what should be the principles governing the 
financing of technical assistance. In that connection, he welcomed the fact 
that the Board had, in June 1981, recommended indicative planning figures for 
the period 1984-1986; those figures would make an important contribution to 
implementation of the provisions of that important resolution. It remained for 
the Board to seek ways of codifying that procedure so that it would be a 
reliable system and one which could enhance the credibility of technical assistance. 
He also wished to thank the countries which had contributed to the 
financing of footnote a_/ agreements. At the same time, he noted with concern, 
in the Director General's report on the technical co-operation activities of 
the Agency, that the financial targets set for the financing of technical 


3 assistance projects and footnote a/ projects were not being attained; he 
appealed to all countries to make their contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund and hoped that those who were able to do so 
would contribute even more. 


59. One of the positive aspects of the Agency's activities since the last 
session had been the work performed by CAS and, in particular, the review of 
emergency and back-up mechanisms by that body. He hoped that, at its February 
session, the Board would follow up that useful work. CAS had also achieved 
useful results with respect to international co-operation procedures in matters 
relating to nuclear energy: some aspects were already the subject of a consensus, 
while the points of disagreement had been circumscribed. It was to be 
hoped that the Committee would continue its activities, which were of benefit 
to all. 
60. The measures taken by the Director General to implement resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/386 concerning the increase in the number of staff members from 
developing regions was a step in the right direction,and action along those 
lines should be continued; experience showed that the developing countries 
were capable of making the highest skills available to the Agency. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 24 


61. In other respects, the picture for the past year gave cause for concern. 
In particular, the Agency could not perform its role in matters of nonproliferation 
unless the safeguards system enjoyed full confidence: in that 
respect, it was the duty of Member States to respect the Statute and 
relevant resolutions. That was why the Board and the General Conference, at 
its twenty-fifth session, had condemned the aggression of Israel against the 
Iraqi nuclear research reactor in 1981. It was well known that Iraq was a 
Member of the Agency and a party to NPT, and that its nuclear facilities were 
under Agency safeguards. It could therefore be stated that the aggression in 
question had been directed against the Agency itself and against its system of 
safeguards. The international community had unanimously called on Israel to 
cease threatening the nuclear facilities of neighbouring countries and, on 
several occasions, it had called on that country to place its own facilities 
under Agency safeguards. Confronted with the persistent refusal of Israel to 
take those demands into account, the General Conference had the duty of taking 
the necessary decisions to ensure that the action of the Agency was not 
frustrated, otherwise the credibility and role of the organization and its 
system of safeguards would be called into question. Similarly, South Africa 
was carrying on its nuclear activities without any controls, thereby constituting 
a permanent threat to neighbouring countries. The United Nations 
General Assembly had on numerous occasions demanded that the activities of 
South Africa in the nuclear sphere should be placed under the control of the 
Agency, and it had urged all international organizations to cease giving any 
assistance whatever to South Africa; it was therefore urgent to put a stop to 
the participation of that country in technical working groups of the Agency. 
62. Non-proliferation was one of the main concerns of the international 
community, and Egypt had been one of the first countries to advocate the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and Africa; it 
had lent its full support to resolution A/35/147 of the General Assembly and 
was following very attentively the work of the expert group on the creation of 
nuclear-weapon-free zones, areas in which the Agency was expected to play a 
leading role. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 25 


63. Another subject of concern was the under-representation of Africa and of 
the Middle East and South Asia in the Board of Governors; only 217<> of the African 
Member States were represented there, although for other regions the propor-^ 
tion varied from 31.2 to 38.97. Such a state of affairs was contrary to the 
principles applied in all the international organizations and to the resolutions 
of the United Nations General Assembly; the General Conference had already 
called upon the Board to remedy the situation but thus far to no avail. It was 
therefore the duty of the General Conference to adopt a suitable resolution 
which could put an end to a situation which had lasted too long. 
64. In future, the Agency would have to assume increasingly broad responsibilities 
and might have to perform new duties. Nuclear energy was becoming an 
increasingly important matter and many countries were now using it for peaceful 
purposes - in particular, a large number of developing countries which had 
formulated or were in the process of formulating their own nuclear power 
programmes. The Agency's activities relating to technical assistance .and 
co-operation and to safeguards would necessarily assume greater proportions. 
It was now an accepted fact that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were an 
inalienable right of all States, which were free to decide on their, national ,priorities 
within the framework of the safeguards system. At the same time,the 
international community unanimously condemned the nuclear arms race and 
horizontal and vertical, proliferation,. As the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and the nuclear arms race were two matters which were of increasing concern 
to the international community, the number of conferences, treaties and organizations 
dealing with those problems was increasing, but the Agency would have 
to continue playing the role of a catalyst in international action in those 
areas. 


65. Certain activities of the Agency were of such a nature as to reinforce its 
credit and effectiveness. That was the case, for example, with the launching 
of the research project on small and medium power reactors; Egypt intended to 
concern itself closely with that matter. The Agency's activities relating to 
the safety of nuclear power plants was also very important and he fully endorsed 
them. The Director General's suggestion for the establishment of a highlevel 
international commission on nuclear safety warranted favourable 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 26 


consideration. Similarly, the Agency's work on international co-operation in 
emergency situationsdeserved support, and the safeguards system should be 
strengthened in step with the development of the nuclear industry. 


66. Egypt had participated actively in the preparations for the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses 
of Nuclear Energy for Social and Economic Development; it regretted that the 
Preparatory Committee had not been able to reach agreement on a draft agenda, 
and it would continue to support the efforts to ensure the success of that 
Conference. The Egyptian delegation likewise attached great importance to the 
next NPT Review Conference; Article IV of NPT conferred an extremely 
important mandate on the Agency, assigning it the duty of giving concrete 
form to the principle of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy and 
of actively promoting the transfer of technology in that area. The Agency 
was also the body which the international community had called upon to 
ensure that that source of energy was not diverted for military purposes. 
That was an indication of the importance of its role and of the importance 
of the experience which it had gained in the efforts expended at the 


international level to put an end to the arms race and to create denuclearized 
zones. In that respect, the time appeared to have arrived 
for all Member States to demonstrate a constructive spirit and to undertake 
the drafting of a convention on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


67. On the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Agency the General 
Conference had asked the Board of Governors to make a review of the Agency's 
activities: he (Mr. Shash) wished to thank the Board for its preliminary 
report and he hoped that that task could be carried to a successful conclusion 
at an early date. 
68. Mr. OSZTROVSZKY (Hungary) noted with regret that the international 
situation had become still worse since the last session of the General 
Conference. Not only had there been no cessation of armed conflicts but new 
ones had developed. The arms race, and in particular the nuclear arms race, 
had intensified. The forces which wanted to upset the balance that had been 
established in the world were trying to place nuclear energy in the service of 
destruction rather than of economic well-being and social progress. When 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 27 


efforts to solve disputed international questions began with the adoption of 
measures leading to confrontation instead of with the elaboration of measures 
acceptable to all concerned, the aggravation of the international situation 
could not fail to have a negative effect on the possibilities of co-operation 
and on the work of the international organizations - whether of the political 
type or essentially technical in nature. An apolitical Agency was an attractive 
idea, but everyone knew that an improvement in the international climate and 
the strengthening of confidence among States were indispensable conditions 
for success in the work of the Agency. 


69. The Hungarian Government wished to emphasize the particularly important 
role of the Agency in reducing international tension, as a consequence of the 
obligations arising under the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Broader use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes was not possible unless a situation of peace prevailed 
and unless the non-proliferation regime and the Agency's safeguards 
system were strictly respected. 
70. It was a disturbing fact that certain States possessing the technical 
and economic means to manufacture weapons and carry out nuclear explosions 
- among them Israel and South Africa, which were conducting a policy of open 
aggression condemned by the United Nations and the Agency - had not yet acceded 
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
71. The experience of Hungary in the development of nuclear science and . 
industry showed that the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Agency's safeguards, 
by strengthening the spirit of co-operation among countries, contributed to 
the transfer of nuclear know-how and technology and promoted the development 
of international nuclear trade. Consequently, the Hungarian Government held 
to the view that international nuclear trade could be conducted only within 
the framework of the non-proliferation regime. 
72. The previous year had been an important one in the history of power 
production in Hungary, for in December 1982 the first unit of the nuclear 
power plant at Paks had been linked up with the grid. Since then the reactor 
had been operating stably and reliably. In nine months of operation it 
had produced over 1500 million kWh of electricity. An external dosimetry 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 28 


system provided for permanent radiological surveillance of the environment 
out to 30 km from the plant, and so far during the reactor's operation radioactive 
releases had been below not only the permissible limits but also the 
design levels. The main supplier of equipment was the Soviet Union, but the 
other socialist countries had, within the framework of the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA), participated in the equipping of the plant: the 
reactor had been built in Czechoslovakia, most of the heat exchangers had come 
from Poland, the reactor hall crane from the German Democratic Republic and 
so on. Hungary itself had supplied 40% of all the equipment, in particular 
the reloading machine, the special water purification installation, the pumping 
station and a 220-MW generator. The Hungarian specialists had been trained 
in the Soviet Union, where they had studied problems of operation and the prevention 
of a wide variety of accident situations. 


73. In the present year Hungary was reviewing the first half of its five-year 
plan of scientific and technical activities directed towards further increasing 
the operational safety of nuclear power plants. It had been found that those 
activities were helping to improve the accuracy of checks on the technical 
condition of equipment and to detect processes which could lead to accidents. 
Mention might be made of an automated system for the diagnosis of equipment, 
a computer program for analysing stresses on the reactor vessel and research 
on structural materials. It was planned, for the future, to supplement 
deterministic safety analysers by analysing the risks associated with the introduction 
of nuclear energy in Hungary, and the Agency's experience would be 
drawn upon for that purpose. 


74. To ensure the success of scientific and technical activities it was essential 
to renew the experimental basis continuously. To that end, Hungary would in 
the near future reconstruct its one research reactor, which had already been 
in operation for over 25 years and which had been used for research and isotope 
production. The power of the reactor would be increased from 5 to 20 MW in 
the process. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 29 


75. Considerable work was being done on thermonuclear fusion. A tokamak 
facility built with the help of the Soviet Union was enabling Hungarian specialists 
to study such questions as plasma diagnostics, non-linear phenomena in plasma, 
the behaviour of first-wall structural materials, and the development of an 
automatic system for controlling the main and auxiliary system of tokamak 
facilities. 
76. As regards the uses of nuclear energy in other scientific and technical 
areas, the scintillation gamma cameras developed by Hungary were yielding satisfactory 
results and their quality was in keeping with the highest world standards. 
77. Hungary was carrying on important research work to meet the needs of its 
medical institutes for radiopharmaceutical products. Among recent developments 
in connection with radioimmunology kits, the most notable one had to do with 
prostaglandins, two new kits having been developed in the past year for use 
in that area. 
78. The Hungarian Government thought very highly of the Agency's activities 
in pursuit of its objectives under the Statute. In addition to the system 
of safeguards, technical assistance was of particular importance, and Hungary 
took pleasure in noting that the funds allocated for that purpose were growing 
steadily and that resources in non-convertible currencies, including the voluntary 
contributions of Hungary, were being used effectively. The fellowships 
which Hungary made available to the Agency every year were likewise being utilized 
in their entirety. Also, Hungary was organizing scientific and training 
activities together with the Agency on a regular basis. 
79. Among the specialized programmes of the Agency, Hungary attached particular 
importance to those relating to nuclear power and to nuclear safety. It noted 
with satisfaction that the International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience 
organized by the Agency in 1982 had proved clearly that nuclear power was safe 
and economic. It noted that in 1982 nuclear power plants had supplied 10% 
of the electricity produced in the world and that 21 new nuclear power plants 
had been linked with the grids in 12 countries, one of which was Hungary. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.250 
page 30 


80. Hungary placed high value on the Agency's activities in the field of 
radioactive waste management and considered that those activities should be 
intensified, since a solution of the waste management problem would contribute 
to the growth of nuclear power in general. 
81. The Hungarian delegation attached great importance to the work done by 
the Agency on revising the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection 
and on safety standards for nuclear power plants, and to the continuing work 
on the establishment of an international incident reporting system and on the 
evaluation of risks in the nuclear fuel cycle. 
82. Hungary welcomed the activities of the Agency in the area of technical 
documentation services, among which mention should be made of INIS, which was 
particularly useful for the developing countries and the moderately developed 
countries. It urged all participating countries to increase their support 
of INIS. 
83. Good results had been obtained in work connected with increasing agricultural 
production, in environmental protection activities and in the radiation 
preservation of food and medical products. The Hungarian delegation considered 
that the Secretariat should intensify its activities relating to research 
reactors and the industrial uses of nuclear techniques. 
84. The Hungarian delegation approved the Agency's annual report for 1982. 
Aware of the importance of the Agency's programme of technical assistance, and 
co-operation, it wished to inform the General Conference that in 1984 Hungary 
would make a voluntary contribution of 2.4 million forints to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
85. Mr. FRALEY (United States of America), using his right of reply under 
Rule 58 of the Rules of Procedure, regretted that in his statement the representative 
of Syria had touched on questions of a purely political nature unrelated 
to the general debate. The unjustified accusations of Syria against 
the United States of America, far from advancing the work of the General 
Conference, would serve only to undermine the actions of the Agency. 
The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
January 1984* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Wednesday, 12 October 1983, at 10.40 a.m. 


President; Mr. KEBLEK (Czechoslovakia) 
later: Mr. SINGH (India) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda*" 
Paragraphs 
7 General debate and annual report for 
1982 (continued) 1 - 113 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Venezuela 1 14 
Czechoslovakia 15 30 
Australia 31 58 
German Democratic Republic 59 68 
Peru 69 78 
Greece 79 88 
Norway 89 104 
Malaysia 05 113 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 18 October 1983**/ 
GC(XXVII)/700. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given 
in document GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 


84-0291 



GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684) (continued) 


1. Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) said that one of the most important 
events connected with the present session of the Conference was the 
admission of the People's Republic of China to the Agency. His delegation 
welcomed China's membership, which would help to strengthen the Agency, and 
hoped that it would not be too long before China occupied the permanent seat 
on the Board of Governors to which it was entitled. China's joining the 
Agency created a situation that would inevitably lead to a revision of the 
provisions of the Statute governing the composition of the Board. As was 
known, those provisions had undergone various amendments in order to fit them 
in with the needs of different regional groups. In his delegation's opinion, 
the constitutional instrument of an international organization should not 
be the subject of partial adjustments intended to mould it to the requirements 
of the moment. Moreover, China's admission was further evidence of the fact 
that Article VI of the Statute did not meet present needs and that the time 
had come to consider the question of revising the Statute and correcting 
the deficiencies built into it. Perhaps the Board of Governors could take 
up that matter in the not too distant future. 


2. His country attributed great importance to the three major priority 
areas to which the Agency's main activities were geared, namely, technical 
assistance and co-operation, safeguards and nuclear safety. They were of 
obvious importance to all countries and had to be considered on their merits in 
the light of their ultimate aims. In that respect he was not satisfied with the 
situation as it stood, in which more stress was being placed on one of those 
areas to the detriment on the others - especially technical assistance. 
3. A matter of great concern for the developing countries was the imbalance 
at present existing between the resources assigned to regulatory and to 
promotional activities. The Agency's safeguards activities were absorbing 
roughly one third of the Regular Budget and those activities were growing 
out of all proportion, while the technical assistance and other promotional 

GC(XXVII)/0R.251 
page 3 


activities were steadily declining. As a result of that situation, the 
developing countries had pressed for more active participation in the stages 
prior to the preparation of the Agency's budget, while it was in the process 
of being drafted by the Secretariat. 


4. As far as the actual safeguards were concerned, Venezuela considered 
that the Agency's safeguards system was a very valuable instrument for preventing 
nuclear materials, equipment and facilities being used for military purposes 
and also for ensuring that the essential safety and protection standards 
were applied to them. The system was vitally important for international 
peace and security; it helped to restrain proliferation, though so far 
only in one direction. The Director General in his address had delineated 
another aspect of safeguards, namely the fact that it was possible for the 
Agency's safeguards system to be used to demonstrate that there could be 
an efficient verification system that was not excessively intrusive. It 
was hoped that the super Powers would take advantage of the experience gained 
by the Agency in operating its safeguards system in order to surmount the 
obstacle that the problem of verification always seemed to create during 
disarmament negotiations. 
5. There was no doubt that the Agency's safeguards system was of benefit 
to all countries and that Member States should therefore assume their share 
of the burden of financing the system. That burden, however, had to be shared 
in an equitable manner The cost of operating the system was related directly 
to the number of nuclear facilities placed under safeguards. It was not 
right, for instance, that a country with a small research reactor should 
have to pay more than countries which, in addition to a research reactor, 
possessed one or more nuclear plants for the generation of electricity. His 
delegation therefore believed that the sharing of the burden of funding the 
safeguards system should be contingent upon the degree of nuclear development 
of the countries concerned. Those countries which were only just starting 
out in the nuclear field or which had no nuclear development at all should 
only make a token payment, while countries which had a well-developed nuclear 
industry should bear the brunt of financing the system. The General Conference 
would be considering a draft resolution transmitted by the Board of Governors 
for consideration in connection with the financing of safeguards (GC(XXVII)/687). 



GC(XVII)/OR.251 
page 4 


The resolution proposed the extension of the arrangements currently in force 
for financing safeguards for one year, and the Board of Governors was requested 
to review the system in 1984. In view of the importance and implications 
of that matter, the Board of Governors should take up consideration of it 
as soon as possible. It might perhaps be appropriate for the General 
Conference to instruct the Chairman of the Board to enter into consultations 
with all interested Member States so as to ascertain the opinions prevailing 
on the best way of financing safeguards. 


6. Venezuela likewise attributed great importance to the Agency's activities 
in promoting the study and application of nuclear techniques aimed at benefiting 
humanity as a whole - for example, techniques for use in food production, 
the purification of water, and the improvement of health. The report of 
the Board of Governors contained a detailed account of the Agency's activities 
in developing, disseminating and applying nuclear techniques in various 
areas. The Agency should continue that important work, and countries with 
advanced nuclear technology should make their latest discoveries available 
to the Agency and co-operate whenever necessary so that the relevant technology 
was placed at the disposal of the developing countries. 
7. As far as technical assistance and co-operation were concerned, it 
was encouraging to see that in 1982 Agency activities in that field had 
continued to receive high priority and that the Agency had continued to serve as 
a clearing house for the transfer to developing countries of techniques related 
to the peaceful application of nuclear energy. His delegation supported the 
guidelines for the provision of technical assistance which had been defined 
by the Board during its technical co-operation policy review and which related 
to multi-year and multi-national programmes, both regional and sub-regional. 
The introduction of dynamic programming would also make it possible to utilize 
resources more effectively. 
8. Although the Agency was to be commended for the efficient manner in 
which it was conducting its technical assistance activities, his delegation 
was perturbed to see that the funds available for those activities were 
strictly limited, despite the steady increase in the needs of the developing 
countries as a result of their economic and demographic growth. He therefore 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 5 


shared the view of many States that, rather than zero growth in the budgets 
for technical co-operation, there should be a gradual increase in them in line 
with the growing needs of the developing countries. 


9. His delegation endorsed the indicative planning figures already agreed 
upon, but it hoped that they would be supplemented by a system of financing 
technical assistance which ensured that the resources available matched the 
needs of the developing countries and that they were predictable and assured 
in the same way as the funds assigned to the safeguards system. 
10. His delegation attributed particular importance to the work of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and had been taking an active part 
in its meetings. It was encouraging to see that at its ninth session CAS 
had managed, for the first time, to make some progress. The headway was doubtless 
due to the fact that some of the countries which in the past had taken a 
more rigid stand on certain aspects of the matters discussed, for example 
principles of co-operation in the field of nuclear energy, and had shown 
themselves to be more flexible. If the same spirit of co-operation prevailed, 
more tangible progress could be expected in the future. 
11. Another issue which called for comment was the staffing of the Agency's 
Secretariat. The General Conference had adopted two resolutions in the past 
requesting the Director General to take steps to remedy the imbalance between 
the number of staff members from developing countries and that of staff members 
from developed countries. Examination of the document submitted to the 
Conference in that connection (GC(XXVII)/694) showed that, although efforts 
had been made to remedy the imbalance, the situation was still rather 
unsatisfactory. The document showed, for example, that of 495 staff members 
holding senior posts in the Secretariat in 1982 only 78 came from developing 
countries, the number of staff members from developed countries being 417. 
The percentage for developing countries was thus hardly 15.7%. For 
September 1983, one year later, the number of staff members from developing 
countries was only 90 out of 516, or 17.4%, the figure for staff 
members from developed countries being 426. There had consequently been 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 6 


an increase of only 1.77 in the percentage of staff members from developing 
countries and it was clearly necessary for the General Conference to call for 
new and vigorous corrective measures. 


12. Lastly, his delegation wished to give a brief account of the modest 
but dynamic work that Venezuela had been engaged in on a regional and subregional 
level. Since 1981 it had been co-ordinating the activities of a 
group of Andean countries (Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela) 
in the nuclear field and had launched a sub-regional atomic energy co-operation 
project with the Agency's assistance. The last meeting of the Andean Nuclear 
Energy Commissions had been held in Bogota on 25 September, with Agency experts 
present. Programmes that would be put into effect as soon as authorized 
by the relevant bodies had been in the following area: radiological protection 
and nuclear safety, nuclear instrumentation, application of nuclear techniques 
to agriculture and stock-breeding, high radiation sources, and research reactors. 
Venezuela intended to step up its regional co-operation in the nuclear field 
so as to broaden the scope of the benefits to be gained from the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy for all countries in the sub-region. 
13. Venezuela had had the distinction of presiding at the Inter-American 
Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC), whose objective it was to promote the 
use of nuclear techniques in Latin America, and would also be hosting the 
next Inter-American Nuclear Energy Conference, which was to be held from 
9 to 15 January 1984. His delegation availed itself of the opportunity to 


invite the Director General of the IAEA to attend that conference. 


14. In conclusion, Venezuela was continuing to develop its nuclear activities 
within an exclusively peaceful context and for broader application in various 
branches of the national economy so that the multiple uses of nuclear energy 
would be of benefit to the development and well-being of all concerned. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 7 


15. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia) said that the present session was being 
held in difficult circumstances at a time when international conflicts were 
taking place in a number of regions of the world and when there were various 
sources of international tension that had not been resolved. Commitments 
to vast programmes for the manufacture of armaments, especially nuclear 
armaments, were having ever-increasing political and economic consequences. 
16. Since the last Conference session the Agency, which was deeply involved 
in nuclear non-proliferation, had passed through a difficult stage. A number 
of positive results had, however, been obtained through extensive and constructive 
consultations between representatives of groups of Member countries 
such as the socialist countries, the developed capitalist countries and the 
developing countries, and also through individual consultations between representatives 
of the different geographical regions. 
17. First, his delegation wished to emphasize the importance of the work 
of the Agency, which was indeed irreplaceable, in the field of the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. That work was vital, and IAEA safeguards 
represented the first attempt ever made to monitor internationally compliance 
with obligations arising out of international treaties and other agreements; 
for that reason it was necessary for the safeguards system to be fully developed 
in the future. That system was unique and could serve - either as such or 
as a model - for verification of the implementation of important measures 
in the field of nuclear disarmament. The Agency's safeguards represented 
the first and, so far, the only international system under which sovereign 
States had decided to submit to inspection by an international organization. 
The fact that the most important nuclear-weapon States had also shown 
willingness to submit to IAEA inspection of a number of their peaceful nuclear 
facilities was extremely important. 
18. On the assumption that the current level of scientific and technical 
knowledge and the practical experience so far accumulated in the world would 
enable any country with the necessary industrial base to produce nuclear 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 8 


weapons, Czechoslovakia was gravely concerned by the fact that certain industrially 
developed countries had not yet joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In his view, the prevention of all types of proliferation 
of nuclear weapons was in the vital interests of all countries of the 
world. 


19. In that connection, he wished to mention two extremely important international 
political meetings that had recently taken place in Prague, namely 
the January meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the signatories 
of the Warsaw Pact and the meeting of the World Assembly for Peace and Life 
Against Nuclear War, which had taken place from 21 to 26 June 1983 and in 
which over 3500 delegates from 132 countries had taken part; the latter meeting 
had been organized exclusively by individuals and groups interested in the 
preservation of peace throughout the world and had been concerned with problems 
which were of fundamental importance to the work of the United Nations as 
a whole, i.e. with the prevention of nuclear catastrophe and, to that end, 
with the utilization of all the resources of the United Nations. In the 
case of the Agency, that meant using all the means at its disposal by virtue 
of its existence as such and of its programme of activities in the cause 
of peace, security and disarmament and also organizing meetings aimed at 
improving mutual confidence between States. 


20. None of the Agency's activities relating to international co-operation 
on the peaceful uses of atomic energy was separable from its efforts to 
bring about peace and understanding between nations. He was convinced that 
the Agency would continue to carry out successfully all the tasks incumbent 
upon it and would actively contribute to implementation of positive initiatives 
recently taken by the United Nations, including those relating to the preparation 
of the International Year of Peace planned for 1986. 
21. Together with the other socialist countries, Czechoslovakia supported 
the admission of the People's Republic of China as an active Member of the 
Agency. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 9 


22. It had already become traditional for his country to pay considerable 
attention to individual specialized areas of the Agency's work, in particular, 
those of nuclear power and nuclear safety. In Czechoslovakia there were 
now two nuclear power stations in operation, and fourteen reactor units 
based on the Soviet 440 and 1000 megawatt WWER design were under construction. 
Czechoslovak factories were producing plant and instruments for complete 
sets of power station components of the WWER type which were destined not 
only for his country but also for export. 
23. Information published recently by the Agency had shown that even in 
the present difficult international circumstances there was still a keen 
interest in wider international contacts and integration which, where the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and, in particular, nuclear power were 
concerned, took the form of valuable international co-operation which could 
make a significant contribution to further progress in that sphere. International 
co-operation was in fact a prerequisite for successful development 
in that field, since there were a number of problems which individual countries 
could not solve alone or which they would be far better able to solve by 
means of such multilateral co-operation. 
24. Recently, the member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA) had made considerable progress in that sphere which had 
been greatly facilitated by close co-operation with the Soviet Union on 
a bilateral and multilateral basis. Some characteristic features of the 
policies of CMEA countries were mutual co-ordination of technical policy 
between the different countries involved, specialization and co-operation 
in the production of plant components for nuclear power stations - in which 
Czechoslovakia was playing an important part - and also the achievement 
of a significant degree of standardization in nuclear power station construction, 
which was being accompanied by efforts to increase the unit power 
of reactors. The conclusion, for the period up to 1990, of an agreement 
on co-operation and on the forthcoming establishment of a linked nuclear 
power system constituted a further important stage in nuclear power development 
in CMEA member countries. Moreover, during their many years of operation, 
nuclear power stations in those countries, had showed their high level of 
reliability and safety. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 10 


25. For those reasons Czechoslovakia attached considerable importance to the 
Agency's work on the further improvement of nuclear power stations, to its work 
on the development of standards as such and to all its other efforts aimed at 
the most extensive possible standardization on an international scale. 
26. The most important question associated with the development of nuclear 
power and with the problem of nuclear safety was that of the treatment and 
disposal of radioactive wastes. In that connection, he welcomed the holding by 
the Agency of the International Conference on Radioactive Waste Management in 
the United States in May 1983. The results of the Conference had shown that the 
technology and plant for treating and disposing of all types of radioactive 
waste were now fully available and could operate safely and with the minimum 
effect on the environment in accordance with the recommendations of the 
International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP). However, relatively 
little attention was being paid to economic questions. At present, the main 
emphasis was being placed on the mastery of processes already developed, and 
advanced scientific research was being somewhat neglected. Even so, the 
subject matter of the Conference had included all aspects of the processing and 
disposal of radioactive wastes. 
27. His delegation greatly welcomed the progress made over the last year in 
the further development of the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) 
and fully supported any moves which would enhance that unique international 
exchange system for information on nuclear science and technology. 
28. Czechoslovakia was also in favour of every opportunity being provided for 
co-operation with the Agency on the uses of nuclear techniques not related to 
power generation. 
29. Like other socialist countries, Czechoslovakia was unflagging in its 
support for the technical assistance programme and, in particular, the concept 
of multi-year projects. 
30. In conclusion, he announced that for 1984 the Czechoslovak Government 
would again be increasing its voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 11 


and Co-operation Fund; in absolute terms that contribution would amount to 


2.2 million Czechoslovak crowns in national currency. In addition, Czechoslovakia 
was making available though the Agency fellowships for post-graduate courses and 
training at institutes of higher education for experts from developing 
countries and was regularly organizing special IAEA courses and study tours. 
31. Mr. BRENNAN (Australia), recalling that the confrontation which had 
occurred at the preceding session of the General Conference had come close to 
causing irreparable damage to the Agency, and to its capacity to fulfil its 
vital statutory responsibilities, said he was hopeful that Member States would 
be able to work together and uphold the Agency's reputation as an efficient 
and dedicated organization pursuing its statutory purposes, leaving any wider 
issues for the appropriate political organs of the United Nations. 
32. Welcoming China's admission to membership of the Agency as a major 
event in the history of the Agency, Australia had noted with satisfaction 
China's assurance that it would abide by the provisions of the IAEA Statute, 
including those on safeguards. He looked forward to a greater involvement 
of China in the international nuclear dialogue, thereby strengthening the 
international non-proliferation regime, and to its full participation in all 
the Agency's programmes. 
33. The new Australian Government would shortly announce the results of the 
wide-ranging reviews which it had undertaken, in response to public concern, 
in respect of the country's uranium, safeguards and related nuclear 
policies. In that connection, the Australian Foreign Minister, Mr. Hayden, 
had assured the Director General that there would be no diminution in 
Australia's full commitment to the Agency and that it would work for even more 
effective safeguards. 


34. In July 1983, the HIFAR reactor operated by the Australian Atomic Energy 
Commission (AAEC) at Lucas Heights, near Sydney, had completed 25 years of safe 
operation, during which it had been used for materials testing, isotope production 
and the generation of neutron beams for research. The Commission's 
Argonaut-type reactor, Moata, was being used for a variety of research purposes. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 12 


35. Australia was continuing its nuclear research activities at significant levels. 
The AAEC and the Australian National University (ANU) were continuing their 
joint programme on the development of SYNROC for the immobilization of highlevel 
radioactive waste. The SYNROC concept was being advanced as an 
Australian contribution to the development of international nuclear waste 
management strategies, and the programme aimed at providing an alternative 
method of high-level waste disposal. It had already been shown that the 
rate of leaching of radioactive species from SYNROC was very low and its 
chemical and radiation stability outstanding. Studies were now being 
concentrated on the fabrication of large sections which would be required 
in commercial applications and for the characterization of those materials. 
A non-radioactive demonstration plant would be commissioned in 1985. 


36. Australia was also conducting research on a number of environmental topics 
including the transport of uranium and its daughter products in and around 
uranium ore deposits in the Northern Territory. During the past year the 
Australian Radiation Laboratory had been designated as one of four global 
reference laboratories for the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency's intercalibration 
programme for the intercomparison of radon calibration facilities. 
37. Australian researchers were collaborating extensively with the IAEA and 
with other countries in the region and elsewhere on such topics as fusion 
research, the production of radioisotopes, the development and manufacutre 
of radiation sources, the application of isotopes and radiation in medicine, 
agriculture and industry, and the training and certification of staff. Much 
of that work was accomplished through or in association with the Agency's 
technical assistance and co-operation programmes. 
38. Australia continued to attach great importance to technical assistance 
and co-operation, both under the Agency's programmes and bilaterally, and recognized 
that the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme 
was being implemented efficiently on a sound and flexible basis. However, 
it was essential to ensure that the assistance provided by the Agency was consistent 
with the recipient countries' capacity to absorb and use the technology 
provided. In that connection, the Evaluation Unit set up recently in the Agency's 
Department of Technical Co-operation would be of great help. Australia supported 
the recommended target of US $22.5 million for voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1984 and expected to pay its 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 13 


share in full. Its pledge of US $351 500 for 1983 had already been fully 
discharged. He urged all other Member States to pledge and pay their shares 
promptly. 


39. After some years of careful planning the minerals sub-project of the 
RCA regional industrial project was now fully operational. Australia's 
contribution to that project would be US $345 000 during the current year. 
In August-September, Australia had hosted the first training course under 
sub-project 4(C) of the industrial project entitled "On-Stream Analysis and 
Control of Mineral Concentrators". The course had been attended by participants 
from the Philippines, Thailand, Pakistan, Malaysia, India, the Republic of 
Korea and Bangladesh. 
40. Australia had also been active in other areas of regional co-operation 
and made funds and expertise available for the RCA project on isotope hydrology 
and sedimentology. It had made a substantial contribution to the planning 
and establishment of special isotope hydrology and sedimentology laboratories 
in the Republic of Korea, Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia. Scientists from 
those and other countries had been trained by Australian specialists in the 
techniques of measurement and interpretation. 
41. Moreover, his country was providing direct bilateral assistance to 
Malaysia for the training of personnel from the Tun Ismail Atomic Research 
Centre (PUSPATI), together with consultancy services to the Centre. When 
that programme ended, in 1984, Australia would consider further possibilities 
of developing its nuclear technical assistance role in the Asian and Pacific 
region. Australia also operated a School of Nuclear Technology which, since 
its inception in 1964, had provided training - particularly in the area of 
isotope applications - to individuals from 32 countries and 138 overseas 
organizations. 
42. It was participating actively in the technical programmes of the Agency. 
It considered the publications in the IAEA Safety Series to be among the Agency's 
most worthwhile achievements and would continue to make an active contribution 
to the further development and updating of the Safety Series documents. 
1/ Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
related to Nuclear Science and Technology. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 14 


43. Australia welcomed the increased programme emphasis to be given to safety 
standards for research reactors and fuel cycle facilities after the completion 
of the programme on nuclear safety standards for power plants (NUSS). 
44. In Australia two more nuclear Codes of Practice had been finalized and 
approved in 1982. Those two, together with the 1980 Code of Practice, provided 
a basic framework within which the detailed control and regulation of uranium 
mining and milling operations in Australia could be developed. 
45. The subject of radioactive waste management was of particular concern 
to his Government, since there were strong doubts about the long-term environmental 
effects of accumulated spent fuel and radioactive wastes, and about 
the adequacy of proposed methods of disposal of high-level wastes from the 
nuclear fuel cycle. It had noted, however, that the International Conference 
on Waste Management held at Seattle had reaffirmed that no further technological 
breakthroughs were required for the establishment of safe waste management 
systems, although further work needed to be done in order to establish internationally 
accepted criteria for safe disposal. 
46. There was a particular need for highly complex scientific developments 
which were closely linked to the welfare, health and environmental protection 
of mankind to be made convincing and comprehensible to the public. International 
collaboration in the field of waste management, as the Seattle conference 
had demonstrated, would play an increasingly important part in the 
safe development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. His Government would 
welcome urgent action by the Agency in following up that conference. 
47. Australia recognized the need for prompt and significant progress in 
the development of international nuclear waste management strategies, and was 
sharing its experience in the management of tailings from the mining and milling 
of uranium with other countries, especially under programmes of the IAEA and 
the Nuclear Energy Agency. Developments in the SYNROC programme were also 
being made known internationally. 
48. In his statement, the Director General had quite rightly described the 
marine disposal of radioactive waste as a controversial subject. In international 
forums Australia had urged that the rights and concerns of all countries 
be taken into account, and had joined the consensus in the South Pacific Forum, 
which had adopted resolutions opposed to the dumping of all levels of radioactive 
waste in the Pacific. Australia was a signatory of, but not a party to, the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 15 


London Dumping Convention and had over the years participated in the development 
of standards under the Convention, which had contributed decisively to the 
protection of the marine environment. It was providing an expert consultant 


for the current technical study on the environmental impact of radioactive 
waste dumping at sea permitted under the Convention. 


49. A major and vital activity of the Agency was the application of safeguards, 
including those under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) 
and the Tlatelolco Treaty. He noted with considerable satisfaction that the 
number of NPT signatories was still increasing and that the provisions of the 
Treaty would now apply to all peaceful nuclear activities in the countries of 
the South East Asian and Pacific region, of which Australia was a part. 
Australia urged all States to adhere to NPT. It also welcomed the negotiations 
between the Agency and the Soviet Union in connection with the latter's voluntary 
offer to place part of its civil nuclear facilities under safeguards. 
50. The Agency's Annual Report for 1982 had again indicated an increase in 
the level of assurance associated with implementation of safeguards. Such 
assurance was the heart of the IAEA safeguards system and constituted an 
essential political benefit to all Member States and the international community. 
It was encouraging to note that the Agency was again able to perform effective 
verification in the two cases where it had previously been unable to do so. 
Part of the difficulty in those two cases had been the absence of full-scope 
safeguards, and Australia continued to believe that the general acceptance 
of full-scope safeguards would greatly facilitate the Agency's safeguarding 
activities and enhance the degree of assurance involved. 


51. Safeguards had to be not only effective but also efficient and adaptable 
to changing demands and technological developments. He agreed with the 
Director General that the cost of safeguards was very small in comparison with 
the value of the assurance which it provided and with the overall outlays involved 
in nuclear power production. Expert advice from SAGSI would continue 
to be valuable in that area. 
52. Co-operation between the Agency and a group of Member States over the 
preceding few years had resulted in the development of a safeguards approach 
to commerical-scale centrifuge enrichment plants, with which activity Australia 
had been pleased to be directly associated. That hexapartite safeguards project 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 16 


could serve as a model for other areas requiring new or updated safeguards 
approaches. Australia would continue to co-operate in such endeavours to 
enhance the international non-proliferation and safeguards regime. 


53. It would continue to contribute extra-budgetary resources in 1983/84 
to assist the Agency's safeguards capacity. Proposals had been prepared 
in consultation with the Secretariat, and new programme activities were 
envisaged. 
54. Another co-operative activity of importance to international nuclear 
exchange in the future was the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply. 
The agreement on an IAEA system for an emergency and back-up mechanism 
was a noteworthy achievement, which would be of direct assistance to countries 
whose vital energy supplies might be unexpectedly affected by an emergency 
situation but which might not have access to commercially available, alternative 
supplies. When implemented, such a mechanism would provide additional security to 
consumer countries in the planning of their economic development. He hoped that 
further progress would be made for the benefit of all Member States. 
55. In a major foreign policy speech on 7 July 1983 the Australian Foreign 
Minister had underlined his Government's commitment to "making a continuing 
strong effort in the whole endeavour to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons 
and to uphold and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation treaty". Australia 
was committed to contributing in the fullest manner possible to the success 
of the Third NPT Review Conference and was concerned that all aspects of the 
Treaty, including the undertakings of Members under Articles III and IV, 
and VI and VII, should receive full and adequate attention. It was strongly 
in favour of disarmament and arms control in general and had recently appointed 
its first Ambassador for Disarmament. Its efforts would be directed towards 
achieving practical progress, for example on the comprehensive test ban 
proposal which Australia was again jointly sponsoring at the current session 
of the UN General Assembly. 
56. The Agency had an important role in that context because of its 
responsibilities for the application of NPT safeguards and because its safeguards 
system could serve as a model for international verification systems for 
arms control. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 17 


57. In conclusion, he wished to associate himself with the Director General's 
comments on a number of administrative aspects of the Agency's work. The 
efficient operation of the Agency was due not only to the positive contribution 
of the Director General himself but also to the high level of competence 
and dedication of the staff of the Secretariat. While the performance of 
the Agency's tasks depended largely on the political will of its Member States, 
an important factor was the working spirit of the Secretariat. He had no 
doubt that the Director General was aware of the importance of assuring 
that motivation within the Secretariat remained high. Moreover, it ought 
to be remembered that, while the Secretariat had a responsibility to serve 
with loyalty the Member States, it also had a right to expect in return that 
Member States would, in conformity with the Statute, permit it to perform its t 
without external influence. 
58. The IAEA had spent an eventful and productive year. However, in the 
coming years more demands would certainly be made on it. Every effort should 
be made to ensure that the organization's reputation and its capacity to 
play its unique role were maintained. Australia, for its part, would do 
its best to sustain the Agency's independent and vital contribution to 
international confidence, development and security through the promotion 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes under an effective international 
non-proliferation and safeguards regime. 


59. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic), referring to the admission 
of the People's Republic of China as a new Member of the Agency, said that 
the accession of the world's most populous nation was an important step 
towards the universality of the Agency. 
60. One of the most urgent of challenges mankind was facing was to preserve 
peace and prevent nuclear war. All the Agency's activities were geared 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and it had an important role to 
play in preventing the emergence of new nuclear-weapon States and in 
strengthening the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Socialis 
States were doing everything to halt the nuclear arms race and to achieve 
nuclear disarmament on the basis of equality and equal security, as was 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 18 


reflected in the important peace proposals contained in the Prague Declaration 
of the Warsaw Treaty States of January 1983. Their aim was that Europe, 
and indeed the world, should be made free of nuclear weapons and that nuclear 
energy should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes, in accordance with 
the noble objectives of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 


61. In the present disquieting situation, the progress made through international 
co-operation within the Agency, as outlined in the Director General's statement 
and in the documents before the Conference, was all the more impressive. 
His country highly valued the Agency's role in the development of co-operation 
between States with different social orders and hoped its significant 
contribution to the implementation of the principles of peaceful coexistence 
would continue to be promoted. 


62. Although overall progress in nuclear energy utilization had slowed 
down in recent years, considerable increases in electricity generation from 
nuclear power were envisaged in a number of countries, in particular those that were 
Members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance. One reason for that 
lay in the advantages ensuing from the use of a standardized nuclear power 
plant design in several countries, which resulted in the multiplication 
of experience, the facilitation of information exchange and the acceleration 
of the process of continual improvement. The latter process covered all 
aspects of design, construction and operation and was aimed at ensuring 
the continuous safe operation of nuclear power plants. No other branch 
in the history of industry had ever invested as much effort in safety as 
the nuclear industry, and the Agency had always played a constructive role 
in achieving high safety standards. The Agency's activities in that 
area were a basic requirement for maintaining and further developing those 
standards and should accordingly be expanded. 


63. Since the possibility of non-peaceful use of nuclear energy was the 
greatest threat mankind had ever faced, the Agency's safeguards efforts 
to verify that peaceful nuclear materials were not diverted to the manufacture 
of nuclear weapons were, of particular significance. As a Party to NPT 
and a non-nuclear-weapon State, his country maintained that the submission 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 19 


of all nuclear activities to IAEA safeguards in no way impaired the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy; on the contrary, the conditions of international 
nuclear co-operation would be much more favourable if the misuse of nuclear 
energy could be ruled out. Universal adherence to NPT and a further 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime were therefore indispensable. 


64. Despite the need for further improvement of the Agency's safeguards 
system, however, his country considered it a viable and effective instrument 
and therefore agreed with the Director General that it might be used as 
a model for the verification of nuclear disarmament measures. 
65. Technical assistance and co-operation was one of the Agency's major 
tasks, and the corresponding programme had increased considerably over the 
years. Though its volume and financing continued to be points of debate, 
it had to be acknowledged that greater predictability and stability of the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund had been achieved by introducing 
indicative planning figures. According to the report on the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities in 1982, that year had been a particularly successful 
one. His country appreciated the Agency's efforts to increase the effectiveness 
of technical co-operation by striving for greater flexibility in the 
use of available resources, such as non-convertible currencies, introducing 
multi-year projects and establishing an Evaluation Unit. 
66. The German Democratic Republic regularly contributed its share to the 
target for voluntary contributions and provided training facilities for 
scientists from developing countries; during the past ten years, eight 
training courses had been conducted and 13 study tours organized. His country's 
total contributions had increased sixfold during that period. 
67. However, with regard to technical co-operation with certain countries 
he was constrained to reaffirm his country's repeatedly expressed reservations. . 
68. In spite of the enormous technological development of mankind, great 
difficulties - such as protecting the environment, meeting the growing energy 
needs, distributing natural resources and food reserves, improving education 
and controlling diseases - remained to be solved; those problems were of 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 20 


particular importance for the developing countries, and could not be solved 
unless peace was preserved and the nuclear threat averted. Through its 
endeavours to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation, the Agency contributed 
to the achievement of that objective, but it needed the active co-operation 
of all Member States to fulfil its mission. 


69. Mr. BARREDA (Peru) said that he wished to join previous speakers 
in expressing satisfaction at the fact that the People's Republic of China 
had become a Member of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The membership 
of such a country, whose population made up virtually a quarter of mankind, 
did much to confer universality on the Agency. Peru held the firm hope 
that, with the contributions that could be made by a country of such ancient 
tradition, the Agency would find itself strengthened in its moral force, 
in its role as a promoter of peace on earth, and in the contributions it 
could make towards fostering the development of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. 


70. Peru's nuclear programme had seen fruitful developments since the last 
session of the General Conference. Construction on the Nuclear Research 
Centre had made good progress with the valuable support of Argentina: the 
buildings intended for radiological protection, the medical services, the 
isotope production plant and the auxiliary laboratories and services had 
been completed. Moreover, 907 of the work on the building which was to 
accommodate the 10-MW research reactor had been performed; 75% of the equipment 
and components had been manufactured or purchased; and the hot cells of 
the isotope production plant were in course of being assembled and tested. 
It was hoped that the reactor and the other installations of the Nuclear 
Research Centre would undergo tests in 1985. At the headquarters of the 
Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute (IPEN) in Lima, the civil engineering 
work for the premises which were to accommodate the 14-MeV fast neutron 
accelerator of the SAMES J-25 type supplied by the Agency had been completed. 
In addition, in November 1983 the pilot biology and nuclear medicine centre 
at the new Hospital for Neoplastic Diseases in Lima was to be opened and 
would immediately become available for nuclear medicine training, research 
and treatment. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 21 


71. In the past year, 760 man-months of training had been given to a total 
of 267 Professionals and technicians in various nuclear disciplines. 


72. The 1PEN had continued its uranium resource evaluation and exploration 
programme and in the last year had identified a large uraniferous district 
covering the whole of what were known as the "Volcanicos-Macusani", which 
2 


had an approximate area of 600 km and were located on the Titicaca Plateau 
in the Department of Puno. 


73. Finally, as regards the nuclear power programme, efforts aimed at the conclusion 
in the current year of the first pre-feasibility study were being 
redoubled, and that study was to be followed by a preliminary site evaluation 
study. The Agency was providing Peru with valuable technical and professional 
support in the first stage of its nuclear plan. 
74. Since the last Conference session there had been an important debate 
on safeguards in the Board of Governors which his Government had followed 
with particular interest. He agreed with the Director General that safeguards 
could not provide a cast-iron guarantee against all non-peaceful uses of 
nuclear material and facilities under safeguards, but that they nevertheless 
represented the best means at the disposal of the international community 
for the creation of an atmosphere of confidence which should foster both 
extensive international nuclear trade and the widespread introduction of 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy, depending on the levels of social 
and economic development of different nations. 


75. Intimately linked with that topic were the activities of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply (CAS), which had made gratifying progress. 
However, in order to be effective, progress needed to be made on all the 
topics figuring in the mandate given to CAS by the Board in 1980. 
76. The Board had been right to decide to proceed with a review of the 
Agency's technical co-operation policy at regular intervals, and he believed 
that it was necessary to maintain a suitable balance between technical cooperation 
and safeguards. In that connection, his delegation wished to 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 22 


thank the Governments of Finland, Italy and the Federal Republic of Germany 
for the contributions they had recently made towards Peruvian nuclear development. 
In addition, the Agency's efforts to foster regional co-operation agreements 
were greatly appreciated. 


77. His delegation had been interested to hear the Director General's comments 
on the possible use of the experience accumulated by the Agency in the field 
of safeguards within the framework of the undertakings made by the nuclearweapon 
States pursuant to Article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). It was to be hoped that, at the Third NPT Review 
Conference, scheduled for 1985, those States would bear the Director General's 
comments in mind since it should not be forgotten that undertakings relating 
to horizontal non-proliferation, which entailed a genuine transfer 
of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, were closely linked to undertakings 
aimed at the reduction and, in the long term, at the elimination 
of the nuclear arsenals which had the power to destroy humanity. In that 
connection, he wished to reiterate Peruvian statements made in the appropriate 
United Nations bodies to the effect that all methods of verifying disarmament 
agreements should be explored and that, when the time came, those which were 
found appropriate should be utilized, without any of them being necessarily 
excluded. 
78. Finally, Peru was convinced that the international community should 
make every possible effort to create a climate of confidence in the nuclear 
sphere. Otherwise it would be difficult to make progress with the cause 
of world peace and with the establishment of a new and just international 
order. 
79. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece) began by welcoming the accession of the People's 
Republic of China to the Agency, which he was convinced would contribute 
greatly to the Agency's efforts to further the welfare of all peoples and 
the maintenance of peace. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 23 


80. Every year the General Conference met to review and assess the Agency's 
achievements and to declare its almost unanimous devotion to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
81. His country was a firm believer in the potential of nuclear energy for 
peace and prosperity and therefore watched developments in nuclear weapons 
proliferation with increasing concern. The recent efforts of the Greek 
Government to alleviate the tension which seriously threatened peace, and 
its support of nuclear disarmament, were well known. For those reasons his 
country strongly commended the Agency on its efforts to enhance the credibility 
of the safeguards system and to build up the necessary confidence for the 
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes only. The verification 
experience of the Agency was such that it could well be of use in the 
disarmament context. 
82. In that connection, his Government welcomed the statement in the Agency's 
safeguards report that no anomaly had been detected which would indicate 
a diversion of significant amounts of safeguarded nuclear materials, but 
it was unfortunate that the Agency had been unable to draw such conclusions 
in the case of two nuclear power plants. 
83. The signing of NPT by Viet Nam in June 1982, which had brought 
the total number of States parties to the Treaty to 119, had been an 
encouraging step forward, but grave concern had been caused by the insistence 
of two Member States to pursue policies and activities which did not inspire 
any sense of security. Only if those two Member States renounced the possession 
of nuclear weapons and placed all their nuclear activities under international 
safeguards would the Agency's safeguards system become wholly credible and 
contribute fully to peace and stability. 
84. The safeguards system, although very important, could not by itself 
realize the high potential of nuclear energy for prosperity. It must be 
supplemented by other activities, particularly in the field of nuclear safety 
and radioactive waste management. In that context his Government welcomed 
the Nuclear Safety Review for 1982. The good safety record of commercial 
nuclear power plants, the insignificant radiation exposure of the public 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 24 


due to effluents from nuclear reactors, and the consistent decrease of the 
dose to the public per unit of energy produced were certainly encouraging 
facts. Continuous efforts to enhance safety levels and guarantee a safe 
contribution of nuclear power to the world's increasing energy demands were 
necessary. 


85. Although Greece gave priority to domestic energy sources, primarily 
hydroelectric power and lignite, it considered that nuclear power had many 
potential advantages if appropriate measures were taken. 
86. During the International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience in 1982 
it had been concluded that nuclear power could not be successfully introduced 
in a country without a strong infrastructure. Greece was paying serious 
attention to that conclusion: although it had deferred the nuclear option 
for the time being, it was putting much effort into developing a competent 
infrastructure, particularly where manpower was concerned. 
87. The Agency's role in those matters was crucial, and Greece strongly 
supported its services and assistance in relation to nuclear power plant 
safety and the preparation of guidelines and reports, as well as the missions 
and assistance to national regulatory bodies in implementing those safety 
guidelines. His country was both a donor and a recipient of technical assistance, 
and it greatly appreciated the Agency's assistance, particularly in uranium 
exploration and the development of radiopharmaceuticals. 
88. In concluding, he reiteratedhis Government's will to continue to support 
the Agency's activities: Greece had already pledged to meet in full its calculated 
voluntary contribution of $90 000 to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1984. 
89. Mr. OFSTAD (Norway) said his delegation welcomed the People's Republic 
of China to membership of the IAEA and hoped that it would involve itself 
in all aspects of the IAEA's activities in accordance with the Statute of the 
Agency. He attached great importance to the Agency's technical assistance and cooperation 
programme, and was pleased to observe that it was continuing to expand, 
owing largely to the substantial increase in the target for voluntary contributions 
to the Technical Assistance and Co operation Fund over the past, few years* 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 25 


Since there were numerous fields of application of nuclear energy and since 
many developing countries were Members of the IAEA, it might be tempting 
to spread out resources over too many projects. However, he believed that 
in the long run it would pay to concentrate on relatively large projects 
spanning a number of years. 


90. His delegation considered that nuclear safety was one of the most essential 
tasks of the Agency, together with safeguards and technical assistance. 
The IAEA had played a very constructive role in the development of international 
safety standards, as well as in the exchange and supply of expertise 
and experience in the safety field. Norway supported the trend towards more 
direct Agency participation in safety work, through advisory missions and 
through helping national regulatory bodies to implement the numerous safety 
guidelines which had been developed. 
91. A fair balance should be maintained between the promotional and regulatory 
roles of the Agency. Despite budgetary problems in Member States, it 
was essential that the Agency should have increased resources allocated to 
safeguards, so that verification operations could be performed with assurance 
despite the increase in the number of facilities to be inspected. 
92. His delegation could accept the draft budget for 1984 and could also accept, 
subject to parliamentary approval, the target proposal for voluntary contributions 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1984. He favoured an 
increase in the technical assistance and co-operation programme, but pointed 
out that public acceptance of nuclear energy was difficult to obtain in many 
countries, including Norway; without a reliable safeguards system, it would 
hardly be feasible to support a technical assistance programme of any kind. 
93. He noted with satisfaction that in 1982, as in previous years, the 
Secretariat had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the diversion 
of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material, or the misuse of 
facilities or equipment subject to safeguards under certain agreements. 
Assurance that diversion did not take place played a very decisive role where 
public acceptance of nuclear energy was concerned. In his view, current 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 26 


safeguards by the Agency gave adequate assurance, but that view was not 
necessarily shared by the public at large. Although the Agency had undertaken 
in its safeguards agreements to protect confidential information acquired 
in the performance of its functions, it was highly desirable that more 
information should be published about the operation of safeguards. 


94. in years to come the number of nuclear facilities and amounts of safeguarded 
materials would increase, which would place a heavier burden on the Secretariat. 
In order to maintain the reliability of the system consideration should be 
given to ways in which the Agency could make better use of its manpower and 
material resources. The characteristics of the fuel cycle of each State 
should be taken into account more fully when designing cost-effective safeguards 
approaches. 
95. In order to find a long-lasting solution for the financing of safeguards, 
further discussions were needed. In the meantime he found the proposal 
in document GC(XXVII)/687 an acceptable compromise. 
96. The Director General had on several occasions expressed concern about 
the problems caused for the Secretariat by having proposed safeguards inspectors 
rejected by Member States. In principle, safeguards inspectors should be 
recruited from as many Member States as possible, but the nationality of 
the inspector was much less important than his technical competence. Less 
qualified inspectors would make inspections longer and more costly and would 
mean that there was less chance of discovering attempted diversions. Moreover* 
such inspectors would hardly be likely to obtain the full co-operation of 
the operators and of the systems of the various States for accounting for 
and controlling nuclear material. As a country with a modest but long-standing 
nuclear programme, Norway had from time to time suggested suitable and wellqualified 
candidates for posts as IAEA inspectors, as well as for other posts 
in the Secretariat, in order to achieve reasonable geographical distribution. 
Norway assessed, as far as practicable, the technical competence of proposed 
inspectors, but accepted Agency inspectors regardless of nationality. The 
Secretariat could not fulfil its safeguards duties if it could not make full 
use of the inspector corps. Moreover, it was to be assumed that the full 
loyalty of an inspector was due to the Agency during the period of his 
appointment. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 27 


97. The report of the Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage 
represented a useful contribution to that important subject, and dealt also 
with assurances of supply and non-proliferation. He was disappointed that 
it had not been possible to reach full agreement in the Group, although a 
large measure of agreement had been reached on a number of issues. 
98. Any further nuclear proliferation would prove highly detrimental to 
current efforts to promote international co-operation and security of supply 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He wished to stress the importance 
of acceptance by all importing countries of full-scope IAEA safeguards on 
their present and future nuclear activities. World-wide acceptance of 
effective non-proliferation measures would increase the security of all States, 
promote predictability of supply for peaceful non-explosive uses of nuclear 
energy, and enhance international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
99. Norway was pleased to note that several States had concluded safeguards 
agreements pursuant to NPT and the Tlatelolco Treaty during 1982. However, 
by the end of 1982 there had still been 38 non-nuclear-weapon States parties 
to NPT without a safeguards agreement. He strongly urged those States to 
conclude such agreements as soon as possible. His delegation welcomed the 
negotiations between the Agency and the Soviet Union regarding the application 
of safeguards to peaceful nuclear installations in that country. 
100. Up to the middle of 1982 CAS had made some progress, but during the 
current year progress had been slow. That was not unexpected, since CAS 
was engaged in a very difficult exercise from which there would be no easy 
results. The work should continue with patience and without undue pessimism. 
101. He regretted that it had not been possible to hold the PUNE conference 
that year as scheduled. The Agency should play a major role in PUNE when, 
as was to be hoped, it was held at some later date. 
102. The IAEA was a very useful tool in its areas of competence within the 
nuclear energy field, such as technical assistance and co-operation, safeguards, 
safety, and information exchange. It had been shown on several occasions 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 28 


that difficult problems could be solved within the IAEA by patient work and by 
keeping to the technical facts. Other international organizations could learn 
from the IAEA in that respect. However, it was unfortunate that over the 
past few years certain political issues had entered into the work of the 
General Conference. Regrettably, that also appeared to be the case as regards 


the Board of Governors. 


103. It was vital, in the common interest, to prevent the spread of nuclear 
explosives and thereby to reduce the risk of nuclear war. It was of equal 
importance to have an efficient and reliable multilateral safeguards system, 
making possible the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It was the firm view 
of his Government that the IAEA played a vital role in achieving both those 
aims. He therefore considered it essential that the IAEA be preserved as 
a viable and effective organization, and that its integrity as a specialized 
technical agency be ensured. Political tensions must not be allowed to interfere 
with the proceedings of such an important international organization, and 
thus undermine its substantive mission. 
104. His Government attached great importance to the principle of universality 
in international organizations, and believed that that principle should be 
strictly adhered to. 
105. Mr. GHAZALI bin Hj. Abd. RAHMAN (Malaysia) expressed his appreciation 
to the Director General and his staff for their dedication and for the invaluable 
services they had rendered to development and to international co-operation 
in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He wished to congratulate the 
People's Republic of China on becoming a Member of the Agency. 
106. Malaysia considered nuclear energy and technology to be an integral 
part of nation-building. At its present stage of development in the area 
of science in general and nuclear science in particular, the question that 
faced it was how to plan ahead so as to ensure that the needs of both science 
and nuclear science were met in the best possible way, and that they did 
the maximum amount of good and the minimum amount of harm. Nuclear science, 
the scope of which ranged from technology to morality, from development 
economics to global stewardship, needed to be viewed in an overall perspective, 
and that should be the ultimate goal of the Agency. Past events had not, 
however, contributed towards the creation of such an overall perspective. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 29 


107. In the past, nuclear science and its related technology had been seen 
as different entities, but modern man was concerned about the relations between 
nuclear science and the rest of society. Unfortunately for some, the concept 
of the IAEA was based on the premise that nuclear energy was a strictly technical 
subject, to be studied by natural scientists and engineers. As a corollary 
to that assumption it was held that others, such as social scientists, should 
not study that energy but only its implications, or its effects on society 
at large. The Agency's existence and purpose had thus been reduced to no 
more than a search for technical knowledge, and as a result, knowledge of 
nuclear energy had become a tool for the manipulation of the world. However, 
there was now greater awareness of man's social and moral responsibilities 
in that connection. It should be realized that nuclear energy had become 
as much a social concept as a technical and scientific one. 
108. If it was accepted that nuclear energy was a social concept, it should 
also be accepted as a topic of controversy, since in all societies, except 
primitive and rigidly controlled ones, social concepts were controversial. 
Nuclear power had been embedded in controversy since its first application 
in the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Controversy surrounded the need 
for nuclear power development, the siting of plants, the disposal of nuclear 
wastes, the ethical issues raised by nuclear power, and the nature of the 
future society for which new sources of energy would be needed. It was a 
complex subject in which technological problems were combined with economic, 
social, moral and political problems that cut across international and domestic 
boundaries. Unfortunately some of those problems arose from the conflicting 
nuclear policies of major nuclear States, and from incompatible world-views 
on nuclear matters. Most crucial were the problems arising from a series 
of unilateral political actions by certain States, such as denial of technology, 
unequal or discriminatory treatment of Member States, stringent nuclear export 
regulations and, above all, inconsistent nuclear policies. The same could 
be said of such issues as access and assurances of supply. Such tendencies 
might prove to be detrimental to the development of nuclear power, which 
was vital for the survival of mankind. There should not be a system of double 
standards in which certain nations assumed that they were superior, and prevented 
others from pursuing their legitimate national interests. 



GC(XXVII)/0R.251 
page 30 


109. Concern had also arisen in regard to proliferation risks, despite the 
various discussions held to resolve the problem. Progress achieved had been 
minimal; the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), for example, 
had been slow and laborious. The PUNE Preparatory Committee had suffered 
a similar fate, and had repeatedly failed to reach agreement, resulting in 
the postponement of PUNE itself. However, all was not lost. It was to be 
hoped that those problems would be resolved in good time, or at least before 
the Third NPT Review Conference, which was scheduled to take place 
in 1985. It was vital to find solutions to those problems before the Conference 
in order to avoid disappointment similar to that of the Second NPT Review 


Conference in 1980. 


110. The troubles of the modern world had reached the point where they threatened 
fundamental freedom and international peace. Vast funds were being made 
available for research in order to improve armaments, resulting in the manufacture 
of new generations of nuclear weapons which were more precise, more accurate 
and more devastating. Those developments contradicted both the letter and 
spirit of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 
111. Malaysia believed that NPT, together with the Agency's safeguards 
system, offered the only possibility of evolving a totally new international 
system of arms control. It was encouraging to note that initial steps had 
been taken by some major nuclear-weapon States in volunteering to make some 
of their civil nuclear installations subject to the Agency's safeguards. 
He hoped that eventually those countries would gain useful experience in 
the application of safeguards on a voluntary basis, and that the time would 
come when the scope of the safeguards system would be extended to cover military 
installations as well. When that was done, a system of arms control verification 
would be created which would be superior to any systems that had been 
suggested so far. Nevertheless, Malaysia still wished to reaffirm the validity 
of the Treaty, and would continue to support and observe it. 


112. The Agency's work should be for the benefit of all mankind, and not 
for a favoured few or for any predetermined category of countries. The ultimate 
goal should be the development and betterment of all peoples, and the safeguarding 
of the right to an honourable life, free from hunger, poverty and disease. The 

GC(XXVII)/OR.251 
page 31 


chief role of the IAEA should be to ensure that means of livelihood are 
assured to all living beings. 


113. In conclusion, he was pleased to have been authorized by his Government 
to pledge a voluntary contribution towards the Technical Assistance and 
Go-operation Fund for 1984 to the sum of US $20 250. 
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
July 1984* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 12 October 1983, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda*" 


7 
General debate and annual report for 1982 
(continued) 137 


Statements by the delegates of the following 
States and organizations: 


Canada 1 -10 
Chile 11 -19 
Israel 20 -27 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 28 -38 
Poland 41 -57 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 58 -75 
Holy See 76 -86 
Sudan 87 -92 
Bulgaria 93 -104 
Ivory Coast 105 -112 
Philippines 113 -122 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 123 -131 
Commission of the European Communities 132 -137 


Reply by the delegate of the United States of 
America to the statement by the delegate of 
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 39 


Comment by the delegate of the Islamic Republic 
of Iran on the remarks by the delegate of the 
United States of America 40 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 21 November 1983. 


**/ GC(XXVII)/700. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 


84-1178 
0013e 



GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684) (continued) 


1. Mr. SULLIVAN (Canada) said that, particularly in the past decade, 
over-optimism and over-pessimism in nuclear matters had given rise to one 
another in endless succession. In the interest of a more accurate reading of 
the extraordinary venture which had been collectively embarked upon, he would 
like to give a brief sketch of the nuclear energy scene in Canada at the 
present time. 
2. In 1982, Canadian companies had produced slightly more than 8000 tonnes 
of uranium, or in other words the largest annual output achieved in 20 years. 
The chief factor behind the surprisingly strong growth was the approaching 
completion of many of the power reactors contracted for in the mid-1970s, 
together with the need to ensure their supply later in the present decade and 
into the 1990s. Given the fact that the installed nuclear capacity of the 
Western world was expected to grow by about 135% betv/een 1981 and 1990, the 
prospects for uranium mining in Canada were good. The bulk of the uranium was 
still being produced in Ontario; but high-grade surface mining operations had 
begun on a major scale in Saskatchewan, which would ensure that Canadian 
uranium remained competitive on international markets whichever way the 
situation turned. Preliminary statistics suggested that in 1983 Canada would 
emerge as the world's biggest uranium producer. It had to be stressed in that 
connection that the increase in production had been matched by a qualitative 
improvement in the conditions under which production proceeded, especially as 
concerned the health and safety of workers and environmental protection. 
Furthermore, the growth in production would have to be accompanied by an 
increase in Canada's uranium refining capacity, which would rise by about 300% 
in the coming years, as the new Port Hope and Blind River facilities were 
completed. The expanded refining programme provided for major improvements in 
pollution control and the recycling of potentially valuable wastes. 


3. By the end of 1982, the Canadian nuclear power programme ranked seventh 
in the world, with 13 reactors connected to the grid and producing close on 
7300 MW(e). A further 11 reactors were scheduled for connection to the grid 
by the end of the decade, making for a net output of approximately 
14 500 MW(e) by 1990. The programme was unique in that it was based entirely 
on the Canadian CANDU reactor system, fuelled with natural uranium. Since the 
previous session of the General Conference, four new CANDU 600 reactors had 



GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 3 


been started up: one in Argentina, another in the Republic of Korea, and two 
more in Canada. In addition, the first 540-MW(e) unit of the Pickering "B" 
station had become operational in 1983. He wished to point out in that 
connection that, as opposed to the widespread view that the lead time in the 
construction of reactors was growing steadily longer, the Wolsung power 


station (Republic of Korea) had been finished completely in 61 months. 


4. The current market situation for large power reactors was very tight. 
The CANDU project at Cernavoda (Romania) should proceed according to schedule, 
but Canada was just as much affected by the current difficulties as were the 
other major reactor suppliers. He was counting on a high level of activity in 
the next few years, as the reactors already contracted for were completed, 
after which there would be some very difficult years, followed by an uptrend 
in orders in the late 1980s and early 1990s. 
5. The Canadian authorities believed that the CANDU system would stand the 
test of the present challenges, as it had done in the past. Although 
pressurized heavy-water reactors accounted for only about 5% of the 
commercially operating 297 reactors in 1982, CANDU reactors consistently 
figured among the top ten reactors in the world in terms of overall 
performance; in 1982 five of the top ten had been CANDU reactors - and in 
terms of lifetime performance to the end of 1982 six CANDU reactors had been 
among the top ten. In a world with a serious energy shortage, a product with 
that record was bound to have a successful long-term future. Furthermore, the 
fading of short-term market prospects, while in certain respects a cause of 
difficulties, had also had its positive side. For example, Canada had 
refocused its interest on smaller power reactors likely to attract countries 
with smaller grids and on still smaller reactors (such as the Canadian 
Slowpoke design) which could perhaps be used for district heating and 
electricity generation. In addition, the Canadian programme of 
high-level-waste management, which was directed towards deep storage in stable 
geological formations, continued according to plan; the successful outcome of 
it was expected before the end of the decade and study of its commercial 
possibilities had already begun. 
6. Turning to other applications of atomic energy, he said that 
radioisotopes, in particular, were being used in a large number of fields for 
improving the health, safety and prosperity of human beings. Canada occupied 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 4 


a leading place in that respect. For example, Canada produced about 65% of 
the bulk-processed radioisotopes currently in use around the world, and it was 
estimated that more than a million people had benefited from radiation therapy 
using equipment produced in Canada and that the years of life added through 
treatments of that kind amounted to more than 13 million. In an era of 
continuing scepticism with regard to the merits of nuclear energy, such 


figures warranted reflection. 


7. The Canadian nuclear programme was noteworthy for its size, maturity, 
strength and autonomy, and also for its peaceful nature. On that point it had 
to be stressed that Canada was not a nuclear-weapon State and had no wish to 
become one; its sole aim was to develop and expand its programme for 
exclusively peaceful purposes. 
8. The Agency was particularly well placed to assist humanity in realizing 
the numerous benefits of nuclear energy while at the same time avoiding the 
awesome dangers inherent in it. The competence that the Agency had acquired 
in developing and applying a credible safeguards system, as well as in its 
activities aimed at bringing the advantages of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy to a growing number of States, was undeniable. Moreover, the Agency's 
mandate was flexible enough to enable it to take up new tasks as the need for 
them was felt. In that respect nuclear safety now counted among its key 
activities and, although it was, of course, a matter primarily for States 
themselves, the Director General's proposal for an international commission on 
that subject still merited serious consideration; a commission of that kind, 
provided that it was kept free of commercial bias, would be able to help 
rationalize safety philosophies and regulatory procedures. 
9. The Agency safeguards system was contributing a great deal to world 
peace and prosperity. If States were to co-operate among themselves in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, they would have to satisfy themselves that 
such co-operation was not being misused or misdirected and to convince public 
opinion and their partners of that fact. The best way for Member States to 
assure one another of their good intentions was to sign the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty or to bind themselves in some similar way and enter into a safeguards 
agreement of the INFCIRC/153 type with the Agency. There was no doubt that, 
were it not for the Agency's safeguards system, nuclear co-operation between 
States would be far less extensive and much more difficult than it was at the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 5 


present time. His country therefore considered that the application of 
full-scope safeguards was a core element of the Agency mandate. It should be 
emphasized that Canada's potential nuclear partners were not being asked to 
assume an obligation that it would not take on itself; his country's nuclear 
programme was entirely under full-scope safeguards and Canada expected the 


same of its partners, in return for which it was willing to give them the 
benefit of its experience in the nuclear field, including the CANDU programme 
and the technology acquired in the fabrication of fuel and production of heavy 
water. 


10. In conclusion his delegation welcomed the admission of the People's 
Republic of China to the Agency, which would help to make it a truly universal 
organization. 
11. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) said that his country was a firm believer 
in the principle of the universality of international organizations and that 
he was happy to see the admission of the People's Republic of China to the 
Agency. Chile attached great importance to the Agency's activities as an 
organization whose mandate was purely technical in nature; he deeply deplored 
the fact that issues had been raised during the debates that were in fact the 
concern of other bodies of the United Nations system. Past experience had 
proved that by introducing non-technical matters into the discussion one 
risked gravely impairing the integrity of the Agency and its principles and 
objectives. The General Conference should therefore keep to the important 
issues which it had before it, namely the transfer of technology, nuclear 
safety and ways of ensuring that the atom was used for peaceful purposes. 
Another problem of a technical nature which caused consternation was the 
disposal of radioactive waste; the Agency should work towards the rapid 
introduction of an international system by which to overcome that problem. 
12. Chile had always been a supporter of the Agency's safeguards system and 
had concluded safeguards agreements on a voluntary basis. Nevertheless, it 
was disturbed to see that safeguards activities were absorbing practically all 
of the draft Regular Budget for 1984 - the appropriations were seven times 
higher than those allocated to technical co-operation. It was also 
disconcerting that the implementation of that co-operation was rather 
arbitrary in the absence of a planning figure for a foreseeable total of 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 6 


assured voluntary contributions. That was incompatible with the Agency's 
basic function, which was to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. 


13. With regard to supplies and the transfer of technology for the benefit 
of countries which, when starting out on nuclear programmes, did not wish that 
fact to involve them in any kind of energy dependence, he supported the 
activities of CAS on the understanding that they should represent one of the 
possible alternatives but not the only one. At the same time, he was 
perturbed by the meagre progress made so far by the Committee, mainly because 
of the lack of political goodwill on the part of supplier countries and their 
wish to introduce into the discussion considerations that had no bearing 
whatsoever on the Agency's functions. 
14. The question of amending Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had been on the 
agenda for six years. He wished to clarify in that connection that any 
amendment which meant a reduction in the relative representation of Latin 
America on the Board of Governors should entail a complete revision of that 
Article. 
15. Chile wanted its nuclear development to proceed without harm either to 
persons or to the environment. The bill on nuclear safety, which was at the 
final drafting stage, would take that requirement into account while 
stipulating precise standards by which investment in the national nuclear 
industry could be promoted. The authorities had begun an intensification of 
the Chilean nuclear power programme, believing it to be an additional and 
valuable contribution during the coming decade and a way of enabling Chile to 
preserve its energy independence. 
16. In a similar vein the Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission and the 
Argentine Atomic Energy Commission had recently concluded a technical 
co-operation agreement for the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Signature of that scientific and technical agreement had demonstrated 
that, when motivated by good intentions, peoples were capable of overcoming 
their egoistic apprehensions and sensibilities so as to join together in 
mastering the most advanced technologies. 
17. Chile had stepped up its efforts in all aspects of nuclear energy able 
to contribute to its social and economic development - for example, hydrology, 
mining and, especially, agriculture and food production. Significant headway 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 7 


had accordingly been made in research into nutrition and agricultural 
production. In the area of food production, it should be noted that the 
consumption of irradiated foodstuffs had been authorized in accordance with 
the recommendations made by the FAO/IAEA/toHO Joint Committee and that the 
industrial irradiation of food products on a pilot scale was now under way in 
his country. 


18. It was encouraging to note that in most of the areas mentioned above 
Chile had been able to work together with the Agency and various friendly 
countries; as a counterpart for that aid Chile hoped to give other developing 
countries the benefit of its experience - for example, it had offered to 
contribute, in the area of technical co-operation, both to the Agency and to 
the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC). It had received fellows 
from Guatemala, Honduras and Uruguay, and the exchange of technical 
information with other countries in the region had been stepped up. 
19. In conclusion, he commended the Director General for his efforts to 
ensure equal participation by all Member States in the Agency's activities and 
trusted that it would soon be possible to arrive at the equitable balance that 
the developing countries had the right to expect. 
20. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said he shared the view of the Director 
General, expressed in his opening address, on the need to remain faithful to 
the Agency's Statute. In addition, his delegation welcomed the People's 
Republic of China as a new Member of the Agency. Israel was following with 
interest the developments in the world energy situation and also the efforts 
being made to find alternative sources of supply. In the recent past a major 
development in that respect had been the place taken by nuclear energy in the 
industrialized countries and the controversy to which the use of it had led. 
Another important trend had been the introduction of nuclear energy in many 
developing countries, which were employing it on an ever greater scale, 
including applications in agriculture and industry as well as in the life 
sciences. 
21. The Agency had to remain fully responsive to the needs of all Member 
States, industrialized and developing countries alike. In the first place, it 
could play an ever more active role in promoting public understanding in the 
industrialized countries. Movements hostile to the development of nuclear 
energy for the generation of electricity had become worldwide; they had won 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 8 


over many sections of the population and were now tending towards solidarity 
on an international scale. There remained much to do and say in order to 
dispel doubts and provide information for the public at large. The Agency 
should step up its activities along those lines, especially in the area of 
environmental protection and nuclear safety. 


22. In addition, more effort and more resources should be invested in the 
implementation of nuclear power programmes in developing countries? Israel was 
following with interest the activities of the Department of Technical 
Co-operation and other relevant Departments, as it felt that the Agency should 
give more attention, in its plans and programmes, to the importance attached 
by those countries to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. For 
example, it should examine more closely the adaptation of existing power 
reactors to the special conditions prevailing in developing countries relatively 
small-size grids, problems linked with the integration of large 
reactors into such grids, inadequate economic infrastructure, dependence due 
to the import of technology, fuel supplies and expertise. In its technical 
assistance programme the Agency should give prominence to activities intended 
to make those countries independent, among other things by the initiation of 
training programmes and the provision of advisory services in fields such as 
planning, joint construction of power plants, and the building of plants in 
water-deficient areas. When directed in that way, international co-operation 
could also be of help in formulating international standards and establishing 
uniformity that would enable the Agency to operate more effectively. 
23. A crucial problem confronting the developing countries, particularly 
those located in arid and semi-arid zones, was a scarcity of water. That 
problem should be approached by resorting to desalination techniques based on 
the use of nuclear energy. He hoped that the Agency would look into that 
matter in the decade to come. Furthermore, the applications of nuclear energy 
to agriculture, industry and the life sciences were of vital importance to the 
international community and, above all, to developing countries; additional 
efforts had therefore to be deployed in the preservation of food products, in 
the eradication of insect pests, and in human and veterinary medicine. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 9 


24. As a developing country with limited financial resources, Israel 
undertook to co-operate with the Agency in carrying out its tasks. It would 
continue, through the Agency, to collaborate with other States, thereby making 
a modest contribution to international efforts in the domain of technical 
assistance. In areas where it had itself acquired competence, for example the 
use of isotopes and radiation in agriculture, industry, hydrology, 
desalination and the introduction of nuclear power in small countries, Israel 
felt it could be useful and was willing to afford other countries the benefit 
of its experience, limited though that might be, by awarding fellowships, 
sending experts abroad and providing courses for foreign trainees. 
25. The global and comprehensive nature of the Agency's mission was clearly 
set forth in the Statute. Politicization of the Agency's work, particularly 
the request made by Iraq for the inclusion of an additional item on the 
agenda, could only undermine that principle; it should be recalled that during 
previous sessions many countries had expressed regret that so much time and 
effort had been devoted to discussion of that issue. He therefore deplored 
the fact that the General Conference was having to spend more of its already 
limited time on the consideration of an initiative that was likely adversely 
to affect the role and activities of the Agency. 
26. The Director General had raised the subject of prohibiting attacks 
against nuclear facilities; Israel was in favour of any international action 
to regulate the status of nuclear facilities and his Government wished to 
state clearly on that point that it was not its policy to attack nuclear 
facilities. 
27. The threat created by nuclear weapons had also been mentioned; Israel 
had long felt it a matter of concern and had always defended the principle of 
non-proliferation. Naturally enough, it was from the perspective of the 
Middle East situation that Israel viewed that problem; it appeared that the 
most effective barrier to proliferation in the Middle East would be to create 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in that region. His country had made proposals 
along those lines based on the precepts underlying the Tlatelolco Treaty. He 
was well aware of the political differences existing between the States of the 
Middle East, but those differences should not be allowed to stand in the way 
of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone and Israel, for its part, was quite 
willing to enter into negotiations on that matter between the States of the 
region concerned at any moment and without any preconditions. 

GC (XXVII)/OR.252 
page 10 


28. Mr. ALGOUD (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) thanked the Director General 
and his staff for their work, which had borne tangible fruit in the annual 
report for 1982. He welcomed the admission of the People's Republic of China 
to the Agency, and was sure that the presence of another great Power would 
have positive effects on its activities. 
29. He was grateful to the Agency for helping developing countries to 
utilize nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, and also expressed his 
appreciation for the assistance given his country through the sending of 
missions of experts and inspectors. The information services supplied by the 
Agency were also important, since they constituted one of the principal means 
by which it achieved its objectives. 
30. In the current political and economic climate no effort should be 
spared to utilize knowledge in the most peaceful manner possible. Among the 
gravest incidents of recent times had been the attacks on the installations of 
certain countries, notably the infamous attack on the Iraqi reactor which, as 
was well known, had been built for research, in other words for peaceful 
purposes. There was also the threat from the United States, which was 
carrying out military manoeuvres in the territorial waters of developing 
countries, often with nuclear submarines which polluted the sea with 
radioactive waste. Such activities had an immediate effect on the natural 
resources of the countries concerned by exposing their coasts to radioactive 
contamination, quite apart from the alarm caused among the populations of 
those countries by such terrorist manoeuvres. Indeed, the United States had 
not hesitated constantly to violate the Libyan territorial waters of the Gulf 
of Syrte. 
31. The United States, in a completely fanatical and racist manner, was 
refusing students from developing countries access to science and technology, 
and was preventing Libyan students from following courses in nuclear sciences 
and civil aeronautics in the United States. That phenomenon, which was unique 
in the world, ran counter to the Declaration of Human Rights and was 
incompatible with the Statute of the Agency. On the other hand, the United 
States was continuing to offer scientific and technical facilities in the 
nuclear field to fanatical racist regimes such as the Zionist entity and South 
Africa, which had enabled those countries, in complete disregard of the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 11 


Statute of the Agency, to stockpile hundreds of nuclear missiles and to make 
direct military attacks on States which had signed and observed the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). 


32. Certain advanced countries were monopolizing technology, and were 
imposing unacceptable conditions on developing countries, conditions which 
relegated them to the least-developed category. 
33. All Member States who genuinely desired peace and who were pursuing the 
noble objectives of the Agency were urged to intensify their efforts to 
counter the barbarian and racist activities of the United States, the Zionist 
entity and South Africa - countries attempting to dominate the peoples of the 
Third World and to deprive them of the right to benefit from the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, which were capable of delivering them from the 
spectre of poverty and hunger. 
34. Libya reiterated the need to adopt a resolution calling for the 
expulsion of the Zionist entity from the Agency, since it had now been proved 
that that entity did not respect either the Agency's Statute or the Agency's 
resolutions. That entity continued to defy the international community by 
refusing to sign NPT and refusing to conclude or apply safeguards agreements, 
whilst seeking to obtain nuclear weapons in order to threaten the security and 
independence of the States in the region and of Third World countries in 
general. It was clear that that entity possessed nuclear weapons, and that it 
had no regard for the principles and objectives of the Agency. 
3 5. He wished to make a few comments on the agenda and on the annual report 
for 1982 submitted by the Director General. Libya considered that the 
provisions of the standard safeguards agreements were sufficient to enable the 
desired objective to be attained, and that additional provisions would only 
hamper the progress of the nuclear industry towards peace, unless they were 
accompanied by other practical measures requiring all facilities in all 
countries to submit to safeguards. The technical assistance programme should 
be financed under the Regular Budget if achievement of one of the principal 
objectives of the Agency's Statute, namely the transfer of peaceful nuclear 
technology to developing countries, was to be assured. Such programmes should 
be given appropriate funding in order to ensure that adequate assistance was 
supplied to countries which needed it, and his delegation suggested that the 
Conference adopt the principle of granting technical assistance on the basis 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 12 


of geographical distribution as it applied within the Agency, so that the sums 
granted to each region would be in proportion to its level of underdevelopment 
in the technical and economic field. 


36. He wished to stress once again that a resolution must be adopted for 
the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute in order to increase 
the representation of developing countries on the Board. His country had made 
a similar proposal six years earlier, but that justified demand had so far not 
been made the subject of an appropriate resolution. Any further delay could 
only hamper the work of most of the Agency's developing Member States. 
37. Public opinion was becoming increasingly aware of the dangers which 
threatened mankind and which were caused by the activities of the racist 
regimes and the ostensible peaceful purposes behind which those countries 
concealed their thirst for hegemony. 
38. Finally, he hoped the General Conference would arrive at results which 
would benefit all the peoples of the world. 
39. Mr. LABOWITZ (United States of America), on a point of order, 
categorically rejected the insulting remarks and extraneous political 
considerations put forward by the representative of the Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya. Such declarations were certainly not of a kind to advance the 
debate and could only undermine the work of the Agency. 
40. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), on a point of order, 
said it was extremely regrettable that the United States delegation should not 
respect the freedom of speech of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. It was clear 
that the United States were opposed to the expression of even the slightest 
cricitism of Israel, South Africa and all other countries which defied the 
international community. 
41. Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland) welcomed the admission to the Agency of the 
People's Republic of China. That was a notable event which would contribute 
to consolidating the Agency's authority as a universal organization. 
42. The Agency had been established to promote the exclusively peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and had subsequently been entrusted with the task of 
supervising the application of the Non-Proliteration Treaty (NPT); its work 
during the past year had been performed in an exceptionally difficult 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 13 


international situation. Poland was very concerned at the increasing danger 
of a generalized nuclear conflict that might be triggered by the unrestrained 
accumulation of weapons, especially nuclear weapons, which had been initiated 
by the imperialist Powers. 


43. Poland had paid heavy tribute during the Second World War, in terms of 
both human and material losses. It was only too well aware of the dangers 
which surrounded the present threats and considered it vital for the 
international community to spare no effort to avoid the terrifying prospect of 
a nuclear catastrophe. 
44. The Agency's activity was of paramount importance for the safe and 
peaceful development of the world in the nuclear era, and the Agency continued 
to play a leading role in preventing the danger of nuclear weapons 
proliferation and in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
45. The Polish Government deeply appreciated the achievements of the 
Agency, in particular its safeguards activities, which it fully supported. 
The continuous improvement of the system, from both the organizational and the 
technological points of view, and its universal acceptance would contribute to 
eliminating the danger of seeing new countries acquiring nuclear weapons. 
They would also help to strengthen confidence between societies, which was 
very valuable if the benefits of the routine and peaceful use of nuclear 
energy were to be extended. 
46. The growing effectiveness of the safeguards system would consolidate 
the Agency's authority as the organization responsible for the strict 
application of the provisions of NPT. 
47. He sincerely hoped the number of countries concluding safeguards 
agreements with the Agency and placing their nuclear facilities under 
effective and reliable international safeguards would increase continually, 
thus increasing the universality and effectiveness of NPT. 
48. His delegation hoped that the third NPT Review Conference would provide 
an opportunity for an exchange of views and a consensus allowing the adoption 
of decisions to strengthen the Treaty and to facilitate international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 14 


49. The establishment of firm principles to govern the export of nuclear 
materials and equipment, including the application of the safeguards system, 
would be of interest not only for the development of international 
co-operation in the atomic energy field, but also for the strengthening of the 
non-proliferation regime, and it was to be hoped that the work on that subject 
being pursued by the Committee on Assurances of Supply would enable the 
Committee to attain its objectives. 
50. Poland was entirely satisfied with the Agency's activities for the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was interesting to note 
that the production of electricity by nuclear power plants throughout the 
world had increased by 12% in 1982 and that such plants now accounted for 
about 10% of the world's electricity generating capacity. Poland was pursuing 
a nuclear power development programme in close collaboration with the other 
socialist States, chiefly the Soviet Union, and with the active co-operation 
of the Agency. Under its nuclear programme it was also using the Agency's 
basic safety standards and the principles developed under the NUSS programme. 
51. The Agency's accomplishments in promoting the use of nuclear techniques 
in agriculture, medicine and industry were noteworthy, as were the many 
activities relating to the dissemination of scientific, technical and economic 
information about nuclear energy. 
52. His delegation was also deeply interested in the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation activities and was pleased to note that the 
resources, including the voluntary contributions of Member States, devoted by 
the Agency to those activities had increased fivefold in the course of the 
last decade. It was particularly gratifying that the Agency Secretariat was 
actively searching for new methods of better utilizing the financial resources 
which the Agency received for that purpose. A closer relationship between the 
assistance provided and the socio-economic objectives of the recipient 
countries should certainly make it possible to increase the effectiveness of 
the technical assistance and co-operation programme. The adoption of 
multi-year projects which were better adapted to the long-term socio-economic 
future of the countries concerned was fully justified. Poland was also in 
favour of using the technical assistance provided by the Agency in as 
effective a manner as possible. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 15 


53. The Polish Government had on numerous occasions indicated that it 
approved of the voluntary nature of contributions to the Agency's Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund, those contributions being made on the basis 
of indicative planning figures quoted in the Agency's programme and payable in 
national currencies. On behalf of his Government, he had the honour to pledge 
the payment of a voluntary contribution in cash amounting to 20 million zloty 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1984. Poland was also 
prepared to grant ten fellowships to applicants from developing countries and 
to receive them at its research centres. 
54. His delegation was entirely satisfied with the Agency's annual report 
and accounts for 1982 contained in documents GC(XXVII)/684 and GC(XXVII)/685. 
It also supported the proposal concerning the budget for 1984 which was 
contained in document GC(XXVII)/686. However, his delegation wished to stress 
that the growth rate of the Agency's budget must be reduced and was convinced 
that the Secretariat would find ways of doing that by achieving savings, 
rationalizing the organization of certain services and making an in-depth 
study of the inflation rate used at the time of preparation of the draft 
budget for the following year. 
55. He wished to inform the General Conference that the Council of State of 
the Polish People's Republic had in September ratified the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and hoped that steps in the same 
direction would be taken by all Members of the Agency. 
56. Poland was deeply convinced that the IAEA would continue, thanks to the 
effectiveness of its work for the benefit of all its Members, to help spread 
the many peaceful and safe uses of atomic energy, which was an important 
factor in the economic development of the world. 
57. His delegation appreciated at its true value the interesting and 
detailed statement by the Director General, which contained new proposals that 
were worthy of careful examination. The statement seemed once again to be an 
eloquent confirmation of the competence, devotion, energy and inspiration with 
which Mr. Blix guided the Agency. 
58. Mr. BELODED (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) welcomed the 
People's Republic of China on its admission to the Agency and hoped its 
participation would be fruitful. During the Agency's history the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy had continued to advance steadily, but the Agency could 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 16 


not ignore major political issues. The most important task was to preserve 
peace and prevent a nuclear catastrophe. Such was the objective of the 


initiatives proposed by the Soviet Union at the thirty-eighth session of the 
United Nations General Assembly at present meeting in New York. The Soviet 
Union had proposed a special item on the agenda regarding a nuclear weapons 


freeze and the conclusion of an agreement prohibiting the use of force in 
space and from space to Earth. The commitment made by the Soviet Union not 
to be the first to use nuclear weapons had particular importance. Note 
should also be made of proposals for an agreement on a total nuclear test ban 
and a nuclear weapons ban. The socialist countries had also made a joint 
proposal for an agreement on the mutual non-use of military force and to 
promote peaceful relations between the Warsaw Pact countries and NATO. 


59. As Mr. Andropov, General Secretary of the Communist Party and President 
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, had stressed, the Soviet leadership had no doubt as to the course 
of action that should be adopted in the present tense international climate. 
The aim of the Soviet Union was, first and foremost, to preserve and 
strengthen peace, to promote detente and to broaden and increase co-operation 
between States. 
60. His country actively supported the Agency's main lines of activity in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which were of interest to all countries, 
such as nuclear power and the nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear safety and 
environmental protection, the International Nuclear Information System (INIS), 
and nuclear fusion. 
61. Under the terms of its Statute, the main functions of the Agency, 
essential to fruitful international co-operation, were to control the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, to strengthen the non-proliferation regime and to 
improve the safeguards system. 
62. Ukrainian research centres were carrying out integrated research in 
low-, medium- and high-energy physics, nuclear power and plasma physics. 
Work on the theory of nuclear matter, non-axial nuclei, diffraction 
interaction and shell correction had received world-wide recognition. Major 
advances had been achieved in neutron physics and in using data obtained from 
neutron interactions with nuclei. Intensive work was being carried out on 
the effect of radiation on various reactor materials and radiation damage had 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 17 


been studied on models using electron beams and heavy ions. Highly resistant 
components had been developed, in particular large-scale reactor vessels 
capable of withstanding high pressure. Technical and economic aspects of 
using nuclear energy in the economy and its role in the energy balance were 
being examined. 


63. The Ukrainian, Byelorussian and Moldavian Academies of Science and 
scientific institutes in CMEA Member States were studying the technical and 
economic feasibility of designing fast breeder reactors using a nitrogen-based 
dissociating compound. 
64. The Ukraine was continuing its scientific and technical programme 
"ENERGOKOMPLEX", concerned with the application of research results and 
implementation of measures for environmental protection. 
65. The Tchernobyl", Rovno and Yuzhno-Ukraina power plants, at present in 
operation, had a total capacity of about 5000 MW. The Khmel'nitsk and Crimea 
power plants and a large nuclear heating and power plant were being 
constructed. 
66. Plans for 1981-1985 envisaged an unprecedented development of nuclear 
power. By 1985 Ukrainian power plants would have a total installed capacity 
of 13 000 MW and would have an annual production of more than 
70 000 million kWh. Ionizing radiation was widely used, particularly in 
physics, material sciences, chemistry, geology, and biology. 
67. Radiation-induced mutagenesis had been used for selecting new useful 
species of crops, for inhibiting plant growth in order to improve product 
conservation techniques, and for insect sterilization. 
68. The study of the effects of fast neutrons on animals had shown that 
neutron radiation was much more harmful than X-rays or gamma rays and that 
even low levels led, after one or two years, to a high percentage of 
tumours. The results convincingly demonstrated the serious danger to mankind 
of new types of nuclear weapons, particularly the neutron bomb. 
69. There were more than 70 radiation diagnosis laboratories in the 
Ukraine. In 1982 more than 3000 diagnoses had been made, which had led to 
considerable improvements in early detection of disease and development of 
appropriate treatment. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 18 


70. Such progress had been possible only as a result of the continuous 
training of scientific staff and highly qualified engineers. His country 
believed that the competence of those experts justified a more satisfactory 
representation in the Secretariat and he hoped to see that matter resolved in 
the near future. 
71. The Ukraine had increased its participation in international 
co-operation in research and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It had 
become a tradition to hold, as part of the Agency's technical assistance 
programmes, training courses and study visits for experts from developing 
countries in Kiev and other cities of the Republic. During recent years, 
more courses and study visits had taken place, in which about 250 experts, 
mainly from Asia, Africa and Latin America, had participated. 
72. In 1983 regional training courses had been held in the Ukraine on the 
application of induced mutations in vegetable selection; there had also been 
a study tour devoted to nuclear power, and an Agency interregional course on 
neutron physics and nuclear data. Experts from 50 countries had participated 
in them. During the last three years IAEA/WHO training courses had been held 
in Kiev on the medical application of nuclear techniques, which had enabled 
participants to learn about the latest techniques and the prospects for using 
radioisotopes in clinical practice. Those courses had been attended by more 
than 100 experts from dozens of countries. At the end of October the courses 
would be given for a group of experts from developing Member States of the 
Agency. 
73. The Ukraine was actively participating in the exchange of scientific 
and technical information with the Agency, particularly under INIS. 
74. His country appreciated efforts made by the Agency to improve the ways 
and means of granting technical assistance and to strengthen co-operation with 
developing countries. It believed that the new measures for evaluating the 
effectiveness of technical assistance were useful. 
75. His delegation had been authorized by its Government to announce a 
voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund of 
250 000 roubles in national currency. In conclusion, he expressed his 
conviction that the present session of the Agency's General Conference would 
constitute another step along the path of developing international 



GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 19 


co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and strengthening 
confidence between nations and that it would make a useful contribution to the 
cause of peace and international security. 


76. Mr. CEIRANO (Holy See) praised the documents which had been 
prepared by the Director General and his staff and which reflected the 
effectiveness of the activities of the Agency and its organs. The annual 
report, in particular, clearly indicated that the use of nuclear energy 
remained a complex question which concerned everyone and which deserved mature 
consideration. 
77. Without entering into a technical discussion, he wished to make some 
remarks on the Agency's policy and programmes, giving particular emphasis to 
activities which advanced the cause of the human individual and of human 
society, in the spirit of the remarks made by Pope John Paul II in the speech 
he had made at the Vienna International Centre on 12 September. 
78. The Agency had originally been established in order to demonstrate that 
nuclear energy was not a purely destructive force, but could also be harnessed 
for peaceful purposes and for the good of all. However, nuclear energy seemed 
to have remained an ambivalent reality, an instrument which even in its 
peaceful applications might turn against its master in certain cases. As long 
as the first problem, that of nuclear weapons, was not solved, it was 
impossible to ignore the second problem, that of the control and safety of the 
use of nuclear energy. 
79. Unfortunately, little progress had been made with regard to the problem 
of nuclear weapons since the Conference session in 1982. In fact, the present 
political and military situation of the world, and more particularly of 
Europe, gave the impression that the misgivings felt by one side in view of 
the armaments efforts of the other might lead to a spiral of weapons 
manufacture and deployment which in turn might bring about a deterioration in 
the world situation unless a sovereign vision and political will led to 
negotiations and agreements with durable results. The Holy See was interested 
in all honest attempts at negotiation and supported them. That idea had been 
the principal theme of the Pope's message during the special session on 
disarmament of the United Nations General Assembly in June 1982 and continued 
to be the basis of repeated appeals by the Holy See to all parties concerned: 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 20 


appeals to negotiate in all honesty and integrity, with a sense of 
responsibility to individuals, and appeals to reduce tension and encourage 
liberty, justice and security for all nations in the present and future. 


80. The Church would continue to propose to all interested parties the 
principles of its tradition, which had been tested in the course of centuries 
and which might, as they had in the past, be applied to present-day problems 
of armed warfare and rearmament, in the first instance so as to eliminate or 
minimize the risk of war, but above all to avoid the mass destruction of 
innocent people. 
81. The peaceful uses of atomic energy had been questioned during the last 
decade. The protagonists of such peaceful utilization asserted that nuclear 
energy could be put to use in all countries, whether or not they possessed 
natural resources. Nuclear power therefore seemed particularly suitable for 
developing countries which had chosen the path of rapid industrialization. 
For them to renounce nuclear energy, it was said, would mean giving up rapid 
and certain development. Nuclear power also presented great advantages for 
developed countries. A high level of industrialization went hand in hand with 
a high energy consumption. Countries which at present faced serious 
ecological problems because their industries used forms of energy which were 
not "clean" would find in nuclear energy a clean alternative which would 
enable them to maintain their industrial production level while reducing the 
negative effects of industrialization on the environment. 
82. The opponents of nuclear energy claimed that the production and use of 
nuclear energy was still too risky. According to them, the risks were 
twofold: on the one hand, the possibility of malfunctioning of nuclear 
reactors, which might lead to the radioactive contamination of entire regions, 
and on the other, the dangers connected with the storage of nuclear waste. 
There was no point in dwelling on those fundamental positions and trying to 
find a solution to a controversy which demanded a certain detachment, but he 
did recognize the legitimacy of that controversy, in the context of which the 
policies and programmes of the Agency had to evolve. 
83. In 1983 the Agency had provided assistance to more than 70 Member 
States in various forms. Two aspects of its activities deserved mention and 
encouragement: first, regional co-operation. Given the funds, instruments 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 21 


and personnel available, regional co-operation between developing countries 
made great sense and should be encouraged to the extent possible. The RCA had 
already brought benefits to the region of South East Asia and the Pacific. 
That approach, which had for some time been applied successfully to the 
research being conducted at CERN, in Europe, might serve as a model for other 
parts of the world. Assigning increasing personnel, funds and equipment to 
such common initiatives was certainly a way of enabling a larger number of 
countries to benefit from the fruits of atomic energy. 


84. His delegation had already stressed in the past that it was necessary 
to improve techniques and the training of scientists in the developing 
countries, and that was probably where the emphasis should lie in regional 
development and co-operation programmes. Fellowship programmes, research 
contracts and assistance in the construction of research facilities for 
developing countries called for more attention, staff and financial resources, 
and a splendid step in the right direction would be to pool research and 
ideas, techniques and scientific knowledge derived from the nuclear 
disciplines and to let them blossom out in a growing network of national, 
regional and international co-operation. 
85. In May 1983, the Pontifical Academy of Sciences had organized, in the 
Vatican, a symposium on the biological effects of ionizing radiation, which 
had examined in great detail the method of optimization and had shown once 
again what efforts the scientific community was making to protect life and 
minimize the real and potential threats which surrounded it. In that context, 
too, the Church was playing a role, not by judging the merits of a technical 
procedure, but by helping all those responsible to understand the ethical, 
moral and spiritual implications of the methods they were concerned with. The 
level of protection against ionizing radiation which was currently assured 
showed the extent to which scientific knowledge, in conjunction with ethical 
awareness of moral responsibilities in and to society, might lead to the 
discovery of methods and the establishment of programmes on the basis of which 
science could be advanced while protecting the common good and the life of 
everyone. 
86. Those were only a few problems, but they were those on which the Agency 
should concentrate its attention more than ever. In doing so, it should be 
prepared to answer the question which Pope John Paul II had put in 
September 1983 and ask itself whether what was being done could advance the 



GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 22 


cause of man as man, a thought which might not always be easy but which was 
necessary. Nuclear science and modern society should be approached with a 
profound respect for all the realities and their potential. The interest 
attached to intellectual, technical, scientific and educational questions 
should always be counterbalanced by an opening and a devotion to the cause of 
man, who was created in the likeness of God and therefore deserved a maximum 
of dignity and respect. 


87. Mr. EL AGIB (Sudan) welcomed the admission to the Agency of the 
People's Republic of China, whose participation would strengthen the authority 
of the Agency and contribute to the development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
88. He congratulated the Director General and his staff on their efforts to 
protect the rights of developing Member States, particularly by appointing 
nationals of those countries to senior posts in the Secretariat. His 
delegation also hoped that it would not be long before Africa was equitably 
represented on the Board of Governors. 
89. He agreed with the Director General that safeguards and technical 
assistance were two important programmes which were of interest to both 
developed and developing countries, as they constituted an indissoluble 
whole. Nevertheless, the problems of the developing countries were sometimes 
more urgent in view of the international situation. Therefore his delegation 
attached great importance to the financing of technical assistance and 
considered that the funds for that activity should be provided from the 
Agency's Regular Budget. The Agency was a technical organization, but some 
saw in it a political platform. He expressed reservations with regard to that 
distinction, as he felt both those aspects to be inextricably linked. 
Moreover, his country regarded atomic energy as a political weapon in itself. 
Those who adopted that position did not necessarily wish to give the political 
aspect ascendancy over the technical aspect. They also did not necessarily 
seek to politicize scientific and technical discussions, but only to expose 
important problems. 


90. The Sudan was an immense country, rich in as yet untouched arable land 
and enjoying favourable natural conditions, and it might become the principal 
producer of foodstuffs in the Arab world. However, the realization of those 
possibilities depended on extensive research in various fields: botany, 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 23 


zoology, development of new, high-yield varieties, prevention of diseases and 
epidemics, etc. His country was therefore grateful to the Agency for the 
assistance it provided, especially under the integrated programme for the 
application of radioisotopes and radiation to agriculture. The Sudan had been 
using nuclear medicine for a long time. Under a pilot project undertaken with 
the assistance of WHO and the Agency, a hospital had been built 17 years 
earlier which was now pursuing diagnostic and therapeutic activities using 
nuclear techniques. The Sudanese Government regularly organized visits and 
training courses for scientists from neighbouring countries. New prospects 
were now opening up, thanks to the use of gamma cameras and cobalt and caesium 
treatment. His country hoped to be able to offer modern nuclear medicine 
services from which the entire African continent could benefit and wished 
regional co-operation in the nuclear field to be developed further with the 
assistance of the Agency. 


91. The situation in the Middle East continued to be explosive as a result 
of Israel's obstinacy in refusing to allow the Palestinian people the 
legitimate right of returning to its usurped home country. The expansionist 
frenzy of Israel drove it to pursue its aggression from the Golan Heights to 
the furthest corners of Lebanon. Israel had not hesitated to bomb the reactor 
in Iraq and it ceaselessly violated the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
92. As to South Africa, that country was in open defiance of the 
resolutions of the Agency and the Charter of the United Nations. The Director 
General should take the necessary steps to exclude South Africa from technical 
meetings which enabled it to increase its power. It was precisely because 
Sudan respected the much-quoted principle of universality that it considered 
that the status of membership should be reserved for countries which respected 
the universal principles of the Charter of the United Nations and refused to 
those which flouted them. 
93. Mr PANDEV (Bulgaria) welcomed the People's Republic of China on 
its admission to the Agency. He hoped that it would help to strengthen the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime and to promote co-operation between States in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
94. The twenty-seventh session of the Agency's General Conference was being 
held in a complex and contradictory international situation. Despite the 
positive results obtained recently at the Madrid meeting, the situation was 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 24 


continuing to deteriorate as a result of the policy of world confrontation and 
the escalation of the arms race. Bulgaria believed the Soviet Union and the 
United States could still reach an agreement on limiting nuclear weapons in 
Europe. It was vital to take immediate practical steps to avert the threat of 
war, particularly nuclear war. That had been the objective of the political 
declaration adopted during January in Prague by the Political Consultative 
Committee of the Warsaw Pact Member States and of the proposal made by the 
Soviet Union at the thirty-eighth session of the United Nations General 
Assembly condemning nuclear war and advocating a nuclear weapons freeze. 


95. Bulgaria attached great importance to strengthening the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime. It welcomed the accession of new States to NPT and 
their acceptance of the obligations devolving from it. It believed that the 
Agency should actively and constructively contribute to preparing and 
organizing the Third NPT Review Conference. 
96. The Agency's activities in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, the 
economic and social development of countries, the improvement of the welfare 
of peoples, and the strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime had 
received wide recognition. His country fully shared the opinion of the 
Director General, Mr. Hans Blix, that international co-operation was 
indispensable for the wider use of nuclear energy and for solving the energy 
problems facing mankind. International co-operation, particularly important 
for developing countries, could only be fruitful if the Agency exercised 
effective control over the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Bulgaria 
supported and participated fully in the Agency's safeguards system and was 
helping, as far as it was able, to improve the methods and techniques of its 
application. It welcomed visits by Agency inspectors and called upon all 
other countries to follow its example. The Agency's work in technical 
co-operation, the increase in technical assistance and the steps taken by the 
Secretariat to improve its effectiveness were commendable. The technical 
assistance given in 1982, which had helped to implement projects and train 
national staff, was appreciated. 
97. The Agency's most important programmes were those concerned with 
technical co-operation, safeguards, nuclear power and nuclear safety and with 
the development of INIS. Priority should continue to be given to them when 
allocating financial resources and staff. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 25 


98. His delegation considered that contributions to the Agency's Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund should remain voluntary and be made in 
national currency. Bulgaria would again pay in 1984 a voluntary contribution 
at the calculated level. 
99. Bulgaria endorsed the Agency's budget for 1984 but believed that the 
1985 and 1986 estimates should be cut down. Once again it had to be stressed 
that it was essential to use all resources as rationally as possible. 
100. The views of his delegation on the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute were well known. The Board of Governors, as constituted at present, 
should carry out its work efficiently and any amendment of the kind would 
require profound analysis and should take into account the interests of all 
Members of the Agency. 
101. Nuclear energy had continued to develop in Bulgaria at a fast rate and 
in line with the approved programmes. In 1982 the fourth unit of the Kozloduy 
nuclear power plant, equipped with a WWER-440 reactor, had become 
operational. The Kozloduy power plant consequently now had four units with a 
total capacity of 1760 MW(e) and during the first half of 1983 had produced 
more than 6000 mil]ion kWh, thereby accounting for about 30% of the national 
electricity production. Rapid progress was being made on the third 
construction stage at the Kozloduy power plant, which provided for two 
WWER units each with a capacity of 1000 MW(e). A second site was being 
prepared in the Belian region, on the banks of the Danube, for the 
construction, by 1990, of the first of four 1000-MW(e) WWER units of a nuclear 
power plant. Also under way were technical and economic studies on the use of 
nuclear power plants to provide urban heating and low-temperature heat and 
steam for industrial and consumer needs. 
102. Bulgaria attached great importance to staff training and safe operation 
of nuclear power plants. Application of nuclear techniques, radioisotopes and 
radiation was continually increasing. Radiation was used for research in 
physics, chemistry, geology, biology and so on. Nuclear techniques were 
applied in medicine for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes; in industry for 
control and automation of various processes; and in agriculture for seed 
irradiation. Radiosterilization of pharmaceutical products and medical 
instruments was envisaged in the near future. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 26 


103. The mobilization of national resources, multilateral co-operation with 
CMEA Member States, bilateral co-operation, in particular with the Soviet 
Union, and co-operation with the Agency accounted for the success achieved by 
his country in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
104. Bulgaria actively supported the activities of the Agency and 
contributed, as far as it was able, to developing international co-operation 
in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. In 1982, as part of its participation 
in the Agency's research programme, it had organized an interregional training 
course on radioimmunoassay; a training course on the application of induced 
mutation techniques in plant selection; and a study tour on the subject of 
nuclear power. It was also participating in INIS and Bulgarian experts were 
attending working group meetings, seminars and symposia organized by the 
Agency. 
105. Mr. MANOUAN (Ivory Coast) welcomed the admission to the Agency of 
the People's Republic of China, which was one of the five leading nuclear 
Powers. Its admission was a step towards the Agency's universality. 
106. There had always been two sides to science and technology: they 
enabled man to dominate nature, but also constituted a hazard for him. With 
the discovery of the atom and the build-up on the planet of a destructive 
force capable of destroying several times over all the major urban centres, 
that hazard at present appeared terrifying. The Ivory Coast, which believed 
that science and technology should serve the cause of life rather than death, 
subscribed unreservedly to the Agency's objectives. It was a party to NPT and 
had signed a safeguards agreement under the Treaty. 
107. Although his country was interested in the application of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, biological and physical sciences, its electricity 
was produced by hydroelectric and thermal power plants and it was studying the 
potential of solar energy and biomass. The energy requirements of the Ivory 
Coast were too small to make nuclear power viable. However, it might one day 
be viable and the Ivory Coast followed with interest the Agency's work in all 
areas: technical co-operation, safeguards, nuclear safety and the fuel 
cycle. His delegation was pleased to note that in Africa agriculture was the 
sector which had received most Agency assistance. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 27 


108. It was pleased that resources allocated to technical co-operation had 
increased by 12.5% in 1982 and that extrabudgetary resources had increased by 
23.4%; however, UNDP resources had fallen by 21% in 1981 to less than 17% in 
1982. It was grateful to countries which had provided those extrabudgetary 
resources and hoped that their number would increase. However, its 
satisfaction was mixed with concern for two reasons: the rate of increase in 
resources allocated to technical co-operation had been smaller in 1982 than in 
1981 and assistance provided in 1982 had diminished in comparison with 1981, 
whilst unliquidated obligations had increased. It deplored the fact that 
$9 million were frozen in projects which could not be rapidly implemented, 
whereas some high-priority projects could not be put into effect owing to lack 
of resources. Consequently, he noted with interest the new programming 
methods planned to solve that alarming problem. Obligations should be 
increased, and for that purpose developing countries should be assisted in 
identifying priorities and in planning and programming technical co-operation 
projects. He believed it was possible not only to reabsorb unobligated 
balances but also to maintain steady growth of the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme. The fall in UNDP resources would mean that increased 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund and to the 
extrabudgetary funds would be necessary. 


109. His country fervently hoped that expenditure on armaments would be 
reduced. It attached great importance to non-proliferation; to the creation 
of an atmosphere of trust favourable to disarmament; and to the application of 
the Agency's safeguards system. In that connection, it was comforting to note 
that in 1982 no anomaly had been detected indicating the diversion of nuclear 
material for illicit purposes and also that the number of facilities 
containing material under safeguards was continually increasing, which 
demonstrated the effectiveness of the safeguards system and its increasing 
credibility. Since non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament were 
inseparable, it was important that that trend persist. 
110. In order not to impede that development, the General Conference should 
refrain from adopting inappropriate measures to resolve certain international 
conflicts. However odious the acts or situations at the origin of certain 
conflicts, however legitimate the feelings of aversion they inspired, it was 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 28 


essential, in an area where the co-operation of all was vital, to avoid taking 
steps which, by depriving certain Member States of their rights or privileges, 
would frustrate the basic objectives of the Agency. 


111. Worldwide co-operation was also vital in the fields of nuclear safety 
and radioactive waste management. He noted with satisfaction the findings of 
the first report on nuclear safety? the issue of the revised version of the 
Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection; efforts made to develop an 
international system for reporting incidents in nuclear power plants; the 
implementation of rules governing safe transport; and the compilation of a 
document describing uniform action to be taken in emergencies and setting out 
planning measures to be applied in accidents the impact of which might extend 
across national frontiers. Particular study should be made of ways of 
improving the safety of nuclear power plants and reducing radiation risks for 
individuals. His delegation welcomed the importance given to the problem of 
radioactive waste; to the exchange of information; and to the publication of 
reports and the encouragement of co-ordinated research work in that field. It 
also approved steps taken to publish the brochure on "Nuclear Energy, the 
Environment and Man" in all working languages of the Agency. It did not 
understand, however, why 33 of the 41 safety guides had been published in only 
one working language and hoped that the situation would be rapidly remedied. 
112. Information was the logical outcome of international co-operation. It 
was essential that experts of all Member States receive a continuous, directly 
usable flow of technical information from the Agency and be able to use the 
results of meetings organized by the Agency in its spheres of competence. The 
general public also had a right to be informed; in the light of the 
controversies to which nuclear power gave rise people were concerned and at 
times alarmed. The Agency had a fundamental duty to inform the public frankly 
of the problems and their solutions. 
113. Mr. BARTOLOME (Philippines) said that the Philippines, as an Asian 
country bound by ties of friendship with the People's Republic of China, 
welcomed the latter's admission to the Agency. The entry of China 
strengthened the Agency's universality and constituted an important event 
since, for the first time, all the nuclear-weapon countries were Members of 
the Agency. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 29 


114. He was pleased to note that the present Conference session had so far 
been marked by a spirit of co-operation, which contrasted with the ending of 
its last session. 
115. He welcomed the progress made by the Agency in the field of nuclear and 
radiological safety. It was important to show the public that every possible 
precaution was being taken to ensure the safety of nuclear energy. In that 
respect, he noted the headway made in the NUSS programme, the International 
Incident Reporting System, and the development of a model for negotiating 
bilateral or regional mutual assistance agreements between Members in case of 
nuclear incident. He also welcomed the appointment of teams to look into the 
matter of operational safety and supported the Director General's proposal to 
set up a high-level international commission in the field of nuclear safety. 
116. It would not be possible to allay public concern regarding nuclear 
power until acceptable methods for waste disposal had been developed. He 
therefore welcomed the report of the International Conference on Radioactive 
Haste Management (GC(XXVII)/INF/214), and approved the conclusion contained in 
paragraph 3.2.2 of that document, in which final underground disposal in 
territory under national jurisdiction was considered to be the most practical 
method of radioactive waste disposal given present-day techniques. He also 
called the attention of all Member States to the resolution adopted at the 
Seventh Consultative Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the London Dumping 
Convention, which called for a suspension of sea dumping of radioactive 
waste. The disposal of radioactive waste was an international problem which 
consequently required international solutions. The Agency should continue to 
develop regional or sub-regional approaches and to study, in co-operation with 
regional development banks, the possibility of setting up regional waste 
management centres. 
117. He noted with satisfaction that in 1982 the Agency had not detected any 
anomaly which would indicate the diversion of nuclear material for illicit 
purposes. However, he deplored the fact that some Member States had not yet 
placed major nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. It was perturbing 
that inspection goals had been achieved to the extent of only 45% in 1982 and 
that in 1981 only 45% of routine inspections had been carried out owing to 
lack of resources. The Agency's safeguards system undoubtedly had an 
important role to play in promoting nuclear trade. It was, however, perhaps 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 30 


overdoing it to claim that safeguards activities were in fact promotional. 
That was virtually tantamount to claiming that nuclear weapons were peaceful 
because, as a deterrent, they maintained world peace. Experience had shown 
that the best programme was bound to fail if it could not rely on a stable 
source of funds. Such was the case of the Agency's safeguards. The present 
financial arrangements were temporary and due to expire in 1984. It was 
necessary to develop more stable, long-term arrangements taking into account 
the base rate of assessment of Member States and their installed nuclear 
capacities. 


118. The Agency's technical assistance programme had greatly helped to 
spread the benefits of nuclear power in developing regions. The value of 
efforts made by all Member States to improve it was appreciated and the 
policies which the Board of Governors had just adopted would help to make it 
more effective. 
119. As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 
the Philippines believed that funds should be found for all footnote a/ 
projects. The First NPT Review Conference, in 1975, had recommended that all 
technically sound or footnote a/ projects should be financed. However, except 
for one year, the resources available for footnote a/ projects had usually 
been inadequate. In his statement, the Director General had informed the 
Conference that for 1983 only six countries had as yet contributed to 
footnote a/ projects, compared to ten in 1982. The continued non-application 
of the recommendations of the First NPT Review Conference did not augur well 
for the Third NPT Review Conference, to be held in 1985. The nuclear arms 
race was escalating rapidly despite the pervasive world economic recession. 
It was ironic that annual global expenditure on armaments could pay the total 
external debt of all the developing countries. While preparations were being 
made for the Third NPT Review Conference, it should not be forgotten that the 
implementation of only some parts of the Treaty was a sure recipe for another 
failure. Nuclear-weapon States should fulfil their obligations under the 
Treaty and initiate negotiations to put an end to the nuclear arms race. 
120. The Philippine Government had noted the progress achieved in the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and was pleased that the Committee had 
reached an agreement on emergency and back-up mechanisms even though those 
mechanisms did not come up to expectation. As a party to NPT, his country 



GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 31 


believed that under the Treaty a Government undertook to accept irrevocably 
general safeguards and was assured, in exchange, of full access to nuclear 
material and technology. Emergency and back-up mechanisms did not provide 
guarantees of supply. They were a monument to the sanctity of the commercial 
market. The Philippines was not against free trade but could not understand 
why interference with the commercial nuclear market was considered a 
transgression and why that argument was not applied to other products. 


121. The Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for Asia and the Pacific had 
entered its second decade and, as a result of the Agency's continuing 
assistance and the co-operation of the 13 signatories of the Agreement, one 
could look forward to more effective co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy in those countries. He was pleased to note that a similar 
regional agreement was being arranged for Latin America and he hoped that 
co-operation between the two regional groups would become a reality. 
122. He concluded by thanking the Agency for its continuing assistance to 
the Philippines. 
123. Mr. VYLKOV (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance) said that 1982 
had been marked in CMEA member countries by further advances in economic 
development. Gross national income had increased by 2.6% mainly as a result 
of increased work productivity and savings in raw materials, goods and 
energy. Industrial production had risen by 2.3%, and in the first half of 
1983 by 4.3%, compared with the corresponding period in 1982. Agricultural 
production had increased by 3%. 
124. With regard to economic, scientific and technical co-operation, the 
development of energy resources of CMEA member countries had been one of the 
main objectives successfully achieved. The objectives pursued and the 
resources used to achieve them were set forth in the special long-term 
co-operation programme to meet the needs of CMEA member countries in energy, 
fuels and raw materials, which had been adopted at the thirty-second session 
of CMEA, in 1978. Among the major achievements, note should be made of the 
integrated energy network of European CMEA members (Mir) with a total capacity 
of 148 000 MW and the oil and gas pipelines "Druzhba" and "Soyuz". The gas 
pipeline linking Siberia to Western Eruope, in which the German Democratic 
Republic and Poland had participated in addition to the USSR, was due to be 
completed in 1983. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 32 


12 5. The electricity production of the CMEA member countries had grown at an 
unprecedented rate, increasing by 57% during the last five years. In 1982, it 
had amounted to 1 811 million MWh; for coal production the figure had been 
13 81 million tonnes, for oil 627 million tonnes and for natural gas 
522 000 million cubic metres. 
126. The increase in the energy production of the CMEA member countries was 
attributable chiefly to nuclear power, which currently accounted for 22 500 MW 
and would in the course of the next decade reach 100 000 MW. That rapid 
increase was a result of efforts made by the CMEA member countries at all 
stages of co-operation - from basic designing to the planning, construction, 
production and operation of nuclear power plants. A vast system of 
specialization and co-operation for the production of nuclear power equipment 
had been set up with the participation of more than 50 large enterprises and 
associations in the CMEA member countries and Yugoslavia. In the Ukraine the 
CMEA member countries were constructing Europe's two largest nuclear power 
plants, whose output would be distributed through two interconnected 750-kV 
transmission lines to Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and Romania. 
127. In 1982, Bulgaria, Hungary and the USSR had taken new power reactors 
into service. The construction of nuclear power plant units was continuing in 
the CMEA member countries, and so was the construction of the first nuclear 
district heating plant in the Soviet Union. The CMEA member countries had 
also established an extensive system of co-operation on the scientific level 
to promote the future development of nuclear power - construction of 1600 MW 
fast-neutron reactors, improvement of facilities for the study of 
thermonuclear fusion processes and reactors to satisfy district heating needs. 
128. The safe operation of an increasing number of nuclear power plants was 
an important consideration in the co-operation between the CMEA member 
countries, which had prepared a manual for the classification and evaluation 
of the radiological consequences of accident situations due to loss of coolant 
in a nuclear power plant with a WWER reactor. Continuous radiological 
monitoring was carried out in the Danube basin and in the vast regions of the 
Baltic Sea and the Black Sea. In almost ten years, not a single case had been 



GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 33 


recorded, even locally, where the maximum permissible levels for radioactive 
contamination had been exceeded. The reliability of the 20 operating units 
equipped with WWER-440 reactors was illustrated by their power utilization 
factor, which lay somewhere near 70%, as against the world average of 61%. 


129. Questions of uniformity and standardization occupied an important place 
in the co-operation between CMEA member countries. For instance, the 
association "INTERATOMENERGO" was working on standards and unique 
specifications for the production and operation of equipment, devices, 
instruments and materials for nuclear power plants. For that purpose, the 
Agency's documents on the safety of nuclear power plants had been widely 
utilized. The multilateral co-operation between the CMEA member countries 
also made it possible to resolve problems connected with fuel loading, with 
the treatment and neutralization of radioactive waste, and with the automation 
of power plant control and operation procedures. 
130. The manufacture of 280 new types of isotopic product had been 
organized, including radiopharmaceuticals and radioimmunoassay kits. The 
association "Interatorn Instruments" had concluded an agreement on 
specialization and co-operation in the production of nuclear instruments which 
already covered about 50% of the trade between CMEA member countries in that 
field. 
131. The CMEA member countries were convinced that nuclear power could 
satisfy the future energy needs of mankind and that there was no alternative 
to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Co-operation and the exchange of 
scientific and technical information between the Agency and CMEA continued, 
and the CMEA countries were making efforts to extend that co-operation to 
other uses of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
132. Mr. AUDLAND (Commission of the European Communities), said that 
co-operation between EURATOM and the Agency had been further strengthened in 
the course of the past year. 
133. Research and development, which was one of the principal fields of 
activity of EURATOM, was also one in which international co-operation was 
becoming increasingly important, as the Director General had stressed in his 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 34 


statement. During the first years of EURATOM, research and development had 
been directed mainly towards the production of nuclear power, which was 
essential for the etablishment of a Community industry. The civil nuclear 
industry of the Community had reached an unequalled level, and as a result 
EURATOM's research and development priorities had shifted towards long-term 
projects or infrastructures. That tendency took into account the fact that 
certain States Members of the European Community had not yet embarked on 
nuclear power programmes. 


134. Current research and development work at EURATOM was focused on two 
large sectors. The first concerned the very distant future and involved the 
production of energy by controlled thermonuclear fusion. The second, more 
immediate, concerned the generation of power by nuclear fission. Virtually 
all research and development activities in the latter context related to the 
safety and security of nuclear power plants and nuclear materials and to the 
protection of populations and of the environment against the effects of 
radiation (reactor safety, waste management disposal, health physics and 
safeguards). 
135. The organization of EURATOM itself was favourable to co-operation in 
research and development matters. A general scientific and technical research 
programme defined the strategy and basic priorities for co-operation at the 
Community level. For each research field, an action programme set forth in 
detail the activities required to achieve the desired objectives. Within that 
context, EURATOM's research was performed at various levels. In sectors, such 
as nuclear safety, which were of interest to all Members of the Community, the 
work was often carried out in the four joint research establishments in 
Belgium, Italy, the Netherlands and the Federal Republic of Germany. Other 
activities were pursued in national research institutes with the financial 
assistance of the Community; the results obtained there were also placed at 
the disposal of all Member States. That was essentially the procedure in 
nuclear fusion research. Finally, the Community's programmes and those of its 
Member States were subject to a high level of co-ordination. The flexibility 
of the organization enabled EURATOM to cover a vast field of research and to 
assist countries in improving the cost-benefit ratio of their own programmes. 
Moreover, EURATOM's programmes generally extended over four to five years and 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 35 


thus enjoyed the continuity and stability which were required for large 
research projects. The extent and volume of activities deployed by EURATOM 
and its ability to adapt showed how valuable international co-operation could 
be. 


136. In describing briefly the principal research and development 
programmes, he said that EURATOM was leading the field in thermonuclear 
fusion. The JET experimental device was the largest and most ambitious 
tokamak fusion reactor in the world. It had been put into service on 
25 June 1983. Remarkably, the construction period (five years) and the costs 
(about US $300 million) had not exceeded the forecasts. The Commission was at 
present considering the possibility of constructing a second experimental 
device in the 1990s. In the field of nuclear fission, EURATOM's research and 
development programme was concerned mainly with reactor safety and involved 
expenditures of US $50 million per year, or about 30% of the total research 
and development budget in that field provided by all the countries of the 
Community. With regard to nuclear waste, EURATOM had a research and 
development programme under a 12-year plan which extended to 1992. In the 
coming years it would be necessary to demonstrate the existence and 
reliability of waste management and disposal techniques. In the field of 
radiation protection, EURATOM's research and development was directed towards 
acquiring a better understanding of the effects of radiation on health and on 
the environment. Community standards existed in that field which EURATOM's 
research and development work would make it possible to keep up to date. 
Nearly 80% of research and development work on radiation protection on the 
Community scale was co-ordinated by EURATOM, whose own expenditure amounted to 
US $10 million per year. Finally, EURATOM was contributing to research and 
development on safeguards and undertaking work related to nuclear measurements 
and research on actinides. 


137. The strengthening of co-operation could only be advantageous in most of 
those fields, particularly in those of nuclear safety and, perhaps, waste 
management and disposal. Fruitful relations had already been established in 
that respect between EURATOM and the Agency and between EURATOM and certain 

GC(XXVII)/OR.252 
page 36 


Member States of the Agency. He recalled that three international conferences 
had been jointly sponsored by the Agency and EURATOM in the last three years. 
EURATOM was fully prepared to co-operate with the IAEA and, in particular, to 
allow the developing countries to benefit from its experience. 


The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
July 1984* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 13 October 1983, at 10.25 a.m. 


President: Mr. KEBLUSEK (Czechoslovakia) 
later: Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda"'-* 
Paragraphs 
7 General debate and annual report for 1982 1 106 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 1 13 
Panama 14 32 
Viet Nam 33 41 
Yugoslavia 42 56 
Islamic Republic of Iran 57 72 
Point of order raised by the delegates of 
the United States of America and France 73 75 
Spain 76 86 
Mexico 87 99 
Tunisia 100 111 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 20 October 1983. 
**/ GC(XXVII)/700. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 


84-2250 



GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684) (continued) 


1. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) expressed his 
delegation's concern at recent developments in international relations. Like 
other socialist countries, Byelorussia hoped for a fundamental improvement in the 
world's political climate and the removal of the threat of war. One of the 
most important ways of averting nuclear disaster was to limit, reduce and, 
eventually, completely eliminate nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union had proposed 
a programme of measures to avert the nuclear threat and improve the 


international political climate. In so doing, it had been prompted by its 
desire to resolve the crucial question of the nuclear age, namely whether atomic 
energy would serve the socio-economic development of mankind or turn the whole 
planet into a lifeless wasteland. There could be only one answer to that 
question: atomic energy should be used only for the benefit of mankind. There 
was therefore clearly an urgent need for the United Nations General Assembly, 
at its current session, to consider the agenda items proposed by the Soviet 
Union, namely "condemnation of nuclear war" and "freezing of nuclear armaments". 


2. It was gratifying to see that the Agency's accounts for 1982 and budget for 
1984 gave evidence of successful operations and planning in the Agency's main 
areas of activity, to which his delegation attached particular importance: 
nuclear power, nuclear safety, safeguards, technical assistance, protection of 
the environment and the nuclear information system (INIS). While on the whole 
approving the documents and draft resolutions submitted, his delegation wished 
to make the following comments. The nuclear power programme rightly reflected 
current developments in the field of nuclear power and the increasingly complex 
problems of nuclear energy forecasts and waste processing and disposal. It 
appeared preferable, however, to extend programmes on the technology of nuclear 
power reactors, in particular fast breeder reactors, the main source of nuclear 
fuel in the future, and also reactors for the production of high-temperature 
process heat for industry and of low-temperature heat for district heating. 
3. The Agency had made great progress in the field of nuclear safety, 
especially in its work on safety standards for nuclear power plants and its 
Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection. It was to be hoped that work 
would be intensified on nuclear safety and radiation protection in nontraditional 
reactors such as fast breeders and reactors for the production of 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 3 


heat as well as electricity, with due regard for their special construction 


features and safety requirements. Another very important aspect of the 


Agency's activities was its supervisory function in .connection with the Non-


Proliferation Treaty. He noted with satisfaction that the Agency was con


tinuing to improve safeguards methods and equipment through automation and 


computerization at all stages of inspections, analyses and data processing. 


That had led to qualitative improvements in the safeguards programme in terms 


of operational readiness, reliability and flexibility. At the same time, the 


increasing need for reliable safeguards called for the early development and 


introduction of a full set of safeguards methods and procedures for all types 


of nuclear reactor and fuel cycle facility, including uranium enrichment and 


plutonium extraction plants. In the long run, that should lead to a reduction 
,in inspection activities and corresponding budget economies. It was also 


essential to apply safeguards in the case of certain kinds of technical assis


tance, which, in his delegation's view, would be no less effective as a result 


however. 


4. The Regular Budget for 1984 appeared to be based on minimum growth of 
expenditure and reflected the considerable efforts made by the Secretariat and 
the Board of Governors to draw up a balanced budget with a number of economies. 
Despite savings of 8.57 compared with the preliminary estimates, it had been 
possible to increase allocations for technical assistance to about a third of 
the Agency's expenditure in 1984. 
5. The nuclear power and safeguards programmes were two of the most important 
of the Agency's activities and deserved priority in the allocation of funds and 
staff. In the proposed budget, however, expenditure on those programmes had 
been reduced far more than the total budget in relation to the preliminary 
estimates. His delegation hoped that the Secretariat would channel resources 
saved by curtailing non-productive activities into the basic programmes to the 
greatest extent possible. 
6. His delegation was pleased to note the positive results that had been 
achieved in the Agency's technical co-operation programmes, which were 
designed to assist Members in achieving national self-reliance in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, creating national scientific and technical infrastructure 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 4 


and solving specific technical and economic problems. The Secretariat was to 
be commended for introducing multi-year and dynamic programming and integrated 
project planning, for extending the idea of regional projects based on the 
"network approach" and, finally, for assisting Member States in obtaining 
additional financial resources for national projects. Those achievements 
would make it possible to meet the changing needs of developing countries, 
including the least developed among them, without impairing the integrity of 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. Those results fully confirmed 
the justice of the provisions of the Statute on technical assistance financing. 


7. In view of the great importance of technical assistance, his delegation 
did not object to the proposed increase in the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund target to $22.5 million in 1984 and, moreover, was authorized 
to announce an increase in Byelorussia's voluntary contribution for that 
year to 70 000 roubles. 
8. Modern Byelorussia was blessed with considerable scientific and technical 
potential. Scientific institutions and universities in the Republic were conducting 
fundamental and applied research in virtually all areas of science, 
which made it possible to achieve high growth rates in industrial and agricultural 
production. Considerable progress had also been made in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
9. Research was being conducted in Byelorussia on the structure of the 
atomic nucleus, nuclear spectroscopy, neutron activation analysis and its 
practical applications, the influence of radiation on properties of semiconductor 
materials and derived structures, the use of radiation in the technology 
of semiconductor instrument production, etc. 
10. Radiation from a variety of sources was being widely used in industry 
and agriculture, in various types of non-destructive testing, in the 
development of new construction and semiconductor materials, in the 
industrial manufacture of bacterial fertilizers, seed irradiation and fodder 
processing, the analysis of soil conditions for mineral intake by plants, 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 5 


and a number of other fields of radiobiology and physiology. Particular 
attention was being paid in Byelorussia to the use of isotopes and radiation 
in cancer diagnosis and therapy. Byelorussia had a certain amount of scientific 
expertise which could be of use to the Agency and was prepared to consider 
co-operating with it in the areas of science and technology he had mentioned. 


11. Great importance was also attached Lo the development and industrial 
application of fast breeder reactors, in order both to develop nuclear power 
generally and to reduce dependence on natural uranium resources. His country 
was successfully co-operating with other Soviet Republics as well as Bulgaria, 
Hungary and Poland on a pilot industrial nuclear power plant with a capacity 
of 300 megawatts, operating with a fast breeder reactor using associating gas 
coolant. In order to supply the city of Minsk with electricity and lowpotential 
heat, construction had begun on a nuclear power plant consisting of 
two WWER-1000 reactor blocks. Other cities in the Republic would eventually 
be supplied with heat from nuclear power plants as well. 
12. Byelorussia took an active part in the Agency's activities; its 
scientific institutions participated in the INIS system, evaluated nuclear data 
files were being prepared under t lie Agency's international co-ordination programme, 
and theoretical methods of evaluating constants were being improved. 
In June 1983, participants in an 1AEA/FA0 study tour from 23 countries 
visited the Institute of Physics and the Institute of Genetics and Cell 
Biology of the Byelorussian Academy of Sciences. 
13. The International Atomic Energy Agency had an increasingly important 
part to play in applying nuclear energy to the economic and social welfare of 
mankind. Everything possible should be done, however, to ensure that that great 
achievement of the human mind was used only for peaceful purposes and would 
never serve as a means of annihilating life on earth. Byelorussia would 
continue its support of all the Agency's activities that pursued that noble 
goal. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 6 


14. Mr. KOREF (Panama) said that his country was deriving considerable 
benefit from the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme 
in agriculture and medicine. It was very important not only for Panama 
but also for all developing countries to receive technical assistance, which 
was one of the most, important inputs into their economy. The developed 
countries, too, benefited by being able to export their products of advanced 
technology. Panama wished to express its gratitude to the Agency's Member 
States for the steady rise in their contributions to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund and to the donor countries for their extrabudgetary 
contributions in cash and in kind. 
15. The world was passing through a serious economic crisis and unemployment, 
which resulted from lack of funds to buy the products of industrialized 
countries and raw materials. The only remedy was to create new markets, 
which could be found only in the Third-World countries, but the latter had 
no opportunity to earn money in order to buy the sophisticated products 
of developed countries. Thus, technical assistance was not merely charity 
but an investment. In that sense, the developing countries were also donors 
and should therefore fulfil their obligations of paying their individual 
contributions to the Agency. 
16. At the meetings of the Board held in June 1983, his country had energetically 
supported the new programme of the Secretariat for speedy and 
efficient response to technical assistance needs, including the holding of 
biannual seminars to discuss improvements in technical assistance. 
17. It fully endorsed the concept of multi-year programming and special 
missions to assist Member States in formulating requests. It attached great 
importance to programme packages which could be rapidly adapted to the needs 
of countries embarking on nuclear development, to multinational assistance 
through co-operation among several developing countries, and to dynamic programming. 
Endorsement by the General Conference of all those measures, 
intended to reduce the earmarkings against the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund, would provide a stimulus to the Secretariat. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 7 


18. The Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology in Asia and the Pacific was yielding 
good results, and the Agency's help in a similar agreement for the Andean 
region would be appreciated. 
19. Panama shared the view that technical assistance ought to be financed 
from the Regular Budget, although it understood that such a procedure was 
not acceptable to the major contributors. The present agreement on indicative 
planning figures covered the years up to 1986, and negotiations on figures for 
1987-90 should begin in 1984. 


20. His country wholeheartedly approved the application of safeguards by 
the Agency, which activity should be extended. It was of great importance 
for countries with nuclear facilities and even for those who were considering 
building such facilities but meeting resistance from their peoples. The 
Agency's activities on nuclear safety and safety standards were equally 
important. 
21. Although there was an awareness at present of the need for preventing 
damage to the environment, power plants using fossil fuels were continuing 
to be built. But demonstrations were held against nuclear power plants, 
where not a single fatal accident had occurred even though there were 300 
such plants with a total operating experience of 3000 years; minor accidents 
which had occurred had been easily controlled and had produced no adverse 
effect on the environment or on the plants themselves. 
22. His delegation therefore deplored the Agency's reluctance to issue more 
publications demonstrating the safety and harmlessness of nuclear power plants. 
It was regrettable that many countries were impoverishing themselves by 
importing vast quantities of fossil fuel while they could develop nuclear 
power mainly on the basis of local material and labour. 
23. His country was in favour ol the Agency's playing an important part in 
finding solutions to the waste management problems also in the long term, 
there being relatively few problems for short-term disposal. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 3 


24. He shared the Director General's view that an attack on a nuclear facility 
should be a matter of concern to all and that the 1949 Geneva Convention 
on the subject should be ratified by all Members of the Agency. A General 
Conference resolution to that effect would not be out of place. 
25. Panama was taking an active part in the work of the Committee on Assurances 
of Supply (CAS); he was pleased to note that issues like emergency and backup 
mechanisms were approaching solution and would in due time be submitted 
to the Board and the General Conference for approval. In that connection, 
he wished to thank all Working Groups of CAS for their hard work. 
26. His Government welcomed the publication of an evaluation procedures 
manual for technical co-operation projects and hoped that it would meet the 
Agency's needs and that its officials, together with the countries concerned, 
would be able to evaluate the assistance provided so that similar operations 
in future could benefit from the exercise. 
27. His country was greatly interested in the radiation preservation of 
foodstuffs, especially fruits and vegetables, for local consumption and 
export, and hoped that it would soon be possible to use that technology 
on a commercial scale at a moderate cost. 
28. It was also ready to eradicate the Mediterranean fruit fly, should 
it appear in its territory, and would welcome any improvements in the eradication 
technique made in Egypt. 
29. He strongly supported the Director General's statement to the effectthat 
the Agency could co-operate in the disarmament negotiations and use 
its wide safeguards experience for the purpose of verification of nuclear 
disarmament. That was the greatest service which the Agency could render 
mankind, which was threatened by the vast nuclear arsenal of the nuclearweapon 
States. 
30. In his recent address to the United Nations General Assembly, the President 
of the United States had also pointed out that disarmament depended on reliable 
verification. No other organization than the Agency, with its proven neutrality 
and its excellent relationship with nuclear-weapon States, was better suited 
for such a fund ion. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 9 


31. His delegation wished to extend a cordial welcome to the People's Republic 
of China as a Member of the Agency. 
32. In conclusion, he expressed his gratitude to the Director General for 
implementing the General Conference resolution calling for the appointment 
of more nationals from developing countries, and hoped that the trend would 
continue. 
33. Mr. NGUYEN TUAN LIEU (Viet Nam) pointed out that in the course 
of the 26 years of its existence, the Agency had achieved major successes, 
mainly as a result of the proper application of its objectives and performance 
of its duties in response to the needs and requirements of each phase of 
the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the world. 
34. The Agency's chief function was to facilitate the development and practical 
utilization of such uses of nuclear energy, to promote research in that field 
and to ensure that nuclear energy was not diverted for non-peaceful purposes. 
A further important function was the provision of technical assistance, especially 
to the developing countries, which represented two thirds of mankind. 
35. In performing those functions, the Agency also placed particular emphasis 
on the principles of respect for the sovereignty of States and equality and 
non-discrimination in the supply of technical assistance to Member countries. 
In short, the guiding principle behind the Agency's work was to encourage, 
strengthen and extend international co-operation, which in turn ensured the 
Agency's further growth and enhanced its stature as an international body. 
At the present time, with the developing countries facing urgent economic 
and social problems in their endeavours to build a new life, the Agency's 
role was assuming increasing importance. He expressed his country's appreciation 
for the efforts made by the Agency, and its Director General in particular, 
to defend and perform its important work and create an atmosphere conducive 
to international co-operation between its Member countries, attaching increasing 
importance to the needs of the developing countries. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 10 


36. Viet Nam had entered the initial phase of its programme to construct 
the material infrastructure and create the necessary reserve of qualified 
personnel for the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. With 
the assistance of the Soviet Union, the construction of Viet Nam's first research 
reactor, with a capacity of 500 kW, was in progress. In recent years, it had 
conducted training programmes relating to nuclear energy with a view to developing 
the country's economy and raising the standard of living of its people. 
37. Since 1978, Viet Nam had received assistance from the Agency in the 
form of equipment and materials on the one hand, and training on the other. 
A number of Agency missions had been made and enormous benefits had been 
derived from the experience and advice of Agency experts. He wished to express 
his gratitude to the Agency and to the Soviet Union and other friendly countries 
for the assistance which they had lent to Viet Nam in launching its nuclear 
energy projects. 
38. In 1982, Viet Nam had signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons, having already, in 1981, signed a safeguards agreement with the Agency 
for a research reactor currently under construction. In June 1983 it had signed 
a further agreement with the Agency relating to the supply by the latter 
of fuel for that reactor. Those undertakings reflected its intention to 
develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
39. As a State belonging to the South East Asia region, it had signed the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training related 
to Nuclear Science and Technology. The latter provided a good illustration 
of co-operation between States for the purpose of placing nuclear science and 
technology at the service of the international community as well as each 
country. His delegation was convinced that consolidating such regional cooperation 
would help to strengthen understanding and co-operation between the 
region's nuclear scientists. 
40. Referring to the present international tensions caused by the forces 
of aggression and the consequent escalation in the arms race, exacerbated 
in particular by the doctrine of a "limited nuclear war", he expressed his 
delegation's appreciation of and support for the important initiative taken 
by countries of good will such as the Soviet Union. The latter, in particular, 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 11 


had undertaken not to be the first country to use nuclear weapons, to make 
Europe a denuclearized zone and to guarantee the safety of non-nuclear-weapon 
countries. Despite the fact that the forces of aggression were frenetically 
pursuing and intensifying their criminal policies, it was nonetheless becoming 
ever more possible to defend peace; the common will of the peoples to ensure 
peace, national independence and economic development were now irreversible 


facts of life. 


41. The foreign policy pursued by the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam was 
one of peace, co-operation and friendship. In its efforts to rebuild the 
country after 30 years of resistance to a war of aggression it was deeply 
attached to the principles of peace, independence and liberty, while at the 
same time respecting the same rights with regard to other countries. It 
was prepared to enter into various kinds of co-operative and friendly relations 
with other countries and, in particular, would do its utmost to restore peace, 


stability, co-operation and freedom from foreign interference to the region 


of South East Asia. 


42. Mr. PESIC (Yugoslavia) expressed his delegation's particular satisfaction 
at the decision of the Government of the People's Republic of China to apply 
to join the International Atomic Energy Agency and welcomed the Chinese delegation 
to the present session of the General Conference. The inclusion of China 
in the Agency's regular activities and co-operation with China in all fields 
of relevance to the Agency and its Member States in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy would not only serve to enhance the Agency's universality, 
but would also help to promote its work in many fields of importance to all 
its Members, in particular the developing countries. 
43. He commended the Director General and his staff for the extensive and 
first-rate work which they had performed under very complex conditions during 
the past year, a year in which Yugoslavia had taken an active part in a number 
of Agency activities and had closely followed all those in which it was not 
directly involved. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 12 


44. The Yugoslav Government set a high value on its co-operation with the 
Agency. In addition to numerous regular forms of participation and co-operation, 
such co-operation was encouraged by exchanges of views and visits, some at 
the highest level. The Director General and some of his colleagues had, for 
example, recently made a most successful and useful visit to Yugoslavia. 


45. Within the framework of its regular activities, the Agency had provided 
considerable technical assistance in various forms to his country's nuclear 
institutes and centres. Yugoslavia, in turn, had actively and continuously 
supported the Agency's activities. At the same time, it had taken a consistent 
stand in objecting to certain inadequacies in the Agency's structure and 
work. He hoped that his delegation's comments, which were intended to be 
constructive and objective, had indeed been taken in that spirit. 
46. Yugoslavia was now making intensive preparations for the construction 
of its second nuclear power plant, the first in a series of similar power 
plants. It was therefore faced with the complex task of selecting the most 
reliable technologies and favourable terms for its relatively extensive nuclear 
programme. Such an undertaking required enormous efforts and sacrifices 
on the home front, together with considerable support and understanding on 
the part of the industrialized countries. His delegation had already, on 
a number of occasions, expressed its gratitude to the Agency for its assistance 
in the construction of its first nuclear power plant at Krsko. It was confident 
that the Agency would continue to do its utmost to assist his country in appropriate 
ways, chiefly at the professional level. Without such assistance 
it would be difficult, in a developing country like Yugoslavia, to implement 
an extended programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
47. Yugoslavia attached the greatest importance to the question of safety and 
accordingly considered it essential to ensure that any system for protecting 
people and property in the event of a nuclear accident was prompt, effective 
and reliable. With such considerations in mind, in 1982 an exercise had been 
staged at the Krsko nuclear power plant for the purpose of ascertaining the 
level of preparedness and organizational capacity required by national bodies 
and the people living near nuclear power plants in the event of a major 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 13 


accident. Yugoslavia had been the first country to request the Agency to send a 


mission to examine its plans for the radiological protection of the population, 


to attend such an exercise and to assist in evaluating its results. Both the 
Agency and the national authorities had concluded that the exercise had been well 
prepared and performed; a great deal of information had been accumulated and 
valuable experience gained. The detailed report (No. NENS/83/2) prepared by the 
Agency mission was now available and, along with various documents published by 
Yugoslavia, might be useful to other countries. 


48. As in the past, the agenda for the present Conference session included 
many important issues, some of which were still awaiting an adequate solution 
after many years. All the issues had already been discussed in the course 
of the year by the Board of Governors and other working bodies, and Yugoslavia 
had regularly participated in the consultations and work of the Group of 77 , 
which had undoubtedly played an important positive role in the search for 
acceptable solutions. His delegation upheld the positions it had taken in 
those various fora on behalf of the Group of 77 and expected the Agency to 
take its views fully into consideration in its future work. 
49. He welcomed the efforts deployed by the Agency in initiating new programmes 
and expanding its existing activities in a rational and balanced manner, 
in line with its Statute and in accordance with the ever greater need for 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In addition to nuclear 
safety, he was referring here to the increased level of technical assistance 
provided to developing countries. A true picture of that increase with respect 
to various items could only be gained by comparison with the previous period 
or year. Wherever possible, the corresponding amounts should be expressed 
in terms of the stated real needs; such a procedure would offer a somewhat 
different picture of the relative amounts spent on technical assistance and 
safeguards. 
50. His delegation would be reiterating its views on a number of subjects 
in the course of the session, but wished, in particular, to mention the 
question of the inadequate representation of developing countries, including 
Yugoslavia, in the Secretariat of the Agency. The leading nuclear Powers 
and the responsible officers in the Agency should endeavour to resolve that 
problem, thereby enhancing the Secretariat's effectiveness. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 14 


51. With respect to the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), he noted that 
the progress made in the most important areas of its mandate was far from 
satisfactory. However, he welcomed the successful completion of the work 
entrusted to Working Group 2. He hoped that CAS would eventually achieve 
success in its endeavour to establish a generally acceptable code of conduct. 
52. Towards the end of 1982 the Expert Group on International Plutonium 
Storage (IPS), unable to reach a consensus, had concluded its work and submitted 
a report to the Director General. Yugoslavia had submitted a number of formal 
and substantive comments, now included in the relevant documents of the 
Group, regarding its establishment. 
53. Yugoslavia attached great importance to the question of international 
plutonium storage. However, because that question was not of immediate 
interest to a large number of developing countries, it was possible that 
inadequate solutions might be agreed upon which could have unforeseeable 
consequences. Unless an attempt was made to resolve fundamental issues 
at a higher and more representative level and to provide explicit guidelines 
for future work, it would be ill-advised to pursue the examination of that 
question. 
54. Noting the difficulties faced by the developing countries in their 
endeavours to generate enough energy for their own development, he drew 
attention to the efforts - which were aggravating those difficulties - to make 
the conditions of international nuclear trade more stringent by introducing 
discriminatory practices and maintaining inequitable relations with regard to 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
55. Recent international conferences had proved that the generation of nuclear 
energy was safe from the environmental point of view and that virtually all 
the major problems regarding waste disposal had been satisfactorily solved. 
It could therefore be concluded that nuclear technology had come of age, as 
demonstrated by the fact that some countries had already made great progress 
in achieving self-reliance with regard to their nuclear energy requirements. 
However, some industrialized countries had curtailed their nuclear programmes 
as energy consumption had fallen owing to rationalization, but, as soon as 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 15 


their economies needed more energy sources, that trend would be reversed. 
The developing countries, on the other hand, had no alternative to nuclear 
energy. It was therefore imperative for them to put forward their views at 
international fora regarding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was in 
the common interest to work towards a new international consensus reflecting 
the priorities and needs of a far wider range of countries. 


56. The failure of four successive meetings of the Preparatory Committee 
for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Cooperation 
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, the lack of awareness 
of the fact that the interests of all countries were inter-related and the 
general lack of goodwill and understanding with respect to the complex problems 
faced by the developing countries in that area were a source of great concern 
and regret. Yugoslavia would do its utmost to find ways and means of overcoming 
the existing differences and reaching solutions which could be approved 
by that conference as a basis for international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. One matter yet to be resolved was the date of the 
United Nations Conference. He hoped that it would be convened in the near 
future and he believed that the United Nations General Assembly would endorse 
the justification for convening the Conference and entrust the Preparatory 
Committee with the task of preparing the ground for the necessary consensus 
on outstanding issues. 


57. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that no other international 
conference brought together so many eminent scientists or their delegates. 
He wondered, however, whether morality had found its place beside 
knowledge and science. The contemporary world was suffering from a great 
moral crisis. In the absence of a serious and unified effort to avert it, a 
terrible disaster would occur which would threaten the existence of all 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 16 


mankind. The sinister plans that were being made in the atomic arsenals were 
even more terrifying than the past disasters of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
Science and knowledge without morality could result in nothing but the destruction 
of mankind. In other words, the value of science lay in its application, 
not in science itself. 


58. He recalled that at the twenty-sixth regular session of the General 
Conference the credentials of the delegation of Israel had been rejected 
and world imperialism had felt for the first time that the unity of the 
oppressed nations of the world would put an end to its use of veto rights, 
bribery and false promises to serve its ends. The free nations of the world 
had learnt that the United States and its allies supported and protected 
Israel unconditionally and deceived the masses with their propaganda. The 
United States, in order to mislead world public opinion, pretended to respect 
the votes of other nations. However, when it failed to obtain positive 
votes despite all its efforts, it revealed its true nature by rejecting 
those votes, as the United States delegate had done at the last meeting 
of the twenty-sixth regular session of the General Conference. 
59. The Government of the United States had always encouraged and assisted 
the Israeli Zionist and usurper regime in its inhuman invasions. Although 
Israel was not eligible for continued membership in the great family of 
nations, the United States had threatened to withdraw from a number of international 
organizations and discontinue its financial contribution to them, should 
Israel be excluded from membership in those organizations. The Islamic 
Republic of Iran condemned the United States Government for its humiliating 
behaviour towards the members of international agencies. It strongly believed 
that the nations of the world should unite without expecting any help from the 
super-Powers and undertake to defray the expenses of the international organizations 
so as to release them from the domination of those Powers. The previous 
year, the Islamic Republic of Iran had accordingly declared its readiness to 
make up any shortage of Agency funds resulting from the United States threat. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 17 


60. Furthermore, as a safeguard against future threats by the United States, 
the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran had proposed that a special fund 
be set up under the supervision of the head of the Movement of Non-Aligned 
Countries, the members of which should contribute to the fund according to 
their financial ability to compensate for the possible stoppage of United 
States contributions and to free the international agencies from imperialist 
domination. 
61. In view of the misleading reports on that proposal in the world imperialist 
press, the Islamic Republic of Iran reiterated its sincere will to co-operate 
in the proposed manner with the other non-aligned and anti-imperialist countries 
to prevent the United States and its allies from impugning the proposal 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran. 
62. In the previous year's discussion on the breach of the Agency's Statute 
by Israel, some countries had opposed the suspension of Israel's membership as 
illegal by virtue of the use of the word "persistently" in Article 19.B of the 
Statute. He therefore suggested that that Article be amended in such a way 
that the word "persistently" only applied when it did not endanger the world's 
safety and security. 
63. Moreover, at the previous session of the General Conference, his delegation 
had observed that Israel had participated in all the Conference's meetings 
and votes and that the credentials of its delegation had not been rejected 
until the last day of the Conference. In order to prevent similar cases in 
the future, his delegation suggested that Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure 
of the General Conference be amended to read: "The credentials of delegations 
must be approved not later than the end of the second day of the regular 
session". 
64. The Islamic Republic of Iran, inspired by the Islamic ideology, was 
determined to be active in all areas of science and technology, including 
nuclear technology. Science and technology belonged to all the nations of 
the world and should not be monopolized by a few countries. The super-Powers, 
however, had always tried to create difficulties, in particular for the Third-
World countries, in the use of nuclear energy. They would exploit the valuable 
resources of the Third World until they were exhausted and would then 
demand extortionate prices for the transfer of technology, thereby bringing 
those countries under their imperialistic domination. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 18 


65. The total energy produced by the 13 nuclear power plants in developing 
countries by the end of 1982 had been less than 4000 MW, whereas the energy 
produced by the developed countries had been approximately 200 000 MW, or 
fifty times as much. A large proportion of the uranium used for the production 
of that large amount of energy had been procured from Third-World countries. 
That unjust state of affairs should not be tolerated. 
66. As an example of the behaviour of the super-Powers towards the Third-
World nations, he cited a loan by the Islamic Republic of Iran to France in 
the amount of US $1 billion for which the French Government refused to pay 
either principal or interest. 
67. In view of the atomic arsenals in the United States, the Soviet Union and 
their allied countries and the inhuman decisions and projects carried out in 
those countries, his delegation suggested that an international police force 
might be established by the Third-World countries, under the supervision of 
the Agency, in order to control the atomic arsenals in the East and West. The 
oppressed nations of the Third World that had suffered domination, pressure 
and extortion by the super-Powers were best placed to carry out a supervisory 
function of that kind. 
68. One of the greatest obstacles to the development of nuclear technology 
was the insufficient assurance of the supplies required for that technology. 
Both super-Powers endangered the world's safety every day by their accumulation 
of nuclear weapons but nevertheless made observation of the nonproliferation 
rules a condition for the assurance of supplies. Most developing 
countries, however, were only considering the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy and believed that the transfer of nuclear technology was no more 
important that the transfer of any other type of technology. 
69. Quoting Imam Khomeini, he said that writers, intellectuals, scholars and 
scientists throughout the world should enlighten the public on the danger of 
a nuclear holocaust so that the masses would rise against the two super-Powers 
and prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
70. At the fourth session of the Preparatory Committee of the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy, the United States and the Soviet Union, together with 
their allies, had formed a united front against the developing countries and 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 19 


had advocated the postponement of the Conference. Should the Preparatory 
Committee fail to achieve its purpose, it would be the responsibility of the 
United States, which had disregarded the principle of the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy in the Second World War, thereby shattering all confidence in 
nuclear technology. The participation of the United States in the Conference 
was therefore incompatible with the goals of the Conference. 


71. Despite problems resulting from the war with Iraq, there had been 
remarkable improvements in the scientific and industrial fields in his country, 
including progress in nuclear science. The Islamic Republic of Iran was conducting 
research into new sources of energy, such as plasma physics and fusion, 
and working on new technologies, such as the production of radioisotopes for 
use in medicine, agriculture and industry. A facility for the radiosterilization 
of medical instruments and equipment was under construction and would 
eventually serve all the hospitals and medical centres in the country. Also, 
the first unit of the Bushehr nuclear power plant was nearing completion. 
72. In conclusion, he reiterated his country's commitment to the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute with a view to increasing the number of 
representatives from Africa and the Middle East and South Asia on the Board of 
Governors. His delegation insisted that the Conference take a final decision 
to remedy the unjustified under-representation of those regions. 
73. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), speaking on a point of order, 
requested the right to reply to the statement by the delegate of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran under Rule 58 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. He said that the comments made by the delegate of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran were offensive, unwarranted and irrelevant. 
74. Mr. de LA BATHIE (France) also requested the right to reply to the 
statement of the Islamic Republic of Iran under the same Rule. He regretted 
that the general debate had been used as a forum for political comments which 
were contrary to the spirit of constructive co-operation in which the 
Conference's work was proceeding. 
75. The PRESIDENT granted the delegates of the United States and France 
the right of reply which they had requested under Rule 58 of the Rules of 
Procedure. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 20 


76. Mr. MADRID GONZALEZ (Spain) welcomed the admission of the People's 
Republic of China as a Member of the Agency, which was a cause for satisfaction 
for his country. 
77. As in previous years, his delegation wished to describe briefly recent 
activities carried out in Spain in relation to the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy. 
78. With regard to uranium ore prospecting, in 1982 95 000 line metres had been 
surveyed, resulting in an increase in reserves by some 6000 tonnes, which had 
brought them up to a level of approximately 30 000 tonnes by the end of that 
year. 
79. The Juzbado (Salamanca) fuel element fabrication plant had been completed, 
and it was hoped that it would soon begin production. 
80. In 1982 the total electrical energy generated had been 114 570 GWh, 
representing an increase by 2.5% over the previous year. 8771 GWh of that had 
been produced by nuclear power stations, of which there had been four in 
operation in that year, with the installed power by the end of the year having 
been somewhat over 2000 MW. During 1983 two 930-MW power stations had 
been connected to the grid, which had brought the installed capacity up to 
nearly 4000 MW. At the time of speaking, various further nuclear power 
stations were at different phases of construction, and the Ministry of 
Industry and Energy was reviewing the National Energy Plan. Once the Plan 
had been approved by the Government, it would be submitted to Parliament for 
its consideration. The amount of nuclear power to be installed and the 
schedule for its connection to the grid would be decided in accordance with 


the Plan. 


81. The Spanish authorities attached considerable importance to the back end 
of the fuel cycle, since the finding of satisfactory solutions for radioactive 
waste management was one of the key aspects of the utilization of nuclear power. 
In view of its concern, the Spanish Government welcomed both the fact that that 
topic was being given considerable importance in the Agency and the announcement 
of the efforts begun with a view to finding suitable solutions. It also 
agreed with the Director Genral's remarks relating to the need to increase 
international co-operation in that sphere. For its part, Spain was adopting a 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 21 


series of measures of an organizational, legal and financial nature which were 
considered necessary for coping adequately with the problem of waste management. 


82. His Government was particularly concerned about the dumping of radioactive 
wastes at sea. At the seventh consultative meeting of the contracting parties 
to the London Dumping Convention, the Spanish proposal for a moratorium on 
radioactive waste dumping into the sea until it was possible to know the hazards 
involved had received the support of 19 countries, that is three-quarters of 
those present and voting. 
83. Also, at the 66th meeting of the Steering Committee of the Nuclear Energy 
Agency of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
held in April 1983 in Lyons, the Spanish delegation had requested the suspension 
of the multilateral consultation and monitoring mechanism for the dumping of 
wastes at sea with a view to that mechanism being re-examined and modified in 
order for it to include, among other things, comparisons between dumping at sea 
and storage on land, since provision had been made for such comparisons in the 
IAEA recommendations concerning the London Dumping Convention. 
84. According to section 3.2.2 of the report annexed to document 
GC(XXVII)/INF/214, underground disposal on land under national jurisdiction 
was, with today's technology, considered to be the most appropriate and 
practicable method of safely disposing of radioactive wastes that resulted from 
the use of nuclear power in a Member State. Spain agreed with that statement, 
especially since the irreversibility of sea dumping made storage on land 
preferable. In the light of the above considerations and since, in addition, 
the Agency was currently reviewing its definitions and recommendations in 
respect of sea dumping, the Spanish delegation believed not only that land 
storage was preferable, but also that it was necessary to put an end to all sea 
dumping, and it urged Agency Member States to cease such operations. 
85. Turning to co-operation with the Agency, he said that Spain would always 
make maximum efforts in that context and also in order to assist with the 
universal dissemination of knowledge related to the peaceful uses of nuclear 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 22 


energy. Among the activities on which Spain and the Agency had been 
co-operating - apart from the traditional ones whereby Spanish nuclear centres 
acted as host for visiting scientists and fellows sponsored by the Agency he 
wished to mention the holding in Spain of four meetings, namely, the 
Technical Committee Workshop on Reporting and Assessment of Safety-Related 
Events in Nuclear Power Plants; the Advisory Group Meeting on Methods of 
Treatment of Low- and Intermediate-Level Liquid Wastes; the Interregional 
Training Course on Uranium Ore Procesing; and the Seminar on Technical and 
Environmental Aspects of Spent Fuel Management. 


86. Finally, during 1983 a supplementary co-operation agreement on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy had been signed between the Governments of 
Spain and Brazil in the context of a basic agreement on technical co-operation 
signed earlier. 
87. Mr. de ROSENZWEIG-DIAZ (Mexico) welcomed the decision by the 
People's Republic of China to join the Agency, especially since that country 
and Mexico had long maintained cordial cultural and commercial relations. 
Mexico had in fact been the first country of the New World to have ties with 
China. 
88. At a time when meetings of the preparatory committee for the Third Review 
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) were beginning, Mexico wished to emphasize that, at the meetings 
both of the above-mentioned committee and of the Conference itself, NPT 
should be examined as a whole, and its various parts could not and should not 
be considered separately. 
89. It was unfortunate that, 26 years after the establishment of the Agency 
and 13 years since NPT had come into force, all efforts to halt the arms race 
and to prevent the application of nuclear energy for military purposes by 
certain countries had so far been ineffective. In that context, it might be 
recalled that one year earlier the Nobel Prize for Peace had been awarded to 
the author of the Tlatelolco Treaty, the distinguished Mexican, 
Alfonso Garcia Robles. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 23 


90. Mexico had roundly condemned the military attack by an Agency Member State 
which was not a signatory of NPT on the nuclear research centre of another 
Agency Member which was a signatory. His Government considered that the 
author of that armed intervention and those who attempted to justify it were 
flying in the face of the Agency's Statute, of NPT and, in particular, of the 
Agency's safeguards system, thereby seriously jeopardizing progress on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. His delegation believed that, in parallel to 
the steps which should be taken with respect to that act of aggression, it 
was necessary, in the appropriate international body, to consider the need to 
set up an international legal instrument which specifically provided all 
nuclear facilities subject to Agency safeguards with protection against military 
attacks. 


91. In addition, Mexico condemned the racist regime of South Africa and 
wished to draw the attention of the Conference to resolution 37/69A of the 
General Assembly, under which all intergovernmental organizations had been 
requested to exclude the racist regime of South Africa and to put an end to all 
co-operation with it. That resolution had also requested the Agency to refrain 
from providing South Africa with any service which might assist it in its 
nuclear plans and, in particular, to exclude that country from all IAEA 
technical and working groups. 
92. Turning to various important aspects of the Agency's activities, he said 
that Mexico had voted against the new list of base rates established by the 
General Assembly of the United Nations in its resolution 37/125A since it was 
not in accordance with the criteria to be applied when drawing up such lists. 
Specifically, Mexico believed, first, that the Committee on Contributions 
had not carried out the mandate conferred upon it by the General Assembly 
under resolution 36/231; secondly, the list of base rates had been drawn up 
to a large extent from the statistics available to the United Nations 
Statistical Office; thirdly, excessive weight had been given to exchange, 
rates and to statistics on national incomes calculated at constant prices 
without taking inflation into account; and, fourthly, the new list had been 
drawn up in a manner which was irregular and incompatible with the principles 
of justice and equity. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 24 


93. With regard to technical assistance, in October 1982 an agreement had 
been signed between Mexico, Egypt and the Agency for a large-scale project on 
eradication of the Mediterranean fruit fly in Egypt. That agreement constituted 
the first example of horizontal technical co-operation between two Member 
States of the Agency. Under the agreement, Mexico and Egypt would collaborate 
using management methods and training material which had been prepared in 
Mexico and which, with the assistance of the Agency, would be adapted for the 
Egyptian project. In addition, training would be provided by experts from 
Mexico and the Agency in both Mexico and Egypt. 
94. The problem of the financing of technical assistance persisted. An 
important feature of that activity, unlike safeguards, was uncertainty, since 
voluntary contributions always depended on the economic and political situation 
of the donors. The actual extent of growth in such assistance should not be 
measured against the figures from previous years but on the basis of the 
requirements of Member States and of the availability of funds for financing 
those requirements. From that point of view, the growth in technical assistance 
was still insufficient. 
95. In 1985, it would be necessary to increase the percentage of growth for 
technical assistance activities coming under the Regular Budget because of the 
increase in the number of new projects, a fact which was closely linked with 
the development of the economies of recipient countries. Nor should it be 
forgotten that voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Cooperation 
Fund had to compensate for various developments, such as the stagnation 
in assistance in kind; the reduction in United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) funds; and, thirdly, the reduction in funds for promotional 
activities under the Regular Budget. Moreover, although the extrabudgetary 
funds with which "footnote a/" projects were being financed had increased in 
recent years, such funds were unpredictable. It would be preferable for 
contributions made by donor States and at present designated as extrabudgetary 
to be included from the start in the Technical Assistance and Cooperation 
Fund, since that would be a way of increasing the reliability of the system 
of indicative planning figures. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 25 


96. Turning to the subject of the staffing of the Secretariat, he said that 
for some time developing countries had been in a position to provide highly 
qualified staff for both technical and administrative posts at the Professional 
level in the Agency. It was necessary to satisfy, as soon as possible, the 
legitimate demands of developing countries for equitable geographical distribution 
in the composition of the Secretariat. Although geographical 
representation should not arbitrarily replace the criterion of efficiency and 
the national quotas of different States, due emphasis was not yet being given 
to the geographical factor. In that connection, linguistic diversity was of 
fundamental importance and should also be reflected in the qualifications for 
becoming an international civil servant. It was thus essential that the 
Secretariat should recruit candidates who had mastered at least two official 
and working languages of the Agency. 
97. With regard to Agency personnel practices, transparency in the relevant 
Board documents was required, whereby clear data should be provided on costfree 
experts, personnel with special service agreements, consultants, temporary 
assistance personnel, fellows and trainees at Headquarters. That information 
should be given in detail and should include, for example, the nationalities 
of such personnel, the Departments to which they had been assigned, the duration 
of their respective contracts or assignments and the basis on which they 
received remuneration. 
98. The accounting practices of the Agency had been in existence for over a 
quarter of a century and needed to be adjusted to fit present needs and, where 
possible, simplified. In addition, it was urgent to achieve greater transparency 
in accounting and budgetary procedures. So far, only a small number 
of States had been involved in preparation of the budget. However, budget 
preparation required a system of informal consultations which, with the assistance 
of the Secretariat, would ensure the participation of all interested 
States without discrimination. Moreover, the Secretariat should consider the 
merits of various management systems - for example, one geared to results - in 
order to be able to evaluate satisfactorily the achievements in the different 
activities of the Agency at the end of each financial year. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 26 


99. Mexico welcomed the - albeit modest - progress made by the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS) at its tenth series of meetings. For his 
delegation, the topic of principles of international co-operation was of 
fundamental importance. He urged CAS to continue its activities since, if 
the political will were to be found in all participants, work on that topic 
could be concluded in a relatively brief period. In addition, he was confident 
that in the near future the Board would instruct the Director General to 
implement the system for an emergency and back-up mechanism agreed in CAS. 
Although the results achieved by CAS had indeed been modest, implementation of 
the system would be useful, practicable and inexpensive. 
100. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) was pleased to note that the General Conference, 
after having admitted Zimbabwe to membership at its twenty-fifth session and 
Namibia the previous year, was now unanimously approving the admission to 
membership of the Agency of the People's Republic of China. That event was a 
landmark in IAEA history. Tunisia wished to welcome China and to assure it 
of its fullest co-operation. 
101. At a time of increased tension and world-wide economic and political 
crisis, the Agency was still an invaluable instrument which could be used by 
the community of nations to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy in the 
service of mankind. Economic and social progress, both in the Third World and 
in the industrialized world, was no longer feasible without the help of 
nuclear technology, not only for power production but also for application in 
agriculture, industry, health, etc. 
102. The Director General, in his opening address, had drawn attention to the 
slow progress made in nuclear power production. Opposition to nuclear energy 
on the part of some sectors of public opinion, together with the economic 
crisis, had led certain industrialized countries not only to reduce the number 
of reactors planned for the future, but also to delay or even cancel some 
projects already under way. Yet, any increase in the use of nuclear energy in 
the industrialized countries would inevitably release some of the oil otherwise 
consumed by those countries to meet the needs of the developing areas of 
the world. Although the energy needs of developed countries were continually 

GC(XXVII)/OR.-253 
page 27 


increasing, those countries had little hope of being able to rely substantially 
on nuclear power in the short term, especially in view of the obstacles 
they were encountering in nuclear trade. In that connection, he regretted 
that the Committee on Assurances of Supply had made little progress so far. 


103. He wished to commend the Director General for the emphasis he had placed 
on nuclear safety, and for the steps he had taken to strengthen the Agency's 
programme in that important field. The action taken by the Agency would 
promote nuclear energy in industrialized and developing countries alike by 
helping to set up effective safety mechanisms, and would in addition encourage 
Governments by helping to dispel the fears aroused in the general public by 
the development of nuclear energy. 
104. Tunisia was pleased that it was extending its co-operation with the 
Agency in a number of fields, notably in public health, industry, hydrology, 
etc. It also welcomed the interest shown by the Agency in a regional project 
concerning the application of isotopic techniques to subterranean water 
prospecting in Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco. 
105. Tunisia, which was a signatory of NPT, wished to reaffirm its complete 
support for the Agency's safeguards system. However, it noted that there 
continued to be an excessive imbalance in the allocation of funds under the 
1984 budget as between the two main activities of the Agency, an imbalance 
which was harmful to technical assistance and technical co-operation. 
106. The Director General had done his best to see that more nationals of 
developing countries were recruited for positions of responsibility. The 
Tunisian delegation welcomed that trend, and hoped that the target set in 
resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, adopted by the General Conference at its twentyfifth 
session, would be reached on time. 
107. His delegation regretted to see that there had not been any progress in 
considering the question of amending Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute, 
which the General Conference had had before it since 1977, the aim being to 
reduce, at least to some extent, the inadequate representation of the two 
regions "Africa" and "Middle East and South Asia" on the Board of Governors. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 28 


108. In his opening address the Director General had stated that it would be 
impossible for problems such as those of the Middle East and South Africa not 
to be touched on in the deliberations of the General Conference. In that 
connection his delegation considered that the Agency should henceforth refrain 
from any co-operation with the racist regime of South Africa, which was 
pursuing a policy of aggression against the countries of that region and 
apparently continuing to develop a nuclear military capability, while systematically 
pillaging the mineral resources of Namibia, particularly uranium, 
and refusing to place its nuclear facilities under the Agency safeguards system. 
The openly known alliance in the nuclear field between Israel and South Africa 
was a matter of grave concern for the Agency, the Member States of which were 


striving to eliminate all risk of nuclear proliferation. 


109. The General Conference was not the right body before which to enumerate 
the many acts that had been perpetrated by Israel in defiance of international 
law, but he felt it was the duty of all Member States to see to it that the 
credibility of the Agency and its integrity were preserved. The Israeli armed 
aggression against the Tamuz reactor in Iraq on 7 June 1981 had been officially 
described by the Director General as equally an attack on the Agency's 
safeguards system. All Iraq's nuclear facilities, including the Tamuz reactor, 
were under Agency safeguards; that was not the case with Israel. There was no 
point in trying to maintain the smooth operation of the Agency without 
examining in depth the consequences of damage done to the Agency's safeguards 
system thereby and without seeking means by which the Agency could regain its 
credibility. 
110. Israel, furthermore, had made an official statement proclaiming its right 
to repeat that act against Iraqi nuclear facilities or those of other Arab 
countries. That threat of force was an attack on international peace and 
security as well as on the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation, its 
other main function; it was also a violation of the right of Member States to 
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.253 
page 29 


111. The repercussions of the Israeli attack against the Iraqi nuclear 
research centre were still being felt, and many Member States were increasingly 
aware of the gravity of that incident for the international community. He 
wished, finally, to stress that the remarks that he had just made were not an 
attempt at politicization of the Agency's work; it was rather that the 
Tunisian delegation believed that it had the right to leave no stone unturned 
in its desire to restore confidence in the Agency and in its capacity to 
fulfil its mission. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
February 1984* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 198 3 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg/ Vienna, 
on Thursday, 13 October 1983, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. KEBLEK (Czechoslovakia) 
later: Mr. HENDERSON (United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland) 
Mr. BRUSH (for Mr. HODEL, United States of 
America) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


General debate and annual report for 19 82 
(continued) 1 - 184 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Sweden 1 -16 
Indonesia 17 -20 
Republic of 1 Korea 21 -29 
Austria 30 -40 
Zambia 41 -51 
Bangladesh 52 -58 
Organization for th le Prohil bition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL) 59 -65 
Finland 66 -81 
Turkey 82 -92 
Romania 93 -10 7 
Mongolia 108 -114 
Zaire 115 -121 
Morocco 12 2 -134 
Switzerland 135 -150 
Kenya 151 -160 
Namibia 161 -169 
Uruguay 170 -17 9 
Portugal 180 -184 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 November 1983. 


**/ GC(XXVII)/700. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 


84-0410 
002 5E 



GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684) (continued) 


1. Mr. ALER (Sweden) recalled that at the end of 1982 his country had 
had the sixth-largest nuclear generating capacity in the world. The Swedish 
nuclear programme, which had been described before the General Conference at a 
previous session, was being carried out as planned. Electricity production in 
Sweden was now based entirely on hydroelectric power and nuclear power, so 
that dependence on imported fossil fuel had been considerably reduced. 
Nuclear power plants generated nearly 40% of the electricity and, on a per 
capita basis, Sweden produced more nuclear power than any other nation in the 
world. The Swedish programme, begun thirty years ago, had now reached full 
maturity. The reactor and fuel industry was nearly self-sufficient, but it 
still had to import fuel materials from several countries and accordingly had 
to rely on the smooth functioning of international trade and co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
2. That was why Sweden was particularly interested in the Agency's excellent 
work. The implementation of safeguards to prevent any diversion for military 
uses was a necessary prerequisite for the peaceful use of nuclear energy, and 
it was Sweden's conviction that full-scope safeguards offered the best 
guarantee of smooth international trade in the nuclear field. Experience 
seemed to show that the nuclear industry readily accepted the consequences of 
safeguards, and Sweden was pleased to note the negotiations being conducted 
between the Agency and the Soviet Union regarding that country's voluntary 
offer to place part of its civilian nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
3. An effective safeguards system required good organization and global 
confidence in the system. Sweden had always supported the principle of the 
universality of international organizations and therefore welcomed the entry 
of the People's Republic of China into the Agency. 
4. Sweden was actively participating in the work of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply and welcomed the practical steps which had been taken, 
particularly with regard to emergency and back-up mechanisms. The Agency 
could play a useful role in collecting information, and Sweden was sure that 
the Committee would reach a general consensus on principles of international 
co-operation. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 3 


5. As to technical co-operation, an area of prime importance, he welcomed 
the continuing marked trend towards increased contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund and noted that his country had pledged its 
full base-rate share of the target of $22.5 million recommended for 1984. 
6. Sweden had also been one of the largest donors of extrabudgetary 
resources for the Agency's technical co-operation activities, and the Swedish 
Government would continue to finance footnote a/ projects. 
7. The implementation of the technical assistance and co-operation programme 
was satisfactory. There was room for improvement, however, and his Government 
welcomed the greater attention now being given to project evaluation, which 
should make it possible to reassess the Agency's programme constructively. 
8. The Director General had referred to the increased interest in small and 
medium power reactors, particularly in developing countries. Representatives 
of Swedish industry had participated in discussions between reactor vendors 
and potential customers arranged by the Agency, and Sweden believed that the 
Agency could play an important role in helping Member States to make a 
realistic assessment of the technical and economic possibilities which nuclear 
power offered for their national grids. The infrastructure required to cope 
with safety and radiation protection, even on a modest scale, was considerable 
and took many years to be established. The Agency could play an important 
role by transferring the experience of other Member States and contributing to 
the training of the specialized staff required for regulatory functions. 
9. Sweden welcomed, in particular, the work of the Agency in nuclear safety, 
activities which were quite justly accorded priority alongside safeguards 
operations and technical assistance. The Agency's meetings and seminars were 
of immediate relevance to Member States and the annual report on nuclear 
safety was a valuable source of information which could help foster a wider 
exchange of information. He welcomed the fact that the vast work of the 
Nuclear Safety Standards programme was being carried out according to schedule. 
10. The Swedish authorities regarded with scepticism, however, the Director 
General's suggestion of creating an independent group of experts on reactor 
safety under the auspices of the Agency, since the subject was very complex 
and it was by no means certain that such a group could usefully contribute to 
the international co-operation already established. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 4 


11. The problem of spent fuel management and safe disposal of radioactive 
waste was attracting widespread interest in a great number of countries, not 
only in those with their own nuclear programmes. Sweden was also very 
interested. It welcomed increased international co-operation and exchange of 
information in that field. It had given a detailed account of its waste 
management policy during the scientific afternoon on that subject. 
12. Like many other countries, Sweden was concerned about the dumping of 
radioactive substances at sea. It believed that land-based methods of 
disposal, where waste could be isolated from ecological systems and monitored 
more easily, were preferable to sea disposal. Sweden therefore welcomed the 
resolution adopted at the beginning of the year at the seventh Consultative 
Meeting of the Parties to the London Dumping Convention calling for a 
suspension of sea dumping pending an expert report. He stressed the 
importance of the Agency's work on establishing regulations within that 
controversial area. 
13. The Agency's budget was, on the whole, a reasonable compromise between 
the demands made by Member States and the need for economy. However, the 
Regular Budget represented, in real terms, an increase of 2% compared with the 
previous year. Like many other countries, Sweden was enforcing an austerity 
programme which forced it to reduce expenditure in the public sector in real 
terms and altered its position regarding international organizations. As far 
as the Agency's Regular Budget was concerned, even a zero-growth policy would 
mean preferential treatment by comparison with Sweden's national programmes. 
Most of the Agency's budget related to staff costs, which made it all the more 
essential that the Agency should meet the demands of Member States not by 
increasing the staff of the Secretariat further but by making more efficient 
use of existing staff. Sweden recommended the Board of Governors to focus its 
attention increasingly on budgetary questions. 
14. Sweden actively supported the Agency, not only for the two reasons 
already cited, but for another extremely important reason, which applied to 
all States represented in the General Conference whether or not they had 
nuclear programmes, namely the fear of nuclear war. All States had a 
fundamental interest that nuclear war be avoided. The nuclear-weapon States 
bore a heavy responsibility and Sweden took every opportunity to urge them to 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 5 


reduce their nuclear arsenals. It would be highly desirable for an agreement 
on a total nuclear test ban to be concluded as soon as possible, and Sweden 
had submitted a draft treaty to the Committee on Disarmament at its meetings 
during the summer. 


15. The non-nuclear-weapon States also had an important responsibility. 
They, too, should do everything possible to prevent peaceful nuclear energy 
from being exploited for military purposes. Otherwise, not only might the 
number of nuclear-weapon States increase but also international trade in the 
nuclear field might become severely restricted. The importance of the 
Agency's role in securing an effective non-proliferation regime could not be 
too strongly emphasized. Through its safeguards system, the Agency provided 
States with the most effective means of demonstrating the peaceful nature of 
their nuclear programmes. That was why his Government was very concerned to 
read again in the annual report that four non-nuclear-weapon States had 
unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, in operation or under construction, which 
could produce weapons material. 
16. Sweden would continue to give the highest priority to the Agency's 
decisively important non-proliferation activities. Preparations for the next 
NPT Review Conference were about to begin, and Sweden was confident that the 
Agency would make substantial contributions. The Agency's safeguards system 
was a truly unique instrument in the service of peace and deserved to be 
considered also in the broader perspective of nuclear arms control and 
disarmament. 
17. Mr. BAIQUNI (Indonesia) said that his country, which was about to 
begin its fourth five-year development plan, attached great importance to the 
various applications of nuclear energy. As a developing country, Indonesia 
needed nuclear technology to promote the well-being of its people and regarded 
technical assistance as one of the Agency's most important activities. His 
delegation thus welcomed the information in the Director General's statement 
that technical assistance had steadily increased over the last fourteen 
years. It appreciated the work of the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste, which had enabled a large number of scientists from 
developing countries, including Indonesia, to acquire knowledge and competence 
which was very valuable to their countries. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 6 


18. However, in view of the considerable increase in the membership of the 
Agency since its establishment, and the changing needs of its Members, 
particularly the developing countries, it was essential to adapt the Agency's 
programmes so that the Agency could better fulfil the objectives laid down in 
its Statute. His delegation welcomed the fact that the Director General had 
responded positively to the request made by the Conference at its last session 
and had appointed, especially to posts at the higher levels, more nationals 
from developing countries, whose familiarity with the needs of those countries 
made them particularly well qualified to help the Agency adapt its programmes 
to the changes that had taken place. Indonesia hoped that the Director 
General would continue his efforts in that area. 
19. The safeguards programme was just as important as technical assistance in 
fulfilling the Agency's dual objective of enlarging the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world while ensuring 
that the Agency's assistance was used solely for peaceful purposes. It was 
encouraging to note that despite its limited staff the Agency had been1 able to 
perform its safeguards functions effectively. Indonesia would continue to 
co-operate with the Agency in that field. 
20. As a party to NPT, Indonesia undertook to use nuclear energy solely for 
peaceful purposes. It therefore noted with concern that, while Articles II 
and III of the Treaty had been observed scrupulously by the non-nuclear-weapon 
States party to the Treaty, Articles IV and VI had not been implemented by the 
States referred to therein. Indonesia urged those States which were today 
capable of destroying mankind to take the necessary steps to.end the arms race 
and bring about nuclear disarmament. 
Mr. Hendersoh (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) 
took the Chair. 


21. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea) recalled that his country had been one 
of the founding Members of the Agency and had actively participated in all its 
activities. Over the years, his country had made enormous progress in 
exploiting nuclear energy, and the year 1983 had marked another important 
stage in its nuclear power programme. In April 1983, a 687-MW(e) CANDU 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 7 


nuclear power plant had been put into operation. In September, a 


650-MW(e) PWR had also gone into service. With those two new nuclear units, 
the share of nuclear power, with about 2000 MW, had reached 14.8% of total 
electrical generation capacity. In addition, six nuclear power plants were 
being built, and construction was to begin on a new 900-MW(e) EWR every year 
from 1984 onwards. By 1991, when those facilities were completed, the share 
of nuclear energy would reach 33.4% while the share of oil-fired power plants 
would have decreased from 54.8% to 17.8%. Owing to the world-wide recession 
in recent years, the growth of electricity demand had slowed down, and as a 
consequence the plan to build nuclear power plants Nos 11 and 12 had been 
suspended; but since there were now signs of a fresh up-turn in electricity 
demand, overall power demand was being reassessed. 


22. Various measures had been taken to improve public acceptance of the 
current nuclear power programme. One important measure had been the recently 
revised nuclear energy law, which outlined nuclear safety requirements. The 
modification of that law had led to the publication of other texts on safety, 
in particular on quality assurance, and codes and standards for 
nuclear-related components and environmental protection. 
23. In order to review the current safety problems of three nuclear power 
plants in operation, his Government had invited the Agency to send an 
operational safety review team, in August 1983, to determine whether there 
were adequate safety levels at the nuclear power plants. The visit had 
confirmed the competence of the Korean authorities to ensure the operational 
safety and regulatory management of nuclear power plants. It had also 
demonstrated the valuable objective assistance which such a team could provide 
to countries with limited experience in that area. 
24. As to the implementation of safeguards, his delegation noted with 
satisfaction that there had been no diversion of nuclear material. As had 
already been mentioned, the on-load-refuelling reactor had been in commerical 
operation since April. That type of reactor had been in operation for many 
years in Canada. However, neither inspection procedures nor facility 
attachments had been standardized. His delegation urged the Secretariat to 
expedite the standardization of inspection procedures for the 
on-load-refuelling reactor in order to achieve the safeguards objectives. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 8 


2 5. With regard to the Director General's proposal for the possible 
establishment of an international commission on nuclear safety, his delegation 
wished to express both its interest and its concern. It believed that the 
proposal should be studied in detail by the Scientific Advisory Committee to 
consider the necessary arrangements and the scope of activities. Once the 
results of such a review were available, his delegation could make a more 
definite statement of its views. 
26. The Agency's technical assistance programme was one of its most important 
activities, particularly for developing countries. It had played a major role 
in the development of nuclear energy and its peaceful uses in various 
recipient countries. Compared with previous years, there had been a 
substantial improvement in the quality and quantity of technical assistance 
delivery. However, the funds available for technical assistance remained far 
below the needs of many developing countries. He proposed that the programme 
be standardized to ensure its effective implementation. In view of its 
importance, nuclear power generation technology would arouse growing interest 
in developing countries. The assistance programme set up to meet their needs 
should be standardized and should cover both nuclear power technology and the 
nuclear fuel cycle, particularly spent fuel management and the safe disposal 
of radioactive waste. In no nuclear power programme was it either technically 
or economically feasible to achieve total self-sufficiency. Nuclear power 
technology was continually evolving, and even the developed countries would 
need to count on the co-operation of other countries in that area. His 
delegation therefore believed that standardized assistance projects would 
improve the effectiveness of technical co-operation and would be useful for 
both developed and developing Member States. His delegation fully supported 
multi-year programming and a judicious degree of over-programming to improve 
efficiency and to ensure timely implementation. It hoped its comments would 
be taken into account when technical co-operation policy was formulated and 
implemented. 
27. With regard to staff recruitment, he recognized the Director General's 
efforts to implement resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386. Aware of the increasing role 
played by developing Member States and the importance of recruiting staff on 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 9 


as wide a geographical basis as possible, he hoped that the Director General 
would continue his efforts to rectify the existing national and regional 


imbalance and would take further steps to increase the number of staff drawn 


from developing areas at all levels and particularly at the senior and 
policy-making levels. 


28. With regard to the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA), he welcomed the 
considerable progress that had been achieved in expanding its activities. His 
delegation also welcomed the opening of the UNDP industrial project office at 
the Centre for the Application of Isotopes and Radiation in Djakarta. Among 
the various UNDP industrial projects, it attached particular importance to 
that on radiation sterilization and was proud that a Korean institute had been 
selected as a model regional centre for demonstration and training in that 
field. In that connection he was pleased to announce his Government's 
willingness to host the eighth RCA working group meeting in Seoul, and 
expressed the hope that the meeting would lead to substantial progress in 
implementing RCA programmes. 
29. As to the Agency's 1984 budget, it was understandable, in the light of 
the recent world recession, that adoption of the principle of near-zero growth 
had been inevitable. However, in view of the essential role of the Agency's 
promotional activities, and in particular of the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme, financial resources for those activities should be 
increased. The sum of $2 3.5 million allocated to the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation programme fell far short of what was needed for 
many technically sound projects. He believed that, if the Secretariat 
evaluated projects more prudently and implemented the chosen projects more 
rapidly, it would be possible to stretch the limited resources a little 
further. 
30. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that his country welcomed the decision 
of the People's Republic of China to apply for membership of the Agency and 
the unanimous decision of the General Conference to approve that 
application. By such a major step towards universality, the Agency would be 
in a better position to serve the international community as a whole. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 10 


31. As the Director General had pointed out in his statement, although the 
present economic situation had led to lower-than-forecast energy demands in 
almost all countries, it was vital that there should be a source of energy 
available which caused less environmental damage than fossil fuels. His 
delegation noted with interest that in 1982 nuclear reactors had accounted for 
10% of world electricity production and that the figure would rise to 20% by 
the end of the century. The Director General had also noted the continuing 
trend in some countries to stop further expansion of their nuclear power 
programmes. The reasons for that trend were of a technical and political 
nature, the latter generally described by the term "public acceptance". 
However, public acceptance was itself dependent on the answers to certain 
technical questions such as safeguards, safety and waste management. 
32. In the area of safeguards, considerable progress had been achieved in 
1982. The number of facilities inspected and evaluated had increased. 
Evaluations had become more systematic and comprehensive. More advanced 
equipment had been used and there had been a substantial improvement in the 
attainment of inspection goals, including those for on-load-refuelled 
reactors. The conclusion that nuclear material under Agency safeguards had 
been used solely for peaceful nuclear purposes or had been otherwise 
adequately accounted for confirmed the effectiveness of the system. However, 
further progress was necessary. His delegation endorsed the sum recommended 
for safeguards in 1984 but wished to stress that, in view of the present 
economic situation, the budgets of international organizations should reflect 
the principle of zero growth as far as possible. There should not be any 
competition between the safeguards and technical assistance programmes. In 
determining the level of resources to be allocated to each of them, efforts 
should be made to establish a balance between goals that had their own merits. 
33. Austria, which had consistently supported the principle of horizontal 
non-proliferation, called upon States that were not party to NPT to accede to 
the Treaty and accept its obligations. Concerned also about vertical 
proliferation, Austria shared the Director General's view that the time had 
come for the nuclear-weapon States to study how Agency safeguards, or 
safeguards modelled on them, could be applied to nuclear arms control. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 11 


34. Austria had always been in favour of promoting nuclear trade and the 
transfer of nuclear technology, subject to the need to prevent the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. It therefore welcomed the efforts being 
made both by the Committee on Assurances of Supply and by the Preparatory 
Committee for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). Those 
efforts were of interest to both developing countries and industrialized 
countries with an incomplete nuclear fuel cycle. CAS had made encouraging 
progress in the field of revision mechanisms and emergency and back-up 
mechanisms, and his delegation welcomed the fact that the Agency was to act as 
a clearing-house within the framework of emergency and back-up mechanisms 
devised by CAS. 
3 5. He hoped that activities relating to the review of NPT would give fresh 
impetus to preparations for the UNCPICPUNE, which, his delegation believed, 
would provide a very important forum for discussing international co-operation. 
36. With regard to nuclear safety, he noted with satisfaction that the NUSS 
programme was well advanced and that the Agency's activities had shifted 
towards providing direct assistance to Member States. Important progress had 
been made by establishing the International Incident Reporting System, which 
was due to go into operation shortly. 
37. At the twenty-third session of the General Conference Austria had made a 
proposal concerning the trans-frontier aspects of nuclear power plants, which 
aimed to facilitate co-operation between neighbouring States. In the 
meantime an international advisory group on questions of mutual assistance in 
connection with nuclear accidents had been discussing certain aspects of the 
problem and his delegation hoped that the group would shortly conclude its 
work. He pointed out that an agreement had been signed between Austria and 
Czechoslovakia on questions of mutual interest in connection with nuclear 
facilities. Austria was at present negotiating other, similar agreements 
with other neighbouring countries. 
3 8. From the point of view of the public acceptance of nuclear power, 
radioactive waste management was probably the most crucial problem, 
particularly in countries which did not have the economic resources necessary 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 12 


for constructing their own waste storage facilities. His delegation noted 
the conclusion reached at the International Conference on Radioactive Waste 
Management that no further technological breakthroughs were necessary. What 
was needed was an international demonstration facility to show the public not 
only that the problem of waste disposal could be solved but that it had in 
fact already been solved. The Director General's arguments in favour of 


international co-operation in that field seemed very convincing. 


39. He welcomed the continued fruitful co-operation between the Agency and 
Austria regarding the Agency's laboratories and hoped that technical 
agreements implementing the basic agreement of 1 March 1982 between Austria 
and the Agency would soon be concluded. 
40. One of the Agency's most important tasks was to promote the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy in developing countries through its technical assistance and 
co-operation programme. The fact that the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund had increased more rapidly than the Regular Budget showed 
that the system of indicative planning figures was serving its purpose well. 
The Austrian Government pledged, subject to parliamentary approval, a 
voluntary contribution of $168 750 to the Fund in 1984, which was 23% more 
than in 1983. Furthermore, in 1984 Austria would provide 121 000 schillings 
to finance Type II fellowships and would continue to provide cost-free 
training for fellows selected by the Agency. 
41. Mr. SILANGWA (Zambia) joined other delegations in welcoming the 
People's Republic of China, a country which was a friend of Zambia; China's 
entry was a significant event in the Agency's history since it would make the 
organization more representative and bring it fresh experience and dynamism. 
42. Zambia had always been very committed to the principle of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, which should serve to improve human living conditions 
and not destroy mankind. It was health care, industrial development and, 
above all, adequate food to feed the world's population which would contribute 
more than anything else to peace. Nuclear energy, when diverted to armaments 
- even if not used in a directly destructive way - jeopardized peace and world 
stability by consuming resources which could otherwise have been better used. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 13 


Zambia therefore reaffirmed its commitment to the Agency's Statute, which 
could even, should the occasion arise, be strengthened to reflect the 
aspirations and demands for justice of the majority of Member States. 


43. The severe world economic crisis which had been going on for several 
years had had a devastating impact in Zambia, as in most developing 
countries. Although there had been some signs of economic recovery in the 
industrialized countries, prospects remained dim for most developing 
countries: oil prices were still too high and basic commodities earned too 
little foreign exchange to offer any hope of recovery. 
44. In view of the situation, Zambia was grateful for the assistance received 
from the Agency over the past twelve years, which had helped it to apply 
nuclear science and technology for the nation's peaceful development. The 
effects of that assistance had already been felt in certain sectors and would 
become even more noticeable if present plans and activities were continued. 
Starting from almost no activity in the field of nuclear science, Zambia now 
had a university undergraduate course in nuclear physics; facilities for the 
peaceful application of radioisotopes, radiation techniques and nuclear 
analytical techniques in agriculture, medicine, mineral exploration and 
prospecting; and a modest radiation protection service. 
45. In view of the shortage of time available to the General Conference, he 
would not go into the details of the projects that were receiving Agency 
assistance but would merely point out that, overall, 1982 had been a 
particularly good year as regards assistance provided to Zambia by the 
Agency. In view of its level of development, Zambia hoped that 1982 would be 
used as a reference point for future technical assistance in the application 
of nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes. He hoped that the 
Agency's budgetary resources would reflect the important role which the 
applications of radioisotopes and radiation techniques in agriculture, the 
life sciences and mineral resources development could play in the development 
of the poorest Member States. He wished to take the opportunity to thank the 
Governments of Sweden and India for their assistance through the Agency's 
technical assistance and co-operation programme. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 14 


46. The Director General's report indicated that once again no anomaly had 
been detected which would have indicated diversion of safeguarded nuclear 
material or facilities for the manufacture of nuclear weapons or any other 
purpose. The Secretariat had successfully carried out its inspection duties. 
However, the number of facilities inspected represented only a very small 
fraction of the world's total nuclear facilities, and it was to be hoped that 
all would ultimately be subject to the Agency's safeguards system. The 
Agency's co-ordination and planning activities in areas such as nuclear power 
development forecasting, waste management and international plutonium storage 
had been very useful and should be continued. 
47. The technical assistance and co-operation programme continued to be well 
managed and the resources available to it were relatively higher than in 1981; 
but the fact that many projects had footnote a/ status and that there were 
delays in receiving some contributions clearly showed the inadequacy and 
unpredictable nature of the financing arrangements for the programme. Even 
when footnote a/ projects had received financial support, that assistance had 
often been provided later than had been forecast in national implementation 
plans. His delegation had already stressed, both at previous sessions of the 
Conference and at Board meetings, that the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme was one of the Agency's two major activities and should 
be financed from the Regular Budget to guarantee predictable and assured 
resources. He was pleased that certain donor countries were showing 
increasing interest in footnote a/ projects and hoped that they would follow 
the principles of the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme 
in their decisions to support those projects. Zambia supported the Board's 
recent guidelines for the technical assistance and co-operation programme and 
hoped that future policy reviews of the programme would concentrate on the 
method of project financing. 
48. The work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was very 
important in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Although Zambia 
had not participated in the Committee's deliberations, it had closely followed 
its work and realized how complex and difficult it was. However, in view of 
the time devoted to that work and the pressing need to establish mechanisms to 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 15 


facilitate supplies of nuclear material and technology for the benefit of all 
countries, more positive results should have been achieved. If CAS had made 
more rapid progress it could have made a significant contribution to 
preparations for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 


International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. He urged 
CAS and all those concerned to redouble their efforts to achieve the set 
objectives. 


49. In view of the current difficulties, the 1984 budget had been very well 
prepared. However, although the estimates for the Agency's two most important 
programmes appeared comparable, at $36 692 000 for safeguards and $38 644 000 
for technical assistance and co-operation, the latter programme would not be 
financed from assured resources, as were safeguards. Therefore, it was 
impossible to forecast from the budget exactly how the technical assistance 
and co-operation programme would be implemented in 1984. Nevertheless, Zambia 
endorsed the Agency's 1984 budget and pledged a voluntary contribution to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in accordance with its base rate of 
assessment for 1984. 
50. Fair representation in an international organization promoted democracy 
and mutual respect. However, although the General Conference was acquiring 
greater universality as new Members joined the Agency, the Board of Governors 
remained as unrepresentative as it had been over the past ten years. The 
Board had been examining for several years ways of redressing the balance in 
favour of the under-represented areas of Africa and the Middle East and 
South Asia. As yet, despite the self-evident need to do justice to those two 
regions, nothing had been changed. Zambia believed that there was no 
justification for refusing to correct that anomaly, which was contrary to 
common sense and fair play. He recalled the African proposal to give three 
more Board seats to Africa and two more to the Middle East and South Asia. 
The validity of that proposal appeared increasingly incontestable, and other 
proposals on the same issue had only complicated matters. He hoped that a 
just solution would be found without further delay. 
51. The Agency's activities were dedicated to peace; yet there were still 
numerous areas of conflict in the world which threatened peace. The raison 
d'etre of some regimes seemed to be to destablize the world so as to preserve 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 16 


the privileges of a few. The South African regime continued to perfect and 
consolidate policies aimed at creating conflict, which threatened the peaceful 
development of Africa. It had begun to build up a nuclear arsenal to 
perpetuate its domestic policies of oppression and to carry out terrorist 
activities in neighbouring countries. Even the civil nuclear programmes 
established by that regime were designed to benefit only a few and to increase 
the country's industrial capacity so that its repressive policies could be 
maintained. Those Member States of the Agency which collaborated with the 
South African authorities and which assisted or in any way encouraged them in 
nuclear technology, for either military or civilian applications, were in 
effect threatening the peace in that country and in the region as a whole and 
acting contrary to the Agency's Statute. Fortunately, other Member States, 
acting collectively under the Statute, had shown their displeasure and 
condemnation of that regime's domestic and foreign policies. However, the 


international community still had a lot to do to enable the peoples of 
Southern Africa to develop peacefully. Positive effective action had to be 
taken to force the South African regime to renounce its domestic and foreign 
policies of oppression and to use its civilian nuclear programme for the 
benefit of all South Africans. He therefore urged the Agency and its Member 
States not only to continue effectively to isolate the South African regime 
but also to take positive measures which would ensure that the regime could 
not strengthen its military capability. Furthermore, all Member States should 
act in such a way as to leave South Africa with no alternative but to agree to 
place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. Zambia appreciated 
the measures taken by the Secretariat, in line with the relevant resolutions 
of the General Conference and of the United Nations General Assembly, to limit 
the participation of South Africa in the Agency's activities. It hoped that 
such action would be continued. 


52. Mr. MORSHED (Bangladesh) shared the hope expressed by the Director 
General that the deliberations at the present session of the General 
Conference would be focused on the Agency's two main objectives - promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and preventing nuclear proliferation. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 17 


53. The entry of the People's Republic of China into the Agency was an 
important event. The Chinese people had always made striking contributions to 
the advance of science and technology and China's entry gave renewed hope to 
the developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, that 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would be better directed to suit the needs 
of the developing world. 
54. Energy problems remained acute for all countries, particularly for 
developing countries which, like Bangladesh, also faced problems such as the 
need for increased imports of manufactured goods, high inflation rates, 
worsening terms of trade, and the rapid depletion of traditional energy 
resources. Major steps were needed to increase the supply of energy, 
including nuclear energy, in a planned and sustained manner to meet the 
increased demand imposed by development. However, nuclear energy development 
continued to raise a whole series of complex problems, and as a result nuclear 
power programmes in many countries were stagnating, while in others they were 
slowing down and in some they could not even be initiated. Those problems 
arose mainly because the nuclear industry was capital-intensive and costly, 
because capital was scarce, and because there were uncertainties regarding the 
transfer of technology, and ever-increasing controversy over nuclear safety, 
waste management and nuclear safeguards. 
55. The Agency had greatly contributed to overcoming those problems. For its 
part, Bangladesh was observing its commitments to the Agency, having actively 
participated in Agency activities, particularly as a Member of the Board of 
Governors. The present session of the Conference should help to strengthen 
the Agency's role in various fields, particularly in technical assistance to 
developing countries. Those countries, and especially the least developed 
among them, had the greatest need for that assistance if they were to be 
successful in developing nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
56. Recently, the Agency's technical assistance programme had grown rapidly: 
from a modest training programme, it had come now to include a broad spectrum 
of applications in various fields of particular relevance to the developing 
countries. Bangladesh greatly appreciated the progress made so fa.r; however, 
it believed that the scope and extent of the assistance programme 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 18 


should be further widened. Moreover, the technical assistance programme for 
developing countries should occupy a more central place in the Agency's 
activities and be financed from the Regular Budget. Ensuring the future and 
the stability of the assistance programme in that way would be do much to 
enhance the Agency's usefulness. 


57. Bangladesh also attached great importance to the Agency's efforts to 
develop and implement a credible safeguards system. It hoped that nuclear 
energy would be developed solely for peaceful purposes, and it was that 
concern for peace and stability which had prompted it to accede to NPT. It 
believed, however, that, in order for NPT or any other similar instrument to 
be successful, the signatory States must be assured of greater security and 
increased technical and economic benefits. In 1985, the NPT Review Conference 
should focus on studying ways and means of making the non-proliferation regime 
more viable through greater security and technical benefits for all parties to 
the Treaty. Such a step would supplement the Agency's overall effort to 
promote an effective safeguards system by generating confidence and fulfilling 
the just expectations of all concerned. 
58. Finally, Bangladesh believed it was essential to increase representation 
of the developing countries at all levels of the Secretariat, as had been 
recognized in General Conference resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386. It hoped that 
steps would be taken to implement that resolution and that the number of 
nationals from developing countries would increase, particularly at the higher 
levels of the Secretariat, in order to fulfil the genuine aspirations of 
developing countries. 
59. Mr. MARTINEZ COBO (OPANAL) said that the greatest challenge ever 
faced by mankind was to prevent nuclear war and the destruction of the human 
species. If human civilization was to be saved, it was necessary to abolish 
nuclear weapons right away, thereby removing the risks of nuclear conflict. 
That pressing need took precedence over all others. 
6 0. The contribution made by Latin America to the political philosophy of 
peace and to international law in the field of disarmament had been 
demonstrated by the first and (so far) the only initiative to set up a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely populated region by establishing a 
system which ensured the total absence of nuclear weapons. The award, 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 19 


in 1982, of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Mexican Alfonso Garcia Robles, father 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty, reflected both universal recognition of the enormous 
significance of the Treaty and a tribute to the whole of Latin America, which 
had participated in the long work leading up to adoption of the Treaty in 1967. 


61. During the week, Antigua and Barbados had joined the twenty-five 
countries which had signed the Tlatelolco Treaty. If one accepted the 
interpretation of the Vienna Convention that States which had subscribed to or 
ratified a treaty could not act in any way contrary to the objectives of that 
treaty, one could conclude that the Latin American nuclear-weapon-free zone, 
which covered almost the entire geographical area, would ensure that the 
majority of its inhabitants did not become victims of a nuclear holocaust. 
62. All non-Latin-American States with territories in the area over which 
they had legal or de facto international responsibility had signed Protocol I 
of the Treaty, in which they pledged to keep those territories free from 
nuclear weapons; only ratification by France was lacking, and it was to be 
hoped that Prance would ratify Protocol I in the very near future. 
63. By signing and ratifying Protocol II, the five nuclear Powers at present 
recognized as such had given a full guarantee to respect the sovereign 
decision of the Latin American people and had undertaken not to use or 
threaten to use nuclear weapons against the signatories of the Treaty. 
64. OPANAL welcomed China's entry into the Agency and did not forget that the 
first and unique commitment regarding nuclear arms control taken by China had 
been its signature, ten years earlier, of the Tlatelolco Treaty; that had been 
a genuine gesture of friendship towards Latin America. 
6 5. Relations between OPANAL and the Agency had always been, and would 
continue to be, excellent. Eighteen OPANAL Member States had concluded 
safeguards agreements and two others had initiated negotiations on such 
agreements. The unanimous wish of the OPANAL General Conference was that the 
agreement with Argentina, one of the most advanced Latin American countries, 
on the peaceful applications of nuclear energy should be rapidly concluded so 
that Argentina could become completely integrated into the Tlatelolco system 
by ratifying the Treaty. The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones would 
undoubtedly increase the security of non-nuclear-weapon States, limit 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 20 


proliferation geographically and contribute effectively to reducing the 
likelihood of nuclear conflict. That was why the sustained efforts of the 
United Nations to create other zones should be supported by the international 
community and, in particular, by the Agency. He hoped that the path opened up 
by Latin America would soon be chosen by other areas which did not yet possess 
nuclear weapons, and OPANAL would be happy to share with them its fruitful 
experience of the past 16 years. 


66. Mr. TORNUDD (Finland) warmly welcomed the entry of the People's 
Republic of China into the Agency and recalled that the widest possible 
participation of all States in the Agency's work was one of the basic 
prerequisites for its smooth functioning. With the membership of China, a 
State representing a quarter of the world's population and a permanent Member 
of the United Nations Security Council, all States of the world using nuclear 
power were now Members of the Agency. 
67. Now that such an important step towards the Agency's universality had 
been taken, Finland hoped that there would be no more attempts to exclude any 
Member State from the Agency on political grounds. Member States should, on 
the contrary, endeavour to reduce the level of controversy and give priority 
to the specialized matters falling within the Agency's mandate. 
68. One of the merits of the Agency, within the United Nations family of 
organizations, had been its ability to adapt its programme to changes, 
qualitative and quantitative, in the needs of Member States using nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. To maintain their present excellence, the 
Agency's activities should be kept under continuous critical review and should 
receive the support of all Member States, particularly those with the widest 
experience and the most advanced nuclear power programmes. In the Agency's 
long-term programme, emphasis had shifted from simple exploitation of 
radiation to nuclear electricity generation. Finland welcomed that trend, 
though it had to be recognized that a large number of Member States were more 
interested in other applications. The Agency should be able to provide advice 
and assistance concerning not only the advantages but also the problems 
connected with nuclear electricity generation and other projects requiring 
substantial investments. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 21 


69. Finland welcomed the results of the technical co-operation policy review 
conducted by the Board. It was financial problems that had limited the 
possibilities of technical co-operation. Finland supported the financing of 
technical co-operation programmes through voluntary contributions but believed 
that the targets should be increased. It had pledged its full share for 1984 
and would continue to provide certain extrabudgetary resources for the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities. 
70. The structure of Finland's nuclear industry was special in that Finland 
bought all the uranium and fuel cycle services it needed from other countries, 
not only from principal suppliers but also from many other countries, in the 
East and the West. Hie main components for nuclear power plants had been 
imported, an arrangement which had given Finland unique expertise and enabled 
it to assist the Agency more and more in transferring knowledge on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in particular to countries where the nuclear 
and technical infrastructure was limited and which were dependent, like 
Finland, on supplies from abroad. 
71. The Finnish national economy had considerably benefited from nuclear 
power, and its nuclear power plants were operating highly satisfactorily. 
Concern regarding the safe operation of nuclear reactors had been alleviated 
to some extent, but the problem of waste management had come very much to the 
forefront of public debate and had in turn affected considerations regarding 
acceptable solutions for the back-end of the fuel cycle. Nuclear safety and 
nuclear waste management were two areas of concern which were not specific to 
any one country, and Finland hoped to benefit from information collected and 
disseminated by the Agency. Finland would like to see the Agency become a 
major centre for attempts to reach a world-wide consensus on certain aspects 
of safety and waste management which could greatly influence decisions on the 
large-scale use of nuclear energy and its acceptability in all countries, 
since many of them faced the same problem. 
72. Finland welcomed the new steps which, in addition to the almost-completed 
nuclear safety standards programme, had been taken recently by the Agency in 
the field of nuclear safety. Reports on nuclear safety were now published 
regularly each year, and the International Incident Reporting System, which 
was already operating between Member States of the Nuclear Energy Agency of 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 22 


OECD, could be extended to all Member States of the Agency. He hoped that 
such a step would help to alleviate concern and improve the already laudable 
safety record of nuclear energy. The idea of developing nuclear safety 
philosophies and basic safety criteria within the Agency was worth 
consideration. A high-level commission of worldwide composition, established 
through the Agency, could be of great benefit to all Member States, and not 
only to those which were in an early stage of their m{]{cear power programmes. 


73. Finland had followed with interest and had actively participated in the 
Agency's work in the field of nuclear waste management, and felt confident 
that the results would be valuable. The International Conference on Nuclear 
Waste Management in May 1983 had been successful. The idea, mentioned by the 
Director General in his statement, of establishing internationally accepted 
generic criteria for waste disposal deserved serious attention. 
74. The Agency's safeguards activities were one of its most important tasks. 
According to the annual report for 1982, nuclear material under Agency 
safeguards in 1982 had been used in peaceful nuclear activities or had been 
otherwise adequately accounted for. That was a welcome result. A matter for 
concern, however, was to be seen in the fact that four non-nuclear-weapon 
States had unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, in operation or under 
construction, which could produce material for military purposes. It was 
essential, as his delegation had emphasized on a number of occasions, that all 
nuclear material in non-nuclear-weapon States should be used only under 
international safeguards. 
75. In order for the Agency's safeguards to be applied universally, the 
acceptance of "full-scope safeguards" should be a prerequisite for nuclear 
exports to non-nuclear-weapon States. States submitting all their activities 
to international safeguards should, in return, not only be given preferential 
treatment and receive the fullest possible assurances of supply from the 
supplying States, but also receive security assurances eliminating the danger 
of nuclear threats from nuclear-weapon States. He recalled his Government's 
suggestion that common export requirements should be complemented by common 
import requirements. Member States could commit themselves to buy nuclear 
material and other equipment only from those countries which followed nuclear 
export policies designed to prevent proliferation. A comprehensive framework 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 2 3 


combining assurances of supply and non-proliferation could be established. 
That subject should be examined as soon as possible. 


76. The Committee on Assurances of Supply had been working for more than 
three years. Finland was glad that it had reached a consensus on emergency 
and back-up mechanisms. Progress had also been made in discussions on the 
principles for assuring nuclear supply on a more predictable and long-term 
basis. Finland regretted that the Committee had not reached agreement on 
non-proliferation conditions to be applied in nuclear co-operation and trade. 
Resolution 37/167 of the General Assembly, on the United Nations Conference 
for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of 
Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE), had regrettably cut the essential link between 
preparations for the Conference and the results of the work being done by 
CAS. The work of the Committee should nevertheless be pursued. By its very 
nature CAS was a central political forum for discussions on the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. The factual situation in that field was continuously 
changing, thus adding new aspects to the work of the Committee. 
77. The Expert Group on International Plutonium Storage (IPS) had completed 
its work in October 1982 and submitted its report to the Director General. 
Finland awaited with interest the decision by the Board of Governors 
concerning further development of the IPS concept, which would be an important 
addition to the Agency's safeguards system. 
78. The Preparatory Committee for UNCPICPUNE had not yet reached agreement on 
an agenda and rules of procedure, so the Conference had, regrettably, been 
postponed. Some basic political differences lay behind the formal arguments. 
Under such conditions, it would be reasonable to consider the possibility of 
postponing preparatory work on the Conference for some time. 
7 9. Preparations for the Third NPT Review Conference were also under way. 
The success of the Conference would depend to some extent on the result of the 
Geneva negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States on 
strategic and medium-range nuclear forces. Also, it was very important to 
make further progress in efforts to negotiate a complete nuclear test ban 
treaty. Not all the objectives of the Non-Proliferation Treaty had yet been 
achieved, particularly with regard to the so-called vertical proliferation 
referred to in Article IV of the Treaty. His Government believed that that 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 24 


fact did not detract from the value of NPT in preventing horizontal 
proliferation. The Agency was continuing to provide technical assistance, in 
the nuclear field, to developing countries; Finland supported that activity 
and believed that it should be regarded also as a contribution to the 
implementation of Article IV of NPT. 


8 0. Finland was very interested in the Agency's work. That interest was 
quite natural in view of the fact that nuclear power in Finland accounted for 
over 40% of total electricity production. The Finnish parliament would 
shortly be considering a bill for comprehensive nuclear energy legislation 
which concerned, amongst other issues, decision-making procedures on new 
nuclear power plants and the financing of nuclear waste management by the 
power companies. Finland was, of course, ready to share its experience in 
that area with other countries. 
81. Member States of the United Nations had entrusted the Agency with the 
task of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and Finland therefore 
considered the Agency, as an autonomous international organization, to be an 
ideal international forum for developing the principles to govern the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. It would be necessary to strengthen the role of the 
Agency in that respect as well as its functions in implementing safeguards and 
carrying out other tasks entrusted to it. 
The meeting was suspended at 5 p.m. and resumed at 8.45 p.m. 


82. Mr BARUTCU (Turkey) stressed the important contribution to the Agency's 
universality which the membership of the People's Republic of China would 
make; he trusted that China would fulfil all its statutory obligations and 
enjoy the rights and privileges that derived from the Agency's Statute. 
8 3. States were becoming increasingly dependent on each other in most 
international transactions, particularly in the field of nuclear energy. In 
that sense the IAEA provided a unique mechanism, for it was the only universal 
institution which was directly and solely involved in international nuclear 
co-operation. Its dual functions - promotional activities on the one hand 
and regulatory activities on the other - generated confidence among both 
supplier and recipient Member States. The expansion of nuclear energy was 
consequently being ensured, through the Agency's surveillance, against 
possible non-peaceful applications. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 2 5 


84. As the Agency's work covered such a broad range of subjects, one had to 
concentrate upon what seemed to be the most important items. One such item 
was the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), whose tenth 
session was due to be held in December 1983 in Vienna. He was pleased to 
note the substantial progress achieved during the ninth session of CAS. 
Although some brackets in some of the "Principles of international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear energy" remained, the Committee had been 
able to accept reformulations of several draft principles. That was a major 
achievement for CAS, and the Committee deserved congratulation. In addition, 
adoption of CAS Working Group 2's report on "Emergency and back-up mechanisms" 
was a meaningful achievement which opened the way for the implementation by 
the Agency of such a mechanism. He hoped that subsequent sessions of CAS 
would demonstrate a similar flexible and constructive approach, leading to 
greater agreement in all areas of the Committee's work. More progress in CAS 
would undoubtedly have repercussions on the work of other international fora, 
such as the Third NPT Review Conference and UNCPICPUNE, due to take place in 
1985 and 1986 respectively. 
85. With regard to the implementation of the Agency's technical assistance 
and co-operation programmes, he was happy to note that the total delivery of 
assistance by the Agency in 1982 had amounted to US $40 million - 18% more 
than the 1981 figure. He was also happy to note that extrabudgetary 
contributions had reached a record level of US $9 million in 1982. 
Consequently, the implementation of footnote a/ projects had doubled, 
representing 63% of the value of all requests in that category. Contributors 
of extrabudgetary funds and contributors in kind would, he hoped, continue to 
act in 1983 as they had done in 1982. 
8 6. He noted with satisfaction the increase in the total number of 
assignments carried out in 1982 by experts but regretted the fact that in 
1982, according to document GC(XXVII)/INF/212, 1197 man-months of expert 
services had remained undelivered. The timely recruitment and assignment of 
experts were extremely important for recipient countries, as delays impeded 
the implementation of projects. However, he was grateful to the Agency for 
the technical assistance delivered for his country's projects, in 1982 as in 
1983. The Agency's new methods of delivering technical assistance and the 
concepts of dynamic programming, over-programming and multi-year projects 
deserved support. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 26 


87. Turkey's voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1984 would be in proportion to its base rate of 
assessment. 
88. As to the energy situation in Turkey, demand had been increasing at a 
rate of 12% per year; installed capacity in 1982 had reached 6640 MW; and 
production had attained 27 114 GWh, which undoubtedly represented quite a 
small per capita figure when compared with other European countries. It was 
expected that installed capacity would reach 39 000 MW by the year 2000, and 
that production would reach 165 000 GWh. When those targets were achieved, 
the average per capita electricity figure would reach 2300 kWh. Hydraulic 
potential was estimated to be approximately 100 000 GWh. Lignite resources 
were estimated at 6 billion tons. If 80% of the country's hydroelectric 
potential was to be used, hydro power stations with an aggregate capacity of 
20 000 MW would have to be built. Assuming that further lignite power 
stations with a capacity of 13 000 MW were added, that would still leave a gap 
of 6000 MW to be filled by nuclear power. Such a figure had appeared to be 
beyond his country's capabilities and had consequently been halved, so a 
programme to create 3000 MW of installed nuclear capacity had been initiated. 
89. Turkey was endeavouring to complete plans for the construction of its 
first nuclear power station, and to that end had been studying various offers 
made by major exporters. A decision by the Turkish Government would 
determine the type of reactor to be constructed. The country's proven 
thorium reserves were of the order of 380 000 tonnes; in addition, 
500 000 tonnes of possible reserves had been estimated. Research aimed at 
the eventual use of those reserves had already been initiated, and he believed 
the Agency's contribution in that connection would be most valuable. The 
existence of thorium reserves in Turkey augured well for further uranium 
potential, and uranium prospecting was continuing. He believed that uranium 
reserves would reach 10 000 tonnes as a result of future surveys, scheduled 
for 1984. 
90. Plans also existed for yellow cake production parallel to the 
construction of the first nuclear power station. The Agency's co-operation 
in that field would be highly appreciated by his Government. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 27 


91. Commenting on the relationship between nuclear trade and 
non-proliferation concerns, he expressed his conviction that nuclear trade and 
the nuclear market should in no way be affected by the concerns of 
non-proliferation. Mutual confidence and liberal trade on a 
non-discriminatory basis would pave the way for a smoothly functioning market 
mechanism, which would in turn contribute to the progress of developing 
countries and also benefit the economies of the exporting countries. 
92. In conclusion, he reiterated his conviction that the Agency would 
continue to play its unique role in developing and expanding nuclear 
co-operation amongst its Members. 
9 3. Mr. GROZA (Romania) welcomed the admission of the People's Republic 
of China to the Agency, which would strengthen the Agency's analytical and 
decision-making ability and increase its universality. 
94. The present session of the General Conference was taking place in a tense 
international climate and at a time of unprecedented escalation of the arms 
race which threatened the peace, independence and lives of all peoples. The 
Romanian delegation felt great concern at the extremely harmful effects of the 
arms race on the social and economic development of all States, and in 
particular on that of the developing countries. 
9 5. The President of the Socialist Republic of Romania had stressed that the 
fundamental problem of the present time was to stop the arms race and to bring 
about disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament. 
96. There could be no possible justification for an armaments policy. 
Everything should be done to stop the stationing in Europe, in 198 3, of 
medium-range nuclear weapons, and those weapons which already existed should 
be withdrawn and destroyed. 
97. Firm action was necessary to remove force and the threat of force from 
international relations and to resolve all problems and conflicts between 
States through peaceful negotiations. At the present time the most pressing 
need was to avert war, to preserve peace and the security and life of all 
peoples, and to eliminate the threat of a nuclear catastrophe. 
98. Romania believed that efforts should be stepped up to strengthen the role 
of the United Nations specialized agencies in the fight against 
underdevelopment and for the establishment of a new international economic 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 28 


order, and to increase the contribution made by science and technology to the 
social and economic development of nations, particularly the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. 


99. Romania was a strong advocate of promoting the unhampered transfer of 
nuclear technology, materials and equipment to non-nuclear countries, and of 
wide, unrestricted access for all countries - regardless of size, level of 
development or social system - to the achievements of science and modern 
technology, and to all peaceful applications of nuclear energy. It was 
necessary to create conditions which would enable developing countries to 
benefit fully from those achievements in attempting to eliminate 
underdevelopment, to exploit national resources and to make rapid economic and 
social progress. To that end it was necessary to strengthen international 
co-operation on the basis of full equality, respect for independence and 
national sovereignty, and non-interference in States' internal affairs, to the 
mutual benefit of all concerned. He therefore urged Member States to do 
everything in their power to enhance the Agency's contribution towards wide 
international co-operation for developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
100. Romania, in accordance with its view that all disputes between States 
should be resolved through negotiations, had strongly condemned the air raid 
carried out by Israeli forces on the nuclear research centre in Iraq. 
101. The Romanian Government appreciated the Agency's work during the last 
year, notably its achievements in nuclear power, technical assistance and 
co-operation, training of national staff, nuclear safety, and the social and 
economic applications of nuclear techniques and methods. At the same time, 
it believed that a policy should be pursued which would result in a more 
efficient use of material and financial resources, particularly for those 
activities associated with the Agency's basic function of promoting 
international co-operation and supporting the efforts of Member States, 
particularly those of developing countries, in introducing and developing 
nuclear power. 
102. His delegation wished to reiterate the request it had made in the Board, 
in June, for a strict system of economies, the most efficient use of funds 
possible, the elimination of all non-economic expenses, and a substantial 
reduction of the funds set aside for regulatory activities and 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 29 


administration. In that way, it believed, the 1984 budget could be reduced 
by 1.2% or at least remain the same as the 1983 budget. Unless that were 
achieved, Romania could not support adoption of the budget. 


10 3. He expressed the hope that the Secretariat would make efficient use of 
the 1984 budgetary funds and would have achieved substantial economies by the 
end of the financial year. 
104. Romania aimed to become independent in terms of energy and to supply most 
of its own raw material needs by the end of the present decade. 
Consequently, in its priority programmes particular emphasis was being placed 
on the intensive development of energy and raw materials, nuclear power 
included. Scientific and technological research had been strengthened with a 
view to the development of advanced industries, particularly those related to 
nuclear power, chemistry, microelectronics, electronics and electrotechnics, 
automation, and high-alloy steels. Romania was also giving special attention 
to fundamental research. Its research, technical engineering, design and 
production in the field of nuclear energy and physics were all directed to 
exploiting the country's natural resources, producing the new products and 
materials that could be derived from modern technology, developing new sources 
of energy, and improving existing technology. 
105. The previous year, his Government had taken steps to accelerate the 
construction of nuclear power stations and to increase the country's installed 
nuclear capacity. In 1990 the installed nuclear capacity would be 
4500 MW and by 1995 would rise to 9600 MW. The Cernavoda nuclear power 
station would have 5 units, each with an installed capacity of 660 MW. 
Construction of the first two units was progressing smoothly and the first 
unit was due to be put into operation in 1986. A similar power station, 
construction of which was to begin the following year, would be sited in 
Transylvania, and one or two units would be operational by 1990. The third 
power station, with three units, each of 1000 MW, would be sited in Moldavia, 
and its first unit was scheduled to go into service in 1990. 
106. There had been fruitful co-operation in the past year between Romania and 
the Agency. He appreciated the efficient technical assistance which had 
helped Romania solve a number of major technological problems and problems of 
applied and fundamental research. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 30 


10 7. In conclusion, he expressed Romania's continued support for the Agency, 
along with the hope that the Agency would make ever larger contributions 
towards solving the problems of its Member States, particularly developing 
countries, so that they could benefit fully from the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy in their social and economic development. 
108. Mr. DALKHSUREN (Mongolia) said that the world was going through a 
critical phase marked by attempts of reactionary forces to gain supremacy in 
the world by means of an unprecedented build-up of nuclear armaments. The 
socialist countries, by contrast, were putting forward peace proposals aimed 
at limiting, reducing and, eventually, totally eliminating nuclear 
armaments. His delegation was especially concerned at the reluctance of a 
certain State and its allies to enter into an agreement on a complete and 
general nuclear test ban. The IAEA should act on its mandate in that regard 
and encourage negotiations on the reduction of nuclear armaments. 
10 9. As a signatory of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, Mongolia was concerned at 
the continuing difficulties in securing its full implementation and urged the 
Agency to intensify its efforts in that regard. In particular, a number of 
so-called threshold countries had still not acceded to the Treaty, which 
limited its effectiveness and universality. He shared the concern expressed 
by the Director General at the opening of the Conference session and urged all 
Member States that had not yet done so to sign agreements on safeguards with 
the Agency as soon as possible. 
110. In connection with the Israeli attack on an Iraqi research reactor in 
1981, he recalled the proposal made by the Soviet Union at the thirty-seventh 
session of the United Nations General Assembly to the effect that conventional 
military attacks on nuclear installations should be regarded as equivalent to 
a nuclear attack, in other words as a most serious assault on mankind. The 
attack in question had been launched in defiance of the Agency's safeguards 
system, which was the basis of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Mongolia 
condemned Israel's refusal to put its nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards and for its aggressive policy generally. His delegation was in 
favour of imposing unmitigated sanctions against Israel under Article VII of 
the United Nations Charter. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 31 


111. His delegation continued to support the idea of giving priority in 
technical assistance to those countries which had signed the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty and had entered into safeguards agreements with the Agency. That idea 
represented an important moral and political factor enhancing the 
responsibility of the Agency in the field of technical co-operation. His 
country was a beneficiary of the Agency's technical assistance programme and 
wholeheartedly endorsed the Agency's activities in that field. In 
particular, it welcomed the decision of the Board of Governors to recommend an 
increase in the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund to $22.5 million in 
1984, and also the indicative planning figures for subsequent years. 
Mongolia, for its part, would continue to make its voluntary contribution to 
the Fund. His delegation still believed that technical assistance should be 
directed towards the least developed countries in the first place and that 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund should be made 
on a voluntary basis. 
112. He was convinced that the Agency could benefit from the considerable 
experience of the socialist countries in a variety of areas and that its 
co-operation with the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance and the Joint 
Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna could and should be intensified. 
113. In the draft budget for 1984, his delegation approved the sections 
dealing with safeguards, nuclear power, nuclear safety, the further 
development of INIS, and technical assistance. His country was grateful for 
the Agency's assistance in preparing national programmes for the utilization 
of atomic energy and hoped it would continue in the future. He was glad to 
note that in the current year highly qualified Agency experts had been to 
Mongolia on study and training missions to introduce recent innovations in 
nuclear science. A number of radioimmunological laboratories using 
radioisotopes for medical diagnosis were already in operation and work on the 
establishment of a radiobiology laboratory in Darkhan had commenced with 
direct assistance from the Agency. 
114. In conclusion, he extended his best wishes to the Secretariat for 
continuing success in its work and expressed the wish that the current 
Conference session would make a contribution to peaceful co-operation among 
nations in the field of science. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 32 


115. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) said that, when he had first taken the 
floor at a Conference session, in 1963, there had been a general feeling that 
the work of a technical organization such as the Agency should not be 
paralysed by cold war politics. The current resumption of the cold war 
coincided with a worrying tendency within the IAEA to conduct debates from 
entrenched positions and a lack of co-operative spirit quite out of keeping 
with the Agency's traditional image of technical pragmatism. A compromise of 
the kind that had brought about the Agency's safeguards system no longer 
appeared possible in the prevailing atmosphere of "all or nothing". 
116. One example of that trend was the protracted discussion on the Israeli 
attack on a nuclear research reactor in Iraq. If that fruitless debate was to 
be brought to an end at last, two things would have to be understood: on the 
one hand, it must be realized that nuclear reactors were not military targets 
and never should be, and that compensation should be paid for the incident in 
question; and, on the other hand, that no matter how regrettable and 
reprehensible the first attack of that kind had been, it should not be used as 
a pretext to engage in Middle East politics within the IAEA. 
117. Another contentious point was the Agency's safeguards system. It was 
essential to do everything possible to prevent the abuse of nuclear research 
and development activities for military purposes. Reservations of Governments 
about the programme were increasing, however, because some felt that a 
disproportionate amount of resources was being allocated to safeguards. In 
order to remedy that situation, the Secretariat had launched a praiseworthy 
rationalization programme which, however, was encountering rather surprising 
procedural obstacles on the part of some Member Governments. While some 
suppliers of nuclear material and services were understandably reluctant to 
disclose sensitive information, there could surely be no reason why financial 
reports and descriptive information on material balances should not be duly 
forwarded. A willingness on the part of Governments to co-operate and to 
compromise was more important than ever at a time when inspections were 
revealing an increasing number of discrepancies and anomalies. That trend 
became all the more worrying if there was reason to believe that it indicated 
a concerted strategy for the diversion of civil nuclear material for military 
purposes. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 3 3 


118. A related problem was the degree of confidence to be placed in the 
Secretariat's conclusions on safeguards. That depended not only on the terms 
of the safeguards agreements with the various States and operators of nuclear 
facilities but also on the financial and staff resources and equipment 
available to the Agency. Taken in their entirety, those conclusions presented 
a surprising degree of uncertainty. The problem therefore consisted in 
finding the right balance between reducing the uncertainty inherent in the 
existing system as quickly as possible and avoiding undue budgetary burdens. 
One possible solution might be to renegotiate some of the safeguards 
agreements so as to simplify the task of inspectors and thus reduce the 
Agency's costs. Again, that proposal required a certain amount of good will 
on all sides. 
119. Other areas of disagreement in which both sides were becoming 
increasingly intransigent were the financing of technical assistance and the 
proposed amendment to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. With regard to the 
latter, it would be useful if the African Group withdrew its demand for three 
seats on the Board of Governors, with two for South Asia and the Middle East, 
and agreed to a compromise solution that was more acceptable to some of the 
European countries. 
120. All the problems he had mentioned were amenable to compromise. If it had 
been possible in the past, there was no reason why it should not be possible 
again. 
121. In conclusion, he repeated an idea he had put forward some years 
previously, to the effect that the general debate could be considerably 
shortened if delegations submitted technical details on their nuclear 
programmes to the Secretariat in writing. 
122. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) welcomed the admission of the People's 
Republic of China to the Agency and was sure that the Agency would benefit 
from China's experience in the field of nuclear energy. 
123. In 1982, 86% of Morocco's primary energy consumption and 70% of its 
electricity needs had been covered by imported oil products. The dependence 
on imported oil was likely to increase as a result of an average annual 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 34 


increase in consumption of 6% for primary energy and 9% for electricity. 
Consequently, it was necessary to implement an energy policy adapted to the 
new situation created by the rise in oil prices. 


124. The National Energy Plan had been based on a number of guidelines, among 
which the most important were (1) rapid mobilization of the country's 
unexploited hydro potential, representing 2.8 million MWh out of a total 
4.6 million MWh; (2) development of research on and exploitation of national 
coal reserves; (3) exploitation of national natural gas resources and 
increased research on hydrocarbons; (4) use of imported coal in preference to 
oil, particularly for producing electricity in thermal power stations; 
(5) exploitation of bituminuous schists; (6) exploitation of uranium 
contained in phosphates and introduction of nuclear power for long-term 
electricity production; (7) development of renewable energy sources such as 
solar energy, wind energy and biomass to help meet local needs, particularly 
in isolated areas a long way from electricity grids; and (8) rationalization 
of energy consumption and encouragement of energy savings in both the 
industrial and the domestic sector. 
12 5. National energy sources currently exploited had, so far, only been able 
to meet a small fraction of the country's energy needs. The use of nuclear 
energy to produce electricity appeared to be a viable alternative and was 
better than importing coal. The uranium content of Moroccan phosphates was a 
major asset, and nuclear energy was more economical than traditional forms of 
energy. 
126. Following the two Agency missions which had advised the National 
Electricity Office on aspects of "planning" and "preparation for site 
selection studies", Morocco had thought it wise to secure the services of a 
specialist to deal with all the studies (feasibility, site selection and so 
on) required up to the point of establishing the call for tenders to build, on 
a "turnkey" basis, the first power station in the country's nuclear power 
programme. To that end a site and feasibility study agreement had just been 
signed with the Societe Frangaise d'Etudes et de Realisations Nucleaires 
(SOFRATOME). 



GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 3 5 


127. Morocco attached great importance to research on and the extraction of 
uranium. Uranium prospecting had revealed promising areas. Research carried 
out by OCP (the national phosphate authority) since 1974 on uranium extraction 
from phosphates during the production of phosphoric acid had enabled an 
ambitious programme to be set up which aimed, in the medium term (by 1990), at 
an annual extraction of 500 tonnes of uranium oxide in yellow-cake form, 
rising to 1000 tonnes by the end of the century. 
12 8. Morocco's Ministry of Energy and Mines had acquired a TRIGA MARK I 
research reactor of 100 kW which later on could operate at much higher power 
levels. That reactor, designed for teaching and fundamental research as well 
as training national staff, was now to be installed at the Rabat National 
School of the Mineral Industry. Morocco would be wanting the Agency's 
assistance at different stages of the project, and particularly at the final 
stage when formulating the safety report, putting the reactor into operation 
and arranging any necessary staff training. Studies on the project, which 
obviously would have an essential role to play, particularly in view of the 
long-term nuclear power programme, had been given to the National Electricity 
Office. 
129. A successful interregional seminar on nuclear law and regulatory matters 
had been held at Rabat from 30 May to 4 June 1983; it had dealt in particular 
with the regulatory questions involved in preparing and implementing a nuclear 
power programme. 
13 0. The introduction of atomic energy in Morocco covered many vital sectors 
of the national economy such as agriculture, health, geology and electricity 
production. Morocco would require the Agency's assistance in implementing its 
nuclear programme, particularly in the areas of research and training, and the 
framing of safety regulations for its nuclear installations. 
131. He hoped that all countries in a position similar to Morocco's would be 
supported by the Agency, and by all advanced countries, without threat or 
constraint. 
132. Morocco shared the concern of previous speakers that the Agency's 
technical and scientific vocation should not be disrupted by extraneous issues. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 36 


13 3. However, one could not help observing Israel's continuing refusal to make 
any amends for the outrage to the world's conscience and the damage to the 
credibility of the Agency's safeguards system caused by its attack on the 
Iraqi nuclear research reactor, and its threat to repeat such aggression 
against Iraq or any other Arab State if that was deemed to be in Israel's 
interests. The consequences of not resolving the issue satisfactorily could 
be very serious. The request of the Iraqi delegation to bring the issue 
before the Conference had been prompted not by any desire to disrupt the 
Conference's work but by the belief that Israel's aggression remained a matter 
of contemporary concern. Israel's aggressive intentions could hardly be 
better illustrated than by an article in the magazine "Jeune Afrique" of 
19 September reporting an interview with Mr. Begin, in which the latter had 
said that the destruction of the Iraqi nuclear research reactor was the 
action, during his six years as Prime Minister, to which he attached the 
greatest importance and in which he took the greatest pride. Thus the issue 
of Israel's military attack must remain open until a just solution, in keeping 
with international moral sensibilities, had been found to protect the rights 
of the victim of the aggression and the credibility of the Agency. 
134. The General Conference was called upon, for the third time, to assume its 
responsibilities in putting an end to the arrogance of a country which, like 
South Africa, sought to benefit fully from the advantages offered by the 
Agency without submitting to its fundamental principles. 
13 5. Mr. 2ANGGER (Switzerland) said that his delegation welcomed the 
admission of the People's Republic of China to the Agency, an event which 
represented a major step towards the universality of the international nuclear 
community. 
13 6. As in most other countries, the most serious obstacles to nuclear 
development in Switzerland were the misgivings of some sections of the public, 
economic stagnation and restricted access to various fuel cycle services. 
However, his Government had achieved some success in dealing with those 
problems. For instance, 30% of Switzerland's electricity needs were covered 
by its four nuclear power plants, a further nuclear power plant - with a 
capacity of 1000 MW(e) - was to be commissioned, at Leibstadt, in 1984, and 
progress had been made in the geological research programme for the storage of 
radioactive waste. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 37 


137. However, it was expected that a referendum consequent on an anti-nuclear 
initiative aimed at banning all construction of nuclear power plants in the 
future would be conducted in 1984, five years after the first referendum of 
its kind. That initiative was also, by implication, directed against the 
planned construction of a plant at Kaiseraugst. The Swiss Government had 
firmly rejected the initiative, which it felt would seriously restrict its 
freedom of manoeuvre in shaping an energy policy. 
13 8. Turning to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
he noted that three years previously INFCE's results had been published and 
submitted to the Committee on Assurances of Supply, whose main task it was to 
harmonize non-proliferation guarantees and assurances of supply in a dynamic 
equilibrium; at the same time, the Second NPT Review Conference had come to 
an end after narrowly avoiding a complete impasse. The poor results of the 
latter were due chiefly to its failure to achieve the balance foreseen by NPT, 
namely that between non-proliferation on the one hand and, on the other, the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the development of international 
co-operation in nuclear affairs. While it was undeniable that the parts of 
the Treaty concerning non-proliferation had operated well during the first 
decade of its existence, fresh, increasingly restrictive non-proliferation 
measures applicable to both parties and non-parties were continually being 
introduced and inevitably hampered the development of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Furthermore, there 
seemed to be no real hope of a substantial improvement in the situation. 
13 9. His delegation felt obliged to point out that proliferation was primarily 
a political issue. No non-proliferation system could prove successful without 
offering the participating States convincing benefits in return. Those 
benefits should take on tangible form, both in peaceful nuclear co-operation 
and in nuclear disarmament, as provided by NPT. 
140. The Swiss delegation wished to commend the Agency on its success in 
applying the safeguards system. 
141. Referring to the Director General's statement, he noted his delegation's 
satisfaction at the appeal which it contained to ratify Additional Protocol I 
to the Geneva Conventions, the aim of which was to improve the protection of 
civilian populations in the event of an armed conflict. The Swiss 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 38 


Government, which was the depositary of the Geneva Conventions and Additional 
Protocols and which had convened the diplomatic conferences resulting in those 
instruments, hoped that as many States as possible would ratify the Protocols. 


14 2. The Agency's work in nuclear safety was valuable, and he was particularly 
pleased to acknowledge the importance and usefulness of the safety codes and 
guides for the commonest types of nuclear power plant, the preparation of 
international assistance measures to be taken in the event of a nuclear 
emergency (of interest to small countries and to those with plants located 
near a frontier), research into the risks presented by nuclear power as 
compared with other energy sources and, lastly, the international exchange of 
information and experience on incidents at specific facilities. 
143. International co-operation in radioactive waste management was also 
particularly important. The first task facing the Agency was to establish as 
quickly as possible the feasibility of disposal systems of proven long-term 
reliability. His delegation was actively encouraging the initiatives already 
taken by the Agency. Joint demonstration projects should then be carried out 
with a view to enhancing public acceptance of nuclear power. Finally, the 
long-term aim of international co-operation should be to construct 
multinational waste repositories in areas offering the best technical safety 
conditions. 
14 4. Turning to nuclear research and development in Switzerland, he outlined 
the work being carried out by the Federal Reactor Research Institute, at 
Wiirenlingen, which was mainly concerned with three areasr safety and the 
environment, the technology of advanced reactor concepts and the fuel cycle. 
In the first area, the Institute was endeavouring to determine with greater 
precision the safety margins of present-generation reactors and to gain a 
deeper understanding of various specific phenomena. As to the technology of 
advanced concepts, work was in progress - using the PROTEUS reactor - on the 
physics of advanced pressurized-water reactors with a view to improving fuel 
utilization and the recycling of plutonium in light-water plants. Other 
research related to high-temperature reactors and breeder reactors. 
14 5. In the third area, the Institute at Wiirenlingen had developed a new type 
of fuel, consisting of mixed uranium and plutonium carbides in the form of 
microspheres. 

GC{XXVII)/OR.254 
page 39 


146. With respect to radioactive waste management, the National Co-operative 
for Radioactive Waste Storage (CEDRA) was currently engaged in drilling 
boreholes in crystalline subsoils with a view to identifying suitable sites 
for the construction of deep repositories for high-level radioactive waste. 
Three shallow-ground sites were also under study, for the disposal of low- and 
intermediate-level radioactive wastes. 
147. The most important task facing the Federal Institute of Atomic 
Engineering, at Lausanne, was to design a hybrid "fusion-fission" reactor 
operating with an intense fast-neutron source and producing uranium-233 and 
tritium. That experiment had been made possible through a loan by the Bhabha 
Centre of 1600 barrels of thorium oxide, for which his delegation wished to 
thank the Indian Government. 
148. In the field of thermonuclear fusion, a priority area in Swiss research, 
investigations were being carried out within the context of the EURATOM 
programmes, the JET (Joint European Torus) project and IEA (International 
Energy Agency) programmes. Switzerland's nuclear industry was closely 
associated with the work of the Federal Institutes and would be delivering one 
of the six large superconductor coils for the "Large Coil TASK" project being 
conducted by IEA at Oak Ridge. 
149. Swiss industry was also active in the promotion of fission energy and had 
been primarily engaged in the development of the high-temperature reactor in 
collaboration with the Federal Republic of Germany. In that connection, it 
hoped to concentrate on the new HTR-500 project. 
150. In conclusion, he stated his delegation's view that the best approach to 
resolving the many problems facing the international community in the nuclear 
sphere lay in multilateral co-operation on the widest possible scale. The 
Agency was the most appropriate forum for such co-operation. The 
interdependence of countries in nuclear affairs should serve to promote the 
cause of international co-operation and, ultimately, a rapprochement among the 
peoples of the world. 
151. Mr. WANGURU (Kenya) congratulated the People's Republic of China on 
its admission to the Agency. China's great human resources, its nuclear 
capability, and its contribution to peace in Asia, Africa and other parts of 
the world, were familiar to all. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 40 


15 2. Technical assistance received from the Agency had enabled Kenya to set up 
the Centre for Nuclear Techniques at the University of Nairobi, and also a 
department of nuclear medicine at Kenya's National Hospital which had 
developed diagnostic techniques and advanced methods of cancer treatment. 
Kenya hoped to receive further assistance in establishing two more centres. 
Agency assistance had also proved valuable in connection with the introduction 
of non-destructive quality control tests for highway and building materials, 
which had reduced testing times and hence the cost of road construction. 
Nuclear techniques were being used more intensively in agriculture, too, 
notably in animal health control and veterinary science. 
153. As to the Agency's accounts for 1982 (GC(XXVII)/685), statement V.B. on 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund showed unliquidated obligations 
amounting to US $11 098 791 at the end of 1982, which represented 
approximatley 74% of total obligations for the year - a high figure, linked 
presumably with the problem of recruiting experts and placing fellows. For 
some fellowships awarded in Kenya back in 1980 or 1981 suitable institutions 
had still not been found. He accordingly wanted to appeal to Member States 
with appropriate facilities to give as much assistance as possible, so that 
Kenya could place its fellows and develop its nuclear science activities. 
154. The six-year delay in reaching a decision on the question of increased 
representation on the Board of the geographical areas at present 
under-represented was most regrettable, and he urged that the question be 
resolved rapidly. A point to be noted was that certain specialized agencies 
of the United Nations had larger governing bodies than the Agency. 
15 5. Kenya, with no evidence of any fossil fuel of its own and limited hydro 
and geothermal capacity, was anticipating an energy shortage in the near 
future if population growth continued as expected and if it tried to maintain 
the planned economic growth rate and improved the quality of life as desired. 
The Agency's assistance would be most valuable in any analysis of the 
feasibility of introducing nuclear power in Kenya. 
156. The Agency did not appear to have been very successful in securing public 
acceptance of nuclear power. An organized campaign with that goal might 
relieve Member States of heavy expenditure associated with national 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 41 


legislative measures and public relations efforts. Public confidence and the 
confidence of legislative bodies, particularly in operational safety and the 
management of nuclear wastes, were essential. 


157. While accepting complete and universal safeguards, all parties to NPT 
should have full access to nuclear material, equipment and information. The 
right to fuel cycle services guaranteed under NPT needed a clear, 
internationally acceptable definition. 
158. The Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities had been 
very successful, but more emphasis should be placed on multi-year programmes 
to encourage forward planning, as that would give projects a better chance of 
success. 
159. Kenya welcomed the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply. 
However, the mechanisms evolved to govern fuel supply should not be subject to 
political considerations nor to any compulsion in respect of quality, quantity 
or geographical location. 
16 0. Kenya appreciated the efforts being made to recruit Secretariat staff in 
accordance with the principle of broad geographical distribution, and believed 
that the training of safeguards inspectors from developing countries would 
help rectify the regional imbalance in that important department of the Agency. 
161. Mr. IONESCU CAZANA (Namibia) welcomed the admission of the People's 
Republic of China to membership of the IAEA. China was both a permanent 
member of the Security Council and a member of the United Nations Council for 
Namibia, and as such had a significant role to play in the preservation of 
world peace and security. 
162. He was sure that at its twenty-seventh session the General Conference 
would declare its resolve - a resolve that had been reaffirmed by the 
international community on many occasions - to work towards the 
self-determination and independence of Namibia. He was sure that the 
Conference would also condemn the fact that the people of Namibia, in an age 
in which mankind had achieved mastery of the atom, was still the victim of 
colonial exploitation by the racist regime of Pretoria. The march of history 
might be delayed, but it could never be halted, and one day it would record in 
its annals the victory of the valiant fighters of SWAPO and the Namibian 
people. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 42 


16 3. Referring to the section entitled "Matters of special interest to the 
Agency discussed by the General Assembly of the United Nations" in the 
introduction to the annual report for 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684), he noted that the 
General Assembly had welcomed the approval by the General Conference of 
Namibia for membership of the Agency. Namibia had in fact become a Member of 
the Agency on 17 February 1983, five months after the adoption of 
resolution GC(XXVI)/RES/393. In regard to the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities, he stressed the important role the Agency had to play in promoting 
and developing technical assistance projects in Namibia before independence, 
during the transition period, and after independence. 
164. The United Nations Council for Namibia, since its inception in 1967, had 
done its utmost to persuade the South African Government, by means of 
negotiations, to withdraw from the occupied territories. However, the racist 
regime of Pretoria, in defiance of the wishes of the international community, 
had hardened its position, thanks to the complicity of certain foreign 
economic interests which were reaping rich profits from the development of 
Namibia's natural resources. The growing demand for uranium had strengthened 
the determination of those foreign interests to manipulate the future of the 
territory in order to have a free hand in developing Namibian uranium. The 
Pretoria regime, which had no uranium resources, regarded it as of crucial 
importance to keep perpetual control over Namibian territory and its uranium 
reserves. 
16 5. The Paris Declaration on Namibia, adopted in April 1982, had strongly 
condemned the pillage of Namibian uranium, and had urged Governments whose 
nationals or companies were engaged in uranium trade or uranium enrichment to 
take immediate steps to prohibit any dealings in Namibian uranium, including 
any prospecting activities in Namibia. A decree issued by the United Nations 
Council for Namibia in 1974 on the protection of Namibia's natural resources 
provided that any contravention of the decree might lead to a demand for 
reparations on the part of any future government of an independent Namibia. 
166. At the hearings on Namibian uranium conducted by the United Nations 
Council for Namibia in July 1980, evidence had been presented that 
multinational companies in Namibia, such as those controlling the 
Rossing Uranium Mine, had no concern for the health and safety of Namibian 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 4 3 


workers or for the long-term effects of uranium mining on the health of the 


local people or on their environment. The lack of proper safety measures to 
protect black workers against the effects of radiation made the extraction, 
processing and transport of uranium extremely dangerous in Namibia. Those 
health risks also affected the population as a whole because of the ease with 
which pollution spread to the environment. The most common health risks were 
lung and skin cancer and genetic diseases. 


167. It had also been indicated in the course of the hearings that the owners 
of the Rossing Mines practised apartheid in the field of health care. Whereas 
the white workers had regular medical check-ups and proper health facilities, 
such was not the case for the black workers. The absence of proper protection 
created a very dangerous health situation for uranium miners, and the risk of 
genetic disease posed a threat to future generations of Namibians. 
168. As Legal Administering Authority for Namibia, the Council was continuing 
to monitor the activities of all States which maintained military and nuclear 
relations with South Africa, as well as the activities of all States and 
multinational companies which were contravening the obligatory arms embargo. 
It was aware that South Africa's membership of the IAEA, and in particular its 
participation in groups concerned with uranium under IAEA auspices, was 
facilitating that country's pillage of uranium and thus strengthening its 
nuclear capability. Since the development of that capability constituted a 
threat to the African region as a whole in view of the highly aggressive 
attitude of South Africa towards its neighbours, the Council wished to see 
Africa established as a nuclear-weapon-free zone under the terms of the 
Decalaration on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by the Assembly of 
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity in Cairo in 
July 1964. 
16 9. In conclusion, he drew the attention of the Conference to General 
Assembly resolution 37/233, which again requested all specialized agencies and 
other organizations of the United Nations system which had not yet done so to 
grant a waiver of the assessment of Namibia for as long as it continued to be 
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 44 


17 0. Mr. LEVRERO PUIG (Uruguay) said that Uruguay had pursued its 
efforts to set up a nuclear research and teaching centre in the near future. 
He noted with pleasure the assistance given by the Agency and the Argentine 
National Atomic Energy Commission in conducting feasibility studies. 
171. The Uruguayan National Atomic Energy Commission had continued to develop 
the use of nuclear techniques in medicine, agriculture and industry and to 
promote research and staff training. He thanked the Agency, Argentina, Chile, 
Spain and the United States of America for their help in providing specialists 
and teams as well as fellowships and study visits. 
172. As a result of that help, Uruguay could say with pride that its research 
and teaching institutes had been able to instruct fellows from other Latin 
American countries in nuclear medicine and radiochemistry. 
173. In return for aid received, Uruguay was now placing its experts at the 
disposal of the Agency for the implementation of technical assistance 
programmes and would continue to spread the knowledge and technology with 
which it had been so generously provided. 
174. Uruguay firmly supported the Agency's regional programmes. The 
activities of its National Atomic Energy Commission had been co-ordinated with 
those of Uruguayan industrial organizations and undertakings, and Uruguay was 
actively participating" in the regional programme on non-destructive testing in 
Latin America. 
17 5. He believed that such regional programmes should be enlarged and a 
Regional Nuclear Co-operation Agreement set up, as had first been proposed by 
Uruguay in 1979 at the twenty-third session of the General Conference. Such 
an agreement could, in Uruguay's view, be realized in the near future, and it 
would enable Latin America to emulate the work of the Agency and of Member 
States in other regions of the world. 
176. Article III of the Statute stated clearly that the Agency's main efforts 
should relate to technical assistance. Nevertheless, whereas safeguards were 
financed from the Regular Budget, technical assistance was still dependent on 
voluntary contributions. One must hope that consultations between the 
Director General and the Board of Governors would lead to equal treatment of 
safeguards and technical assistance, especially as the latter was of 
particular importance to developing countries. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 4 5 


177. Uruguay continued to believe that the various regions should be properly 
represented on the Board. That meant that, if Article VI of the Statute was 
to be amended, it should be revised in its totality, and no new version of the 
Article should reduce the existing proportion of seats occupied by 
Latin American countries. In fact, Uruguay also believed that the 
Latin American countries were insufficiently represented in the Secretariat, 
but it appreciated the efforts being made by the Director General to give 
preferential treatment to candidates from developing countries or other 
under-represented areas whose qualifications matched those of candidates from 
developed countries. Uruguay supported training programmes for young 
graduates from developing countries, which would increase the number of 
qualified candidates from such countries available for filling posts in the 
Agency. 
178. Before the admission of the People's Republic of China into the Agency, 
Uruguay had expressed its approval of making all international organizations 
more universal so that they would be better able to fulfil their objectives. 
179. In conclusion, he reiterated Uruguay's continuing support of the Agency 
and its gratitude for the help the Agency and other countries had given to 
Uruguay. 
180. Mr. de CASTELLO BRANCO (Portugal) welcomed the People's Republic of 
China to membership of the Agency. During the past year the Agency had 
achieved important results in the three principal areas of its activity, 
namely safeguards, nuclear safety and technical assistance. Portugal endorsed 
the Agency's efforts to bring more countries under the control of its 
safeguards system; it was in the interests of all mankind that those efforts 
should be continued and that the Agency should have the wholehearted support 
of the international community in its endeavours to build up an atmosphere of 
confidence and credibility in the field of safeguards. 
181. He was glad to note that according to the annual Nuclear Safety Review 
there was no need for any substantial change in the current approach to 
nuclear safety. As far as technical assistance was concerned, he considered 
the Agency's programme for the planning and implementation of nuclear energy 
activities to be well attuned to the needs of developing countries, not only 
from the technical but also from the economic point of view. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.254 
page 46 


182. The Agency's work in the field of assurances of supply was to be 
commended; although some had objected that progress had been slow, the task of 
the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was a difficult one, and it was no 
small achievement to have reached agreement on emergency and back-up 
mechanisms. As far as radioactive waste management was concerned, he welcomed 
the conclusion reached by the Seattle Conference held in May 1983 that nuclear 
energy had advantages over other forms of energy from the ecological 
viewpoint. However, he had serious reservations as to the wisdom of dumping 
radioactive waste in the sea, a practice which was bound to antagonize public 
opinion. 
18 3. Portugal continued to be largely dependent for its energy on imported 
oil, but was meanwhile continuing to prospect for and to produce uranium. If 
a National Energy Plan shortly to be submitted to Parliament was adopted, and 
it was decided to introduce nuclear power plants in Portugal, the first of 
those plants might come into operation by 1995. A survey was being carried 
out to establish the best sites for such plants, and the Agency could be of 
great assistance in that survey. Further studies were being carried out on 
types of reactor, the participation of national industry in the nuclear power 
programme, the disposal of radioactive wastes, nuclear legislation, the 
training of personnel, and public information. 
184. Portugal was grateful for the technical assistance it had received from 
the IAEA in the form of expert advice, help with training and research, and 
support for projects concerned with nuclear energy planning, nuclear safety, 
and uranium prospecting and production, and looked forward to the continuation 
of that assistance in the future. 
The meeting rose at 10.50 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 


GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
June 1984* 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 14 October 1983, at 10.25 a.m. 


President: Mr. KEBLEK (Czechoslovakia) 
later: Mr. MIYAZAWA (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda** 


7 General debate and annual report for 1982 
(continued) 


Statements by the delegates of the following 
States and organizations 


Sri Lanka 
Jordan 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Cuba 
Gabon 
Ecuador 
Nigeria 
United Republic of Tanzania 
Paraguay 
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission 


Reply by the delegate of the Republic of Korea 


Reply by the delegate of the United States of 
America 


Reply by the delegate of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea 


Reply by the delegate of the Republic of Korea 


Paragraphs 


1-97 


1 -8 
9 -21 
22 -30 
31 -39 
40 -48 
49 -58 
59 -71 
72 -79 
80 -85 


86 -92 


93 


94 


95 - 96 


97 


_*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 8 December 1983. 


**/ GC(XXVII)/700. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4.. 


84-1173 


0009E 



GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684 and Corr.l) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. DHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) first welcomed the admission of the 
People's Republic of China to the Agency. 
2. Sri Lanka, one of the founder members of the Non-Aligned Movement and a 
firm supporter of its principles of territorial sovereignty and integrity, 
non-aggression, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, 
equality, mutual benefit and peaceful coexistence, was convinced of the need 
to protect and preserve the Agency's integrity so that it could play its role 
of encouraging co-operation in the nuclear field and helping developing 
countries to enjoy the benefits of nuclear energy. For that reason, his 
delegation believed that the work of the present session of the General 
Conference should adhere strictly to the Agency's Statute. 
3. As the General Assembly of the United Nations had stressed in its 
resolutions 32/50 and 32/112, and as the Preparatory Committee of the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy had reaffirmed, the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes played an important role in the social and economic 
development of all countries, particularly developing countries. But those 
countries lacked the knowledge and nuclear material necessary to exploit 
nuclear energy for the benefit of their peoples, in combating poverty and 
raising their standard of living. It was therefore regrettable that the 
Preparatory Committee of the United Nations Conference had reached a 
deadlock. Any financial, technical or tactical obstacles to the transfer of 
nuclear technology to developing countries could only increase human suffering. 
4. Nevertheless, the study on small and medium power reactors which the 
Agency had recently launched would help to bring the benefits of nuclear 
energy to those developing countries which lacked energy resources and were 
suffering from the continued increase in the price of oil and coal, which they 
were forced to import, and whose electricity grids were not big enough t< 
incorporate nuclear power plants of the sizes used in advanced countries. 
That study deserved high priority in the Agency's programme, and he asked the 
Director General to ensure that it was completed as soon as possible. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 3 


5. The electricity demand had increased rapidly during the last six years in 
his country, where production was based exclusively on hydraulic resources and 
imported coal and oil. That situation would remain unchanged for at least the 
next ten years; that was why his country's atomic energy programme, which had 
been developing rapidly during the last three years, was restricted to the use 
of isotopes and radiation. From 1970 to 1980, the number of institutions in 
his country using nuclear techniques had increased from six to 20 (of which 12 
were using them in research, three in clinical medicine and five in 
industry). Since then, nuclear techniques had spread to other areas, and 
17 other institutions were using them (six of them in research, five in 
clinical medicine, five in industry and one in training); five institutions 
were to be added in 1984 (one for medical diagnosis and four for industry). 
The fact that the first applications of atomic energy were primarily for 
research and that the new applications related to industry and medicine showed 
that in his country atomic energy was already contributing directly to 
industrial production and health care. The majority of institutions using 
atomic energy had received assistance and advice from the Agency. He thanked 
the Agency and reiterated his country's interest in the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology (RCA) in Asia. 
6. Sri Lanka regularly paid its voluntary contributions and its assessed 
share of the Agency's Regular Budget, and hoped that it would go on being in a 
position to do so. 
7. His delegation would support any measures aimed at prohibiting attacks on 
nuclear facilities placed under Agency safeguards. In that connection, it 
acknowledged the importance of safeguards and appreciated the Agency's role in 
implementing them. However, the Agency's activities in the field of 
safeguards should not override its promotipnal activities and its aid to 
developing countries. He believed that resources allocated to safeguards 
should not increase faster than those assigned to technical assistance, and 
was also opposed to application of the principle of zero growth in the case of 
technical assistance and co-operation. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 4 


8. In conclusion, he congratulated the Indian Atomic Energy Commission on 
putting into operation the first nuclear power plant built entirely by 
indigenous effort. 
9. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) welcomed the admission of the People's Republic 
of China to the Agency. China's entry and the voluntary offer made by the 
USSR to place some of its civilian nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards 
were examples of the international community's increasing confidence in the 
Agency. That confidence was to be welcomed at a time when the nuclear arms 
race and the fact that some countries, such as Israel and South Africa, were 
building up their nuclear capacity for military purposes without any form of 
international supervision were a matter of grave concern for the international 
community. 
10. An increasing number of countries were employing nuclear techniques in 
the fields of food production, water resources development and medicine, but 
progress was slow in solving the energy problems of countries which did not 
yet have nuclear programmes, especially the developing countries. According 
to the annual report for 1982, nuclear power production in developing 
countries would not account for more than 7% of total electricity output by 
the year 2000,. whereas the figure would be about 30% for industrialized 
countries. In view of the precarious situation now prevailing with regard to 
fossil fuel supplies and the possibility of sudden changes, the developing 
countries might well be faced with a new energy crisis that would adversely 
affect their development plans and economic growth rates. 
11. The inability of developing countries to make full use of nuclear 
technology in order to overcome their energy problems and attain their 
development goals was the result of a number of factors, which had remained 
much the same for many years without any serious efforts to remedy the 
situation. Those factors were reactor size and profitability; problems 
concerning technology transfer and licences; political and military issues; 
questions of international law; and increasing costs and lead times in nuclear 
power plant construction. Hence, the study on small and medium power reactors 
was important. His delegation believed that increased technical co-operation 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 5 


in the nuclear field, developed through the intermediary of the Agency, would 
narrow the gap between the two groups of Member States - those interested in 
technical co-operation and those, the advanced countries, interested in the 
safeguards system. 


12. The Agency's efforts to develop the international safeguards system 
should be encouraged, together with its efforts to unify safety concepts and 
regulations for the prevention of exposure to radiation. Although it was 
difficult, or even impossible, at the present time to draft standard 
international safety regulations, Jordan would support Agency efforts directed 
towards the harmonization of nuclear safety philosophies, criteria and 
concepts at the State level as a first step towards formulating an 
international safety system. 
13. It had to be stressed, however, that the international safeguards system 
alone was not sufficient to create confidence, but needed to be coupled with 
international laws to protect nuclear facilities from armed attacks that might 
transform them into highly dangerous sources of radioactivity. The Israeli 
armed attack on an Iraqi nuclear reactor under construction, and the 
destruction of it in defiance of all international norms and the international 
safeguards system, regardless of the Agency's neutrality and denying its 
credibility, demonstrated that the danger was not imaginary. Israel's threat 
to destroy nuclear facilities in the Arab world still persisted. 
14. It was therefore necessary to adapt the present international safeguards 
system to take account of the threats of destruction hanging over some nuclear 
facilities. He proposed that the international safeguards system be 
transformed into a "dual responsibility system" whereby, on one hand, Member 
States would guarantee, and assume responsibility for, the peaceful use of 
nuclear facilities and, on the other, the international community would 
guarantee to protect Member States' nuclear facilities placed under Agency 
safeguards against destruction and threats of destruction by nuclear or 
conventional weapons. Such a development would remove one of the main 
obstacles to the use of nuclear energy for the advancement of Third-World 
countries, inasmuch as the nuclear facilities would be protected. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 6 


15. The international community - including the developing countries, and 
especially the smaller ones among them - attached particular importance to 
spent nuclear fuel storage and waste management. The Agency should therefore 
continue its work on the legal and practical aspects of waste management so 
that small countries could use nuclear energy without being exposed to the 
hazards that nuclear wastes involved or being subject to unwarranted 
international pressure. 
16. The concept of international plutonium storage, even if well-intentioned, 
was fraught with risk. There was risk of monopoly or control of nuclear fuel 
markets and risk of pressure on developing countries. It might perhaps be 
more practical and effective for small countries or countries with special 
regional links to find a regional solution and to introduce, for example, 
plutonium storage systems on a regional scale. 
17. Jordan joined other countries in requesting the Agency and the General 
Conference to take a firm decision which would force Israel to comply with its 
international obligations and to undertake not to attack or threaten to attack 
the nuclear facilities of neighbouring States. That would be a way of 
guaranteeing some stability in the Middle East and creating some sort of 
confidence as an initial stage in freeing the area from nuclear weapons and 
direct or indirect nuclear threats. 
18. Like other delegations, the delegation of Jordan regretted that the 
representatives of South Africa continued to participate in some of the 
Agency's activities despite the adoption of resolutions banning South Africa 
from that privilege. He urged the General Conference to take a clear decision 
on that issue and put an end to such participation, and requested the Director 
General to report on the matter to the General Conference in 1984, it being 
borne in mind that South Africa's nuclear activities were a very grave danger, 
jeopardizing the future of the African continent as a whole. 
19. His delegation noted that nothing had been done regarding the amendment 
of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. It was to be hoped that the Article would 
be amended in order to increase the membership of the Board of Governors, 
especially by giving more seats to the areas of Africa and the Middle East and 
South Asia, thereby guaranteeing fair distribution and regional homogeneity, 
which were essential conditions for co-operation in energy and technology. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 7 


20. He welcomed the Agency's continued efforts to serve the interests of the 
international community and hoped that its role would be strengthened and made 
more comprehensive in both its legal and its technical aspects. 
21. It was certain that, if the Agency, with the support of Member States, 
succeeded in reducing the technological gap between developing and developed 
countries so that developing countries could utilize nuclear energy to meet 
their energy needs, it would have achieved one of its most important 
objectives, which was to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the 
benefit of all countries and the prosperity of mankind, and would be in a 
better position to establish co-operation based on international equality. 
The Agency's history justified such confidence and hope. 
22. Mr. HONG (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) welcomed the 
People's Republic of China as a Member of the Agency. China had established a 
nuclear industry and was starting out on the application of nuclear science 
and technology to economic development. 
23. His delegation was pleased to note that, despite the complex situation, 
the Agency had made some progress in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. The International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience, held in 
1982, had proved that nuclear power was a reliable, economic source of energy. 
24. The Agency had always laid great stress on questions of nuclear safety, 
which was essential to the use of nuclear energy. The Nuclear Safety 
Standards (NUSS) programme was progressing and the revised edition of the 
Basic Safety Standards for Radiological Protection was an aid to Member States. 
25. The Agency had also given attention to the problem of radioactive waste 
management, and the international community was looking forward to some 
positive results in that area in the near future. 
26. Technical assistance was one of the main Agency functions of benefit to 
developing countries. His own country had received Agency assistance, 
including assistance with uranium ore analysis and the production of 
radioisotopes. The Agency's technical assistance, however, fell far short of 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 8 


the needs of developing countries owing to lack of funds. The problem of 
financing technical assistance, which had already been under discussion for 
some years, had still not been settled. The consensus on indicative planning 
figures for Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund targets up to the end 
of 1986 constituted some kind of progress. Nevertheless, the Fund should be 
increased and a reliable source of funding be found. 


27. The safeguards system was another of the Agency's principal functions and 
one of the major instruments of non-proliferation. His delegation believed 
that it would be more effective to concentrate inspections on projects and 
sites where the risk of nuclear arms manufacture and proliferation was 
greatest. 
28. His country's rapidly expanding economy required an increase in energy 
production. The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had 
therefore embarked upon a large-scale construction plan for hydraulic and 
thermal power stations and was actively engaged in exploiting new energy 
resources. Also, the Sixth Congress of the Workers' Party had decided to 
construct nuclear power plants in the 1980s, and scientific research and 
professional training was now being directed towards that goal. In addition, 
research was aimed at introducing nuclear techniques into other sectors of the 
economy to improve the people's welfare. As a result, radiation and 
radioisotopes were already being used in industry, agriculture, medicine, 
biology and elsewhere. 
29. He believed that the Director General's statement, in which he had 
pointed out that States forming part of a nuclear-weapon-free zone formally 
committed themselves not to acquire nuclear weapons, was a very important 
contribution to the maintenance and consolidation of world peace. The world 
was on the brink of another war, which would be a nuclear conflict, as a 
result of the adventurist military activities of imperialist States. In order 
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and save mankind from the 
dangers of such a war, his delegation called for an end to the testing, 
manufacture, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons in all parts of the world 
and urged that efforts be stepped up to abolish nuclear weapons completely. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 9 


His Government had proposed that north-east Asia, including the Korean 
peninsula, be made a nuclear-free zone and had done its best to bring about 
implementation of that proposal, which would involve, first and foremost, the 
withdrawal of all nuclear weapons from the area. Unfortunately, however, the 
turn taken by the situation since the previous Conference session was a source 
of deep concern to peace-loving peoples in Asia and in the rest of the world. 
According to the "Washington Post" of 2 May 1983, the United States had 
already installed more than 1000 nuclear weapons in the southern part of the 
Korean peninsula and had again tried to deploy neutron bombs in that area. 
Action of that kind could only weaken the Agency's safeguards system. If the 
United States genuinely wanted peace in Korea and world security, it should 
withdraw its nuclear weapons from the southern part of the Korean peninsula 
and not deploy neutron bombs there. 


30. The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea attached 
great importance to the Agency's work and wished it success. 
Mr. Miyazawa (Japan) took the Chair. 


31. Mr. CASTRO DlAZ BALART (Cuba) noted that, even though the fact that 
certain items always remained on the agenda of the General Conference showed 
that there was not always uniformity of opinion among the different groups of 
delegations, the Agency could, after 25 years of existence, demonstrate 
positive results in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that respect, the 
admission of the People's Republic of China, which Cuba had always hoped would 
be represented in all international organizations, was an important fact not 
only because that country represented a quarter of the world's population but 
also by virtue of its level of development in the nuclear field. 
32. Everyone wished the Agency to concern itself essentially with its 
scientific and technical activities, but it was difficult to believe that it 
could remain aloof from the social situation facing mankind at the present 
time. The annual report for 1982 stated that the current economic recession 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 10 


was the cause of the lower-than-forecast demand for nuclear-generated 
electricity and the fact that nuclear power development plans had not 
materialized in various countries. It was predicted that by the year 2000, 
nuclear power would account for only 7% of the total electricity generated in 
developing countries, whereas the corresponding figure for the developed 
countries would be 30%. Up to the present time, only 29 countries had opted 


for nuclear power, a figure which represented only 25% of the total number of 
Member States of the Agency. The reason was that the state of the economy in 


the majority of developing countries was becoming more of a challenge with 
every year. There were, for example, 1100 million people living in abject 
poverty, more than 430 million people seriously undernourished, 


some 1100 million people without proper housing, some 1300 million people 
without drinking water and some 814 million illiterates. A number of 
countries were consequently in no position to contemplate the possibility of 


establishing a nuclear energy programme for their development. 


33. The ever-increasing poverty of certain States contrasted with the amount 
of money devoted to military expenditure, which was more than 600 billion 
dollars. The escalation of the arms race had been caused by those whose 
policy was based on coersion and intimidation and who tried to disrupt the 
balance of existing forces by developing and deploying new types of weapons of 
mass destruction; by using space for belligerent purposes; and by declaring 
that the use of tactical nuclear weapons was possible. At the present time, 
stockpiles of nuclear weapons were so large that their destructive capacity 
could annihilate the whole of mankind; that was why the primary objective 
which all countries should endeavour to achieve was to abolish the threat of 
nuclear war. 
34. In face of such a situation, international co-operation was essential, 
but such co-operation was possible only if there was a genuine will to resolve 
the serious economic and social problems confronting mankind. Those problems 
and others of a political nature were multiplying the sources of friction, 
particularly in Central America, in Africa, in the Middle East and in South 
East Asia. A situation of that kind, which inexorably affected the use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in developing countries, was 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 11 


exacerbated by industrial underdevelopment and poor technological 


infrastructure as well as lack of qualified experts. That was why Cuba 
believed that the Agency should actively promote the use of nuclear energy in 
the poorest countries with the same resolve it had shown in fostering the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 


35. His delegation noted that nuclear power had made considerable headway 
during the last 25 years. With 297 reactors in operation or 2800 years of 
reactor operating experience, nuclear power production was now an established 
industry. Cuba appreciated the Agency's work under the Nuclear Safety 
Standards (NUSS) programme and also the creation of an Incident Reporting 
System. Member States could thereby profit from one another's experience in 
the safe operation of nuclear facilities. Among the Agency's activities, 
feasibility studies for the use of small and medium power reactors would 
benefit those countries which were least developed in the nuclear domain. 
36. As far as technical co-operation was concerned, he noted that it had 
become one of the major activities of the Agency and that it had enabled many 
developing countries to acquire the resources necessary to launch their 
national programmes. His country had paid in full its contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
37. Some States attached less importance to safeguards since they were 
applied to equipment which those countries were not in a position to either 
acquire or exploit. There was a close link, however, between the acquisition 
of nuclear techniques and the need for international guarantees to prevent 
non-proliferation; there should therefore be a just balance between the needs 
of economic development involving the peaceful use of nuclear energy, and 
safeguards. The main cause for concern in that area was that some countries 
were getting together, without the knowledge of the international community, 
in order to collaborate in the use of nuclear energy for military purposes. 
Such was the case of Israel and South Africa, whose belligerent and 
discriminatory actions and policies were a matter of concern and had been 
condemned by various bodies and international conferences within the United 
Nations system. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 12 


38. In Cuba, scientific and technical development was proceeding at a modest 
rate inasmuch as national policy in that area did not consist only in 
acquiring technical experience and knowledge, but also in meeting existing 
social needs so that the application of that knowledge would not be 
fruitless. The construction of the first nuclear power plant was continuing 
with the co-operation of the USSR. The Agency's technical assistance helped 
in applying nuclear and radioisotope techniques in various sectors of the 
national economy. Cuba had recently concluded a new safeguards agreement with 
the Agency, in connection with a zero-power reactor for training purposes. In 
addition, the second meeting of co-ordinating countries of the Non-Aligned 
Movement on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had been held in Havana in 
April 1983. That meeting had aimed to establish co-operation between member 
countries of the movement. Cuba had been nominated by the Latin American 
group as a candidate for the Board of Governors. If elected, it would be the 
first time that Cuba had held a seat in that policy-making body of the Agency. 
39. In conclusion, his delegation noted that the twenty-seventh session of 
the General Conference showed that nuclear energy would remain a keystone in 
achieving the goal of the economic and social development of Member States of 
the Agency. 
40. Mr. DIVUNGI PI NDINGE (Gabon) pointed out the relevance of the 
Agency's objectives and the general satisfaction to which the Agency's work 
gave rise. 
41. The twenty-seventh Conference session was taking place at a time when the 
world was facing tensions essentially created by the deep-seated egoism of a 
few nations. That egoism lay at the root of the world economic crisis as well 
as the cold war. The inevitable consequences were the destabilization of 
whole areas of the world, the emergence of trouble-spots, and the unbridled 
nuclear arms race. 
42. In view of that situation, his delegation warmly welcomed the admission 
of the People's Republic of China to the Agency and was convinced, from the 
outset, that China would make a major useful contribution to the Agency's work. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 13 


43. He wished to stress the vital need to maintain unity and objectivity in 
the Agency's work, both at the level of conception and at that of 
implementation. All Member States should unanimously decide upon and 
formulate activities, whether of a general nature or directed to the specific 
needs of a particular group of countries. That was essential to the Agency's 
universality. In the light of that conviction, Gabon, as a developing 
country, wished to reaffirm its equal interest in all the different sectors of 
the Agency's activities. Safeguards, essential in ensuring the exclusively 
peaceful use of nuclear energy and thereby creating confidence, were just as 
much an area of special interest to Gabon as was technical assistance and the 
application of nuclear techniques, particularly in food production, water 
resources development and health. Perfected methods of radioactive waste 
management were of interest even to developing countries since, without them, 
some of the industrialized countries might be tempted, as they already had 
been, to seek extra-territorial sites as a result of compelling spatial and 
psycho-political pressures. The primary concern should be to distribute 
resources in the way best suited to priorities. In that connection, his 
delegation wished to pay a just tribute to countries which, through voluntary 
contributions over and above their statutory obligations, had donated 
additional financial support to various Agency activities. 
44. As a uranium-producing country, Gabon made, as far as it was able, a 
modest contribution to the Agency's efforts to establish international 
co-operation. It was preparing to host the Seminar on Radiation Protection in 
Exploration, Mining and Milling of Radioactive Ores for Developing Countries 
in Africa from 14 to 24 November 1983. 
45. Energy remained the essential problem affecting the economic growth and 
social progress of developing countries. In the long run, even if population 
growth slowed down by the year 2020, the per capita energy consumption in the 
developing countries would virtually double, increasing from 0.55 tonnes 
equivalent oil in 1978 to 1.1 in 2020. During the same period, the per capita 
consumption in industrialized countries would increase from 4.4. to about 
6.5 tonnes equivalent oil. Although the percentage increases gave a 
favourable impression, the absolute levels indicated an enormous disparity 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 14 


that was continually on the increase. In addition, whereas during that period 


industrialized countries would rely increasingly on coal and nuclear power and 


less and less on oil, the developing countries would not be able to free 
themselves from dependence on hydrocarbons; the share of hydrocarbons would 


increase from 34% in 1978 to about 45% in 2020, whereas that of nuclear energy 
would increase from 0 to 4%. 


46. In the light of those facts, his delegation wondered at the only modest 
penetration of the developing African countries by nuclear energy, which had 
now reached maturity in technological terms. There were three main reasons. 
The first was the high technical standard required for maintaining and 
monitoring nuclear power plants. Yet that was not really an insurmountable 
obstacle since it should be possible to train local staff, particularly under 
Agency programmes. The second reason was the structure of the demand in the 
developing countries. Their industrial activity and their domestic energy 
needs were still small. Moreover, geographical conditions made 
interconnection of the grids very difficult in terms of both investment and 
maintenance, and it was not feasible to export nuclear technology in its 
present form to a number of developing countries. Only the technical experts 
in the industrialized countries could remedy the situation. Under the 
circumstances, the basic power output would have to be adjusted to demand, in 
other words, small units would have to be made as profitable as possible. His 
country looked forward to positive results from the Agency's study in that 
area. 
47. However, the real problem facing developing countries was how to finance 
their growth. Their debts were increasing and vital investments in energy, 
particularly nuclear energy, were becoming increasingly capital-intensive, 
making it impossible for some developing countries to finance even the local 
share of such investments. To break the vicious circle, there was need for 
consultations and co-operation between the main parties involved, i.e. the 
multilateral financial organizations, commercial lenders, Governments of 
industrialized countries, the international oil industry and the developing 
countries themselves, who should improve the management of their economies, 
particularly in the field of energy. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 15 


48. The end of the twentieth century was marked by a conflict between the 
absolute imperative of the economic and social growth of developing countries 
and an international environment characterized by increasingly expensive and 
increasingly scarce energy. Perhaps the only possible solution to the present 
situation was a complete review of current systems of thinking in wealthier 
countries, particularly as far as their trade and financial relations with 
poorer countries was concerned. Man's genius should manifest itself in those 
areas just as much as in science and technology. 
49. Mr. VIVERO (Ecuador) thanked the Director General for the annual 
report on the Agency's work during 1982. 
50. He welcomed the admission of the People's Republic of China to the 
Agency, which was of particular significance and importance for the 
international community. 
51. The political and economic crisis which the world was facing highlighted 
the precariousness ,of peace; that was why his delegation wished to reiterate 
its deep desire to see all countries of the world united in their efforts to 
exploit nuclear energy for the benefit of mankind and avoid, at all costs, the 
use of it for belligerent purposes. In that connection, Ecuador was well 
aware of the importance of the safeguards system. Efforts should be made to 
ensure that all States, without discrimination, participated in its 
implementation, for it was a suitable way of avoiding the uncontrolled growth 
of nuclear energy and of guaranteeing its use for peaceful purposes. 
Nevertheless, his delegation wished to point out that the technical assistance 
and co-operation from which developing countries benefited, in the form of 
technology and materials, should grow in parallel with the safeguards system, 
in line with the principle of interdependence which existed in the modern 
world. The United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy would be a very important 
event, and Ecuador was taking an active part in the work of the Preparatory 
Committee. For that reason he was concerned at the postponement of the 
Conference and hoped that the various "blocs" would show the political will 
necessary for its success. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 16 


52. He welcomed the achievements of CAS and was convinced that the 
flexibility shown by industrialized countries in agreeing on an emergency and 
back-up system was an example of what could be achieved, given the political 
will to overcome differences, in the interests of the international community. 
53. The Latin American region was proud that, thanks to the Tlatelolco 
Treaty, it was the first nuclear-weapon-free zone in the world. As indicated 
in the message to the General Conference from the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, it was essential and a matter of urgency that the few eligible 
countries which had not yet done so should sign and ratify the Tlatelolco 
Treaty or its Additional Protocols so that the process of denuclearization of 
the region could be completed as soon as possible. The establishment of other 
nuclear-weapon-free zones in the world would be one of the most effective ways 
of geographically limiting nuclear-weapons proliferation and of protecting 
non-nuclear-weapon countries from a nuclear holocaust. In that connection, 
his delegation was pleased to note that the one commitment which the People's 
Republic of China had so far made in the nuclear field had been its accession 
to Protocol II of the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
54. He welcomed the steps mentioned by the Director General in his report 
concerning the appointment of a larger number of nationals from developing 
countries to senior posts. 
55. As far as Article VI of the Statute was concerned, he recalled that, if 
it was decided to amend that Article, the amendment should not reduce the 
relative representation of Latin America on the Board of Governors. 
56. Turning to activities related to nuclear energy in Ecuador, he pointed 
out that nuclear energy was envisaged as part of the long-term national energy 
plan. His country was promoting the application of nuclear techniques in 
various areas of national interest, such as basic research aimed at resolving 
pressing problems of nutrition, the improvement of livestock breeding and 
avoiding environmental pollution by pesticides. In the area of public health, 
his country was applying the Basic Safety Standards for Radiological 
Protection, which were based on the ICRP dose limitation system; 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 17 


it had launched a national programme of personnel thermoluminescence dosimetry 
and had put into operation a secondary standards dosimetry laboratory which 
formed part of the IAEA/WHO laboratory network. Since it had been opened to 
experts from countries in the Andean sub-region, the laboratory functioned as 
a centre of national and international co-operation. He took the opportunity 
of expressing his country's gratitude for assistance given by the Agency's 
Laboratory. In the industrial sector, an electron accelerator and accessory 
equipment for developing industrial irradiation techniques had been set up. 


In that area, quality control by non-destructive testing had also made rapid 
progress, ensuring thereby that the quality of installations such as oil 
pipelines and other types of duct could be guaranteed. In the area of 
teaching, Ecuadorian universities now had departments of nuclear science and 
were laying greater emphasis on applied research. In 1984, Ecuador would host 
a regional course on radiochemistry and nuclear assay techniques. It was 
successfully continuing its programme of uranium prospecting with the support 
of UNDP and the Agency. Also, it hoped to complete, in the near future, the 
Centre of Nuclear Studies and Research, which would be equipped with a 


3-MW reactor for research, training and the production of radioisotopes. 


57. He welcomed the initiative taken by the Joint FAO/IAEA Division to 
reinstall in its laboratories equipment for the culture of in vitro tissues. 
His country was interested in participating in ecological studies in the 
Amazon Basin, and the Government was ready to give the necessary backing for 
them to be carried out. Ecuador had made progress in formulating, jointly 
with the nuclear energy commissions of the Andean sub-region, specific nuclear 
energy programmes. 
58. As it had said the year before, his delegation believed that the Agency 
should continue to act as a catalyst, consultant and guide; it should upgrade 
its systems of technical assistance programming and evaluation so that 
technical assistance was better suited to national and regional needs. It 
very much hoped that, despite the present problems, constructive decisions and 
negotiation would make it possible to meet the current world needs in a more 
balanced way. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 18 


59. . Mr. OBIAGA (Nigeria) thanked the Director General for his efforts 
to implement the resolutions of the last sessions of the General Conference as 
well as for his very constructive opening address and the annual report 
for 1982 (GC(XXVII)/684), which touched on issues of great concern to the 
Nigerian delegation, more especially those relating to the staffing of the 
Secretariat, nuclear safety, waste management and nuclear trade. Such 
questions were important for a developing country like Nigeria, whose 
intention was to employ nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
60. He recalled that the Agency's objectives, as set forth in Article II of 
the Statute, were to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy 
to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. At the same time, the 
dangers inherent in technological progress, which had been and could still be 
applied for purposes detrimental to the human race, could not be ignored. 
Irresponsible application of nuclear technology could only lead to 
incalculable human and material destruction, in fact to a holocaust. It was, 
therefore, to prevent such a tragedy that the General Assembly of the United 
Nations had adopted resolution 35/146 on 12 December 1980 and had once again 
expressed its concern on 16 December 1980, in adopting resolution 35/206, 
which called upon all States, corporations, institutions and individuals to 
put an end to all forms of co-operation with the racist regime of South Africa 
in the nuclear field and to refrain from purchasing uranium or enriched 
uranium from South Africa. His delegation was deeply perturbed by the way in 
which certain Member States had flouted the decisions taken by the General 
Assembly by collaborating with South Africa, thereby encouraging the 
discriminatory social system by supplying it with nuclear technology, which 
enabled it to spread war to its neighbouring countries and to use its weapons 
as a means of blackmail; such collaboration negated the declared objectives of 
the Agency. All delegations should abide by the spirit and letter of the 
Agency's objectives. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 19 


61. At the same time, it had to be recognized that the danger posed by the 
racist regime in South Africa was only part of the danger threatening peace, 
since, on a world scale, the super-Powers continued to stockpile nuclear 
warheads which were a threat to the continued existence of human 
civilization. The 5000 weapons in those arsenals had a destructive power 
estimated at 1.5 million bombs of the Hiroshima type, in other words a minute 
fraction of the stock of weapons would be sufficient to destroy human 
civilization on the whole of the planet. His country continued to support the 
disarmament talks and to urge both parties to take up meaningful discussions 
so as to safeguard human civilization and its very existence. 
62. The Agency's role in that area was clear: it should not only ensure both 
vertical and horizontal non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, but also 
encourage the application of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes under 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In that 
respect, his delegation regretted the indefinite postponement of the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, which was to have been held at Geneva in 
1983. The postponement was a result of the Preparatory Committee's inability 
to agree on an agenda for the Conference; that inability stemmed from a lack 
of political will on the part of certain groups. It was hoped, however, to be 
able to hold the Conference in the near future in order to ensure that nuclear 
energy would ultimately be used solely for peaceful purposes. 
63. The delegation of Nigeria fully supported the decision of the People's 
Republic of China to join the Agency; that was an encouraging sign at a time 
when doubts were being cast on nuclear power as a whole. 
64. It was to be noted, furthermore, that the Director General's report 
showed encouraging progress concerning the implementation of various General 
Conference resolutions, particularly resolution GC(XXVI)/RES/401, on the 
staffing of the Secretariat, in which the Director General had been requested 
"to continue to take steps speedily to increase the number of staff members 
drawn from developing areas in accordance with General Conference resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/386, at all levels" and "to make maximum efforts to rectify the 
existing imbalance" by the end of the period specified in that resolution. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 20 


65. As far as the Agency's promotional activities were concerned, it was 
gratifying to see the training opportunities placed at the disposal of young 
graduates from developing countries to improve their knowledge in nuclear 
technology. 
66. The gradual improvement in nuclear safety and the continuing research 
into radioactive waste management would be relevant to projects under way in 
Nigeria. With regard to waste management, his delegation wished to appeal, as 
it had done last year, for the suspension, or even the prohibition, of the 
dumping of radioactive waste in the sea, which was extremely hazardous for 
marine fauna and flora as well as human life itself. He therefore urged the 
authorities concerned to exercise restraint and to step up scientific research 
in order to find the most satisfactory ways of managing radioactive waste. 
67. Electricity consumption would inevitably increase with urbanization, 
particularly in developing countries, where forecasts indicated that 
electricity would account for 16 to 26% of total energy consumption, while the 
nuclear component was not expected to exceed 7% by the end of the century. 
However, by then, at the present pace, the developing countries would have 
barely laid the foundations necessary to benefit from the immense potential of 
nuclear power, as a result of inadequate manpower, financial resources and 
national infrastructures. It was to overcome those obstacles to development 
that the Department of Technical Co-operation had been set up. In resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/388, the General Conference had recognized the need to finance 
technical assistance from the Agency's Regular Budget or from other similar 
predictable and assured resources. However, the present arrangements 
regarding the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund did not reflect 
enough concern on the part of the majority of developed countries for the Fund 
to meet the growing needs of developing countries in terms of projects and the 
transfer of nuclear technology. 
68. Comparison of the financing of technical assistance and of safeguards, 
which were funded from the Regular Budget, suggested that the Agency's 
regulatory function was more important than its promotional activities. That 
should not be the case, for a situation of that kind might lead to the 
emergence of two opposing groups within the Agency. His delegation 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 21 


sincerely hoped that the twenty-seventh session of the General Conference 
would mark the beginning of a new era and that, as the Director General had 
said, it would be possible to strike a balance between the interests of 
different States and groups of States. 


69. Referring to item 13 of the agenda, his delegation wished to recall that 
in February 1977 it had co-sponsored an amendment to Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute intended to rectify the under-representation of two areas - Africa and 
the Middle East and South Asia. Since then, the matter had become a perennial 
item on the agenda of the General Conference and six resolutions had already 
been adopted. In 1977, four seats on the Board had been available for 
26 African Member States; since then Zimbabwe and Namibia had joined the 
Agency, but the representation of the African group had not changed. It was 
disconcerting to see the persistent lack of agreement on that issue and the 
fact that current consultations had not led to any change in the position of 
those who opposed the amendment. His delegation therefore wished to state, as 
in the past, that the proposed amendment, if adopted, could only improve the 
Board's efficiency. It was to be hoped that the General Conference would 
achieve clear-cut progress in the matter of the under-representation on the 
Board of the areas concerned. 
70. In the area of information and technical services, his country had 
decided to join the Agency's International Nuclear Information System (INIS) . 
71. In conclusion, he wished to state that his Government had pledged its 
full contribution ($42 750) to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1984. 
Mr. Keblusek (Czechoslovakia) resumed the Chair. 


72. Mr, LYIMO (United Republic of Tanzania) noted with satisfaction the 
admission of the People's Republic of China as the 112th Member of the 
Agency. China's admission was an important contribution to world peace and it 
was to be hoped that Member States of the Agency would extend to the People's 
Republic of China the co-operation it needed and deserved. 
73. An increase in the number of seats on the Board of Governors and 
technical co-operation were two points of major significance for developing 
countries, especially those in Africa, which required comment. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 22 


74. With regard to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, despite the admission to 
the Agency during the last 20 years of 25 new Member States, of which 21 were 
developing countries, the composition of the Board of Governors had not 
changed and the areas of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia still had 
the smallest representation. He did not understand why developing regions 
were denied that fundamental right on the pretext that enlarging the present 
membership of the Board would make it less efficient when in fact the increase 
called for was a small one and the total number of seats on the Board would 
not exceed that of the policy-making organs of other specialized agencies of 
the United Nations, which were no less efficient as a result. He urged all 
delegations to make a real effort to find a lasting solution to the problem. 
75. As to the financing of technical assistance, his delegation noted with 
pleasure that that issue was receiving constant attention. He thanked the 
Agency for the assistance it had given and supported a target of $22.5 million 
for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1984. However, only 12% of the Agency's technical co-operation activities 
were funded from the Regular Budget, although technical co-operation was one 
of the Agency's two major activities, the other being safeguards. His 
delegation was concerned about the financing of technical assistance: firstly, 
the total of the resources available each year fell far short of the needs of 
developing countries, as was shown by the increasing number of footnote &/ 
projects; secondly, since the resources for technical co-operation were mainly 
composed of voluntary contributions and extrabudgetary resources, the Agency 
could not exercise full control over technical co-operation activities nor 
show much flexibility in the implementation of programmes. The Agency ought 
to assume greater responsibility in that area and, in order for it to do so, 
the bulk of the resources for technical assistance should stem from the 
Regular Budget. Ninety-two per cent of the Agency's safeguards programme 
would be financed from the Regular Budget in 1984, whereas the corresponding 
percentage for the technical assistance programme would be only 12%. It was 
political will that was needed to solve the problem. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 23 


76. As to nuclear power and safety, at the moment his country's electricity 
needs were covered by its hydroelectric resources, but, as demand increased, 
alternative energy sources would have to be envisaged in the long term. His 
delegation was satisfied with the efforts being made by the Agency to help 
developing countries evaluate the potential of nuclear power in their national 
energy plans and hoped that the maximum number of developing countries would 
benefit from such assistance. 
77. He deplored the fact that the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
did not arouse the same enthusiasm as before, and called upon the 
international community - and in particular the nuclear-weapon States - to 
foster a climate which would revitalize the use of nuclear energy and regain 
public confidence through measures concerning accident prevention and waste 
disposal. 
78. In the field of safety, the Agency's information exchange programme in 
support of implementing the NUSS codes and guides and the Basic Safety 
Standards for Radiological Protection was to be welcomed. In July of the 
current year, his Government had decided to set up a National Radiological 
Protection Commission, which would also be responsible for all promotional 
activities concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He invited 
interested Member States to co-operate with his country in making the 
Commission effective; his delegation was ready to start preliminary 
discussions on the subject during the current session of the Conference. 
79. As far as safeguards were concerned, he was happy to see that there had 
been an increase in the number of safeguards agreements in 1982 and welcomed 
the contribution made by some Member States to developing and testing 
equipment that would aid the Agency in implementing i**s safeguards programme. 
However, he was concerned at the limited possibilities afforded by the 
safeguards system for effectively ensuring nuclear non-proliferation and the 
safety of mankind, since the safeguards covered only a small fraction of 
existing facilities. In view of the build-up of nuclear arms in 
nuclear-weapon States and the deadlock in the disarmament talks between the 
major Powers, it was essential to encourage all parties concerned to place a 
greater number of their facilities under Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 24 


80. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay), expressing his satisfaction at the admission 
of the People's Republic of China to the Agency, which was a technical and 
scientific organization that should be open to all interested countries, said 
he was sure that China's entry would contribute to the development and 
practical application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
81. Following China's entry, the question of the composition of the Board of 
Governors and, in particular, the under-representation of Latin America was 
particularly relevant. He believed that Article VI of the Statute was no 
longer in keeping with present needs and that the new Board of Governors 
should examine the question and submit the results of its work to the General 
Conference at its twenty-eighth session. 
82. He thanked the Agency for the support which it had given in the form of 
equipment, experts, fellowships and study tours. 
83. His country, which had participated in the drafting of the Convention on 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and which had immediately acceded 
to it (ratification of it was currently being discussed by Parliament), was 
greatly perturbed by the fact that the world was insufficiently protected 
against acts of terrorism. 
84. Reviewing Paraguay's activities in 1983 in the nuclear field, he said 
that his country had set up a provisional nuclear centre to use items of 
equipment supplied by the Agency? had started construction of the future 
nuclear research centre; had launched a feasibility study for a zero-power 
research reactor, to be used by a technical training centre to produce 
radioisotopes for nuclear medicine and agriculture; had set up new 
radiocobalt-therapy laboratories; had put an X-ray linear accelerator into 
operation; and had trained technical staff for work in agriculture and 
stock-breeding. 
85. Recalling that his country was fulfilling its financial obligations to 
the Agency, he expressed his appreciation both to the Agency and to friendly 
countries which had provided technical assistance in the form of equipment, 
fellowships or experts to help Paraguay continue its nuclear development. In 
conclusion, he wished for peace for the whole of mankind and hoped that 
progress would be achieved in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 2 5 


86. Mr. PINEDA PAV(3N (Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission) 
welcomed the admission of the People's Republic of China to the Agency. 
87. The Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC), a technical 
commission of the Organization of American States (OAS), acted in a 
consultative capacity for OAS Member States and facilitated co-operation 
between them in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Also, it was authorized 
to make recommendations in the field of nuclear energy to Governments and 
different bodies of the OAS. The Commission held a regular session every two 
years. During the next one, which was to take place at Caracas in 
January 1984 and to which the Director General of the Agency had been invited, 
the Commission would review its plans for the 1980s. Its work was carried out 
through two committees. The Consultative Committee was essentially concerned 
with the application of radioisotopes and radiation, staff training for 
nuclear energy programmes, radiological protection and the development of 
uranium prospecting programmes, in particular the programme for the evaluation 
of uraniferous zones, for which the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute was 
responsible. The Legal Committee made comparative studies of nuclear energy 
legislation in force in different Latin American countries. It had carried 
out, among others, studies on harmonizing official standards relating to 
radiological protection, and intended to examine problems of civil liability 
for nuclear damage and the legal side of technology transfer. The Agency had 
not missed out on those activities and had been represented at the latest 
session of IANEC. 


88. Although the Commission's programmes had been curtailed for budgetary 
reasons, various regional seminars had been held on different topics during 
the current two-year period: nuclear techniques, the eradication of harmful 
insects by the sterile-male technique, and a code of practice for 
radiosterilization. In addition, as a result of co-operation between 
organizations in the countries in the region, there had been meetings of 
co-ordinators of national programmes for radiological protection and nuclear 
safety, meetings of directors of nuclear training programmes, and also 
meetings of the Consultative Committee of IANEC and a workshop on comparative 
law as applied to prospecting for and the mining of radioactive ores. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 26 


89. With regard to the Andean sub-regional arrangement about which the 
Director General had spoken in his statement , the Commission would do 
everything to ensure the smooth running of that arrangement, which opened up 
new prospects for technical co-operation between countries in the same region 
and at the same level of nuclear development. The Executive Secretary of the 
Commission had been invited to a meeting of directors of nuclear commissions 
of the Andean countries held at Caracas in April 1981 and, since then, had 
followed with the greatest interest the discussions concerning development of 
the arrangement, which were beginning to yield interesting results. 
90. The Commission intended to continue its co-operation with the Agency and 
was particularly interested in the course which the Agency organized in Latin 
America on the role of nuclear energy in national energy plans. Also, it had 
been negotiating with the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America (OPANAL) with a view to co-ordinated action, particularly in the 
implementation of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America. 
91. Like all products of science and technology, nuclear energy was fraught 
with risk, but in view of the energy crisis it was at present indispensable, 
and the development and progress of humanity depended upon the proper use of 
it. The nuclear peril was real: according to the United Nations, the nuclear 
arsenals existing today were equivalent to one million bombs with the strength 
of those used at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which was enough to destroy the 
planet six times over. The arms race and the military use of nuclear energy 
should be condemned and all countries should work together so that nuclear 
energy would be used in the service of humanity. To achieve that end, 
developing countries, which had only 3% of the 500 reactors at present in 
operation or being planned, should have better access to nuclear energy. A 
new world nuclear order should guarantee the sovereign right of all countries 
in the nuclear field; regional, bilateral and multilateral co-operation in 
that area; and the availability of a strict safeguards system that would 
abolish horizontal and vertical proliferation and eliminate the risk of 
universal conflagration. 
1/ GC(XXVII)/OR.247, para. 80. 


GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 27 


92. For reasons of both safety and economic viability, nuclear energy had to 
assume increasing importance. The Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission 
was working to that end; it was pursuing the same objectives as the Agency in 
other words, increasing the contribution of nuclear energy to peace, health 
and prosperity in the whole world. 
93. Mr. CHO (Republic of Korea), exercising his right of reply, said 
that it was deeply regrettable that the representative of North Korea was 
seeking to use the Agency's General Conference as a platform for his 
propaganda. First of all, the allegations made by the representative of North 
Korea on the subject of the Korean peninsula were slanderous and extravagant, 
and his delegation rejected them categorically. Secondly, if North Korea was 
sincere when it said it was seeking peace and wished to prevent war in the 
Korean peninsula, instead of making absurd accusations and giving full 
credence to an article in an "imperialist" newspaper it should cease 
perpetrating its insane, barbaric terrorist provocations against the 
Republic of Korea. 
94. Mr. LABOWITZ (United States of America), exercising his right of 
reply, said that the remarks made on the previous day by the representative of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran were groundless and did not merit a reply. He 
wished to state, however, that the work of the General Conference was too 
important to be disrupted by irrelevant political declarations and exaggerated 
language such as that used by the Iranian delegation and the delegations of 
some other Member States. 
95. Mr. PAK (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), exercising his 
right of reply, said that the South Korean delegation did not appear to know 
what a general debate was nor the purpose of the right of reply. His 
delegation had simply stated that the United States had already set up a 
thousand nuclear warheads in South Korea. He had numerous documents to prove 
it, including a 1976 Pentagon report which stated that there were already at 
that time 686 nuclear warheads in South Korea. He had also said that the 
United States was now trying to install neutron bombs in that area. His 
delegation had simply set forth the facts. He could also have said a lot 
about propaganda and terrorist activities, but he had not wanted to depart 
from the issues of interest to the General Conference, namely how to increase 
co-operation and technical assistance and prevent nuclear war. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.255 
page 28 


96. The South Korean delegation had alluded to the Rangoon bomb explosion. 
That incident had nothing to do with the work of the General Conference, but 
he felt obliged to clarify his position on that matter. According to foreign 
reports, Burmese authorities had conducted a detailed inquiry after the 
explosion, no details of which had yet been released. However, immediately 
after the explosion, the South Korean authorities, without any justification, 
had tried to blame the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. As a result of 
anti-communist hysteria, American troops occupying South Korea and the whole 
South Korean army had been put on a full military alert. A wild campaign of 
slander had been launched against his country. Each time there was trouble in 
South Korea, the authorities tried to divert attention by attempting to blame 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 
97. Mr. CHO (Republic of Korea), exercising his right of reply after he 
had risen to a point of order, said that at that late stage of the 
Conference's session the majority of delegations would clearly not wish for a 
pointless, manifestly political polemic of that kind to continue. He wished 
to make it clear that the preposterous accusations just reiterated by the 
North Korean speaker were nothing but groundless fabrications and malicious 
propaganda in preparation for another horrible, sinister scheme. His 
delegation strongly condemned North Korea for its deceitfulness and urged it 
to stop calling out "wine" and selling poisoned vinegar. 
The meeting rose at 13.10 p.m. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
International Atomic Energy Agency July 1984* 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION: 10-14 OCTOBER 1983 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SIXTH PLENARY HEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 14 October 1983, at 3.40 p.m. 


President: Mr. KEBLEK (Czechoslovakia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


17 
Examination of delegates' credentials 1-1 7 


7 
General debate and annual report for 1982 
(resumed) 18 - 57 


Draft resolution on "Protection of Nuclear 
Installations Devoted to Peaceful Purposes 
Against Armed Attacks" 18 -39 


Draft resolution on "South Africa's Nuclear 
Capabilities" 40 -57 


Election of Members to the Board of Governors 58 -61 


18 


8 
Consequences of the Israeli military attack on the 
Iraqi nuclear research reactor and the standing 
threat to repeat this attack for: 


(a) the development of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes; and 
(b) the role and activities of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency 62 - 96 
Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
(resumed) 97 - 113 


18 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 24 November 1983. 


**/ GC(XXVII)/700. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(XXVII)/INF/215/Rev.4. 


84-1183 
0023E 



GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 2 


Item of the 
agenda** 
Oral report by the Chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole on the following items:
Paragraphs 
114 147 
Application for membership of the Agency 
(b) Chinese as a working language of the 
General Conference 
The Agency's accounts for 1982 
The Agency's budget for 1984 
Draft resolution on "The International 
Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material" 
The financing of safeguards 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions 
for 1984 
The financing of technical assistance 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 
Review of the Agency's activities 
19 Appointment of the External Auditor 148 - 150 
20 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension 
Committee 151 152 
21 Report on voluntary contributions pledged to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1984 153 - 154 
Closing of the session 155 - 178 
**/ GC(XXVII)/700. 


GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 3 


EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXVII)/705) 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that on the previous day the General 
Committee had met as a credentials committee to consider the credentials of 
delegates as provided for under Rule 28 of the Conference's Rules of 
Procedure. The Committee's report was set out in document GC(XXVII)/705. 
Since the appearance of that report, the delegates of Peru and New Zealand had 
submitted credentials which satisfied the requirements of Rule 27. In 
addition, an official communication had been received concerning the status of 
the delegate of Bolivia. Furthermore, the delegate of Egypt had requested the 
addition of the following phrase at the end of paragraph 9 of document 
GC(XXVII)/705: ".... and does not recognize Israel's annexation of Arab 
Jerusalem and the Golan Heights". Lastly, the name of Chile had been 
inadvertently omitted from the first list of Member States in the Spanish 
version of that document. 
2. He then asked whether delegates wished to comment on the report and on 
the draft resolution contained in it. 
3. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) said that the following Member States wished 
to express their reservations about the credentials of the Israeli delegation 
to the General Conference: Tunisia, Pakistan, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, 
Lebanon, Kuwait, Jordan, Algeria, Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi 
Arabia, Malaysia, Mali, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Cuba and Sudan.4. 
Those credentials had been issued from an Arab city which was under 
occupation. They had been issued by Israeli authorities which had occupied 
and annexed Arab territories in defiance of international law and the United 
Nations Charter. Since the Israeli authorities had no right to represent 
those occupied Arab territories, the credentials of the Israeli delegation 
were not in order. 
5. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) proposed that the 
credentials of the delegate of Israel be rejected owing to that country's 
violation of the Agency's Statute and its aggressive attitude towards all 
oppressed nations of the world. 
1/ Indonesia subsequently associated itself with these reservations. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 4 


6. Mr. OFSTAD (Norway), speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries -
Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Finland - on a point of order under 
Rule 59 of the Rules of Procedure, moved that no action be taken on the 
proposal by the delegate of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the effect that 
the credentials of the delegate of Israel be rejected. The motion of the 
Nordic countries related only to the specific proposal in question and not to 
other aspects of the General Committee's report on its examination of 
delegates' credentials. The Nordic countries were submitting the motion in 
the belief that it was vitally important for all Member States to be concerned 
about the future of the Agency and its work. The proposal to bar a Member 
State from the General Conference went against the principle of universality 
and was inspired by political considerations which had nothing to do with the 
criteria for acceptance of credentials laid down in the Statute. 
7. The PRESIDENT said that, before calling for a vote on the motion by 
the delegate of Norway, he must remind the Conference of the provision of 
Rule 59 whereby, in addition to the proposer of the motion, two delegates 
might speak in favour of and two against the motion, after which it was to be 
immediately put to the vote. He asked whether any delegate wished to speak in 
favour of the motion. 
8. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) wished to give his 
delegation's full support to the motion put by the delegate of Norway on 
behalf of the Nordic countries. He noted that at recent meetings of the 
United Nations General Assembly a challenge to the credentials of a State had 
been voted down under a rule similar to that being invoked by the delegate of 
Norway. 
9. He urged the Conference to support the Norwegian motion, since the 
Iranian proposal aimed at rejecting Israel's credentials was also designed to 
strike at the heart of the Agency, where both its integrity and its very 
existence were concerned. 
10. As the report of the General Committee made clear, the examination of 
credentials in international organizations was an essentially technical 
exercise designed to ensure that credentials were issued by the persons 
designated under the relevant rule, were submitted to the appropriate person 
and contained the name of the delegate of the Member State. The statement by 
the delegate of the Islamic Republic of Iran showed that his proposal that 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 5 


Israel's credentials be rejected was based on purely political considerations, 
which had absolutely no bearing on the question of the propriety of those 
credentials, which had been issued by a Government recognized as legitimate by 
the vast majority of delegations. The Conference should thus refrain from 
demeaning itself by considering a proposal which was without justification and 
which, if approved, would constitute only the first step in a chain of events 
which would seriously damage the Agency and detract from the benefits which 
all Members derived from it. If the Israeli delegate's credentials were 
rejected, the United States delegation would withdraw from the Conference and 
United States participation in the work of the Agency would be suspended. 


11. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) supported the motion put by the delegate of 
Norway on behalf of the Nordic countries, since the matter under consideration 
was a purely procedural one. 
12. The PRESIDENT said that, since no delegates had expressed the wish 
to speak against the Norwegian motion, he proposed to put it to the vote. 
13. There were 52 votes in favour and 24 against, with 7 abstentions. The 
motion was adopted. 
14. The PRESIDENT, having announced the result of the vote, asked the 
Conference whether it now wished to adopt the draft resolution recommended by 
the General Committee in paragraph 14 of document GC(XXVII)/705, note being 
taken of the reservations expressed by delegations, which would be fully 
reflected in the record. 
15. It was so decided. 
16. Mr. SHASH (Egypt) said that his delegation had supported the 
Norwegian motion and that that support was consistent with the Egyptian 
statement on Israel's credentials before the General Committee. The vote did 
not mean that there had been any change in his Government's position in 
relation to certain basic issues which had been raised in the Conference; on 
the contrary, it had been based purely on procedural considerations. 
17. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), observing that he was not speaking on behalf of 
the Group of 77, said that Nigeria had also voted in favour of the Norwegian 
motion on purely procedural grounds. 

GC(XXV1I)/0R.256 
page 6 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1982 (resumed) 


Draft resolution on "Protection of Nuclear Installations Devoted to Peaceful 
Purposes Against Armed Attacks" (GC(XXVII)/701 and Add.1 and 2) 


18. The PRESIDENT said that the Conference still had before it two 
draft resolutions, one of which was entitled "Protection of Nuclear 
Installations Devoted to Peaceful Purposes Against Armed Attacks" and was 
contained in document GC(XXvTI)/701. It had been submitted jointly by the 
delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Romania and Venezuela 
and was also being co-sponsored by the delegations of Ecuador, Panama and Peru. 
19. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina) said that the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXVII)/701 was designed to meet a need which he believed was 
generally felt within the Agency, a need that had been demonstrated by an 
unfortunate event to which the attention of the Board and of the Conference 
had from time to time been drawn during the last two years. That need had 
also been clearly identified in the Director General's opening statement to 
the Conference. 
20. He believed, therefore, that the large majority of delegations would wish 
the Conference to state clearly and unequivocally that, in future, armed 
attacks of any type against nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes 
should be expressly prohibited. Such a statement would be consistent with 
Article III of the Agency's Statute. 
21. It seemed that if States were alerted to the realities confronting them 
there was still time to prevent a repetition of events of the type he had 
mentioned in any State, irrespective of its political system or its level of 
development in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The draft resolution now 
before the Conference in document GC(XXVII)/701, of which his Government was a 
co-author, was aimed at alerting States to that end. 
22. He was well aware that it was not up to the Agency but to other 
international organizations - in particular the Committee on Disarmament, in 
Geneva - to consider the appeal which the Conference would be making. It was 
up to those bodies to consider what had been done so far and to decide on the 
methods, criteria and approaches for the preparation of legal instruments and 
other documents which would complement, supplement and improve on those 

GC(XXVI1)/0R.256 
page 7 


already in existence in accordance with the most suitable procedures. The aim 
must be to agree upon appropriate international legal arrangements which 
would lead to the prohibition of armed attacks on nuclear facilities devoted 
to peaceful purposes. The topic was not a new one: it had been under 
consideration for some years in Geneva. The immediate purpose now was to give 
fresh impetus to the treatment of it. 


23. In their draft resolution, the co-authors had tried to leave the greatest 
possible freedom to the competent bodies mentioned earlier. It was on those 
organizations that the complex and awesome technical task of responding to the 
Conference's appeal would fall. They would need plenty of latitude and time 
for the requisite negotiations, which, as Argentina was only too well aware, 
were not simple; there might be delays and even reverses. He was confident, 
however, that the Conference would be able to provide a real stimulus to that 
work through the draft resolution, which he hoped would be adopted by 
consensus. In doing that, the Conference would be marking a most important 
and ambitious step forward towards the maintenance of peace and the full 
achievement of the aims of the Agency. 
24. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77, said 
that all members of the Group were able to approve the draft resolution 
without difficulty, and he hoped that the same support would be forthcoming 
from delegations not represented in the Group. 
25. Mr. WILLIAMSON (United States of America) said that his Government 
appreciated the efforts the co-authors had devoted to the draft resolution; 
the United States welcomed a full discussion on the issue of limitations on 
attacks on nuclear facilities devoted exclusively to peaceful uses in an 
appropriate forum such as the Committee on Disarmament. The Agency was not, 
however, the appropriate forum, and it would be a mistake to prejudice the 
outcome of other discussions on the subject, in which the United States was an 
active participant. His delegation was therefore unable to support the draft 
resolution. 
26. The PRESIDENT said he had received a request that the draft 
resolution set forth in document GC(XXVII)/701 be put to the vote. He 
therefore asked delegations to vote on the draft resolution by show of hands. 
27. There were 69 votes in favour and 2 against, with 16 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 



GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 8 


28. Mr. HENDERSON (United Kingdom) wished to explain why his delegation 
had voted against the resolution. His delegation well understood, and to some 
extent shared, the motives of the co-authors of the resolution and had worked 
hard with them in search of a text on which consensus might have been 
achieved. It was, however, unable to support the text set out in document 
GC(XXVII)/701 because it contained formulations which were contrary to United 
Kingdom policy with regard both to the work of the Agency itself and to the 
issue of the protection of nuclear facilities from attack. Giving examples of 
the difficulties his delegation had perceived, he said that, first, it could 
not accept the use of the words "without obstacles" in paragraph (b), which 
did not appear to be consistent with the second sentence of Article II of the 
Statute; and, secondly, that paragraph (e) did not correctly describe the 
effect of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions. In any event, the 
Conference was not the appropriate forum for discussion of that topic. 
29. Mr. NOE (Italy) said that the resolution in document GC(XXVII)/701 
related to a problem that had long been the subject of discussions in other 
bodies, as had indeed been recognized in the resolution itself. Those 
discussions were still far from having led to a final consensus either on the 
objectives to be pursued or on the means and procedures with which to pursue 
them. 
30. His delegation recognized the right of the Conference to express the hope 
that the problem of protecting peaceful nuclear facilities would be resolved 
satisfactorily and as soon as possible by the appropriate international 
bodies. It could not, however, subscribe to the view that the Conference 
should lay down - as the resolution in fact did - the procedure to be followed 
by those bodies and the methods which they were to use in negotiations when 
seeking a solution, since that would tend to prejudice the final result. For 
that reason, his delegation had found it necessary to abstain in the vote on 
the resolution. 
31. Mr. MATSUMURA (Japan) said that his delegation had voted for the 
resolution in document GC(XXVII>/701 because it appreciated the spirit in 
which it had been submitted. Nonetheless, the Japanese Government believed 
that the types of nuclear installation to be covered, as well as the form of 
protection to be provided, were problems which should be discussed in detail 
by the Committee on Disarmament, in Geneva, where such matters had already 
been under discussion. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 9 


32. In fact, in September 1982 his Government had already proposed to the 
Committee on Disarmament a draft protocol whose provisions differed from those 
of Additional Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Convention. In accordance with 
that draft, attacks against nuclear installations for peaceful purposes would 
be comprehensively prohibited. 
33. Mr. DARTOIS (Belgium) said that his country was sympathetic to the 
ideas behind the resolution in document GC(XXVII)/701 and had recognized in 
the Committee on Disarmament, in Geneva, that the protection of nuclear 
installations devoted to peaceful purposes against armed attack was an 
extremely important question. It was thus determined to find a solution in 
the appropriate bodies. 
34. It was not, however, sufficient merely to state that certain nuclear 
installations other than power stations were to be used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. Such exclusive use needed to be recognized in an 
international context, and Agency safeguards would be an appropriate means of 
providing the justification for such recognition. It was because of that lack 
of precision that his delegation had been obliged to abstain in the vote on 
the resolution. 
35. Mr. BRENNAN (Australia) said that his delegation had voted in 
favour of the resolution in document GC(XXVII)/701 because it viewed that 
resolution as a general expression of the Conference's desire to see action 
taken internationally with a view to protecting nuclear installations devoted 
exclusively to peaceful purposes against armed attack. However, Australia 
fully recognized the competence of the Committee on Disarmament in that field 
and its vote on the resolution should not be seen as affecting in any way the 
Australian position on the negotiations under way in that body. 
36. Mr. THABAULT (France) said that the Agency was not the appropriate 
forum for consideration of the matter to which the resolution in document 
GC(XXVII)/701 related. According to the final document of the first Special 
Session on Disarmament of the General Assembly of the United Nations, the 
Committee on Disarmament, in Geneva, was the sole multilateral forum for 
negotiations on disarmament, and the problem with which the present resolution 
was concerned should accordingly be examined in the Committee on Disarmament. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 10 


37. The text of the resolution itself was defective in that it did not state 
the nature of the attacks envisaged; it did not lay down the scope of the 
measures recommended; and the definition of the facilities which were to be 
considered as being used for peaceful purposes gave rise to obvious problems. 
38. France was, furthermore, opposed to a distinction being made which might 
lead to a pre-emptive attack on a facility being regarded as legitimate merely 
because the State which owned the facility had refused to place it under 
safeguards. 
39. However, since his Government intended to continue negotiations on that 
important matter in other, more appropriate bodies and since it appreciated 
some of the intentions behind the resolution, his delegation had abstained in 
the vote. 
Draft resolution on "South Africa's Nuclear Capabilities" (GC(XXVII)/702) 


40. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), introducing the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXVII)/702 on behalf of the Group of 77, said that the resolution 
was a moderate one which in essence demanded that South Africa submit all its 
nuclear installations and facilities to inspection by the Agency, and called 
on those Member States which had not yet done so to end all nuclear 
co-operation with the South African regime. He urged that it be adopted by 
consensus. 
41. Mr. WILLIAMSON (United States of America) said that, although his 
delegation was concerned about the existence of unsafeguarded facilities in 
South Africa, it was opposed to the resolution because it called for severe 
restriction of the rights of a Member State. Such a restriction would 
constitute suspension of the privileges and rights of membership under 
Article XIX, which became applicable in cases where a Member had persistently 
violated the provisions of the Statute or any agreement entered into pursuant 
to it. South Africa had in fact not violated any such provision or agreement, 
nor had it failed to comply with its safeguards undertakings as set out in 
Article XII.C, and there were thus no legal grounds for its suspension. 
Although South Africa had not signed NPT, nor placed all its peaceful nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards, there were several non-nuclear-weapon 
States at present represented on the Board who were in the same position, and 
that was not regarded, in their case, as giving grounds for suspension. 



GC(XXV1I)/0R.256 
page 11 


42. Although his delegation found South Africa's apartheid policies 
repellent, to suspend South Africa would be a clear violation of the Agency's 
Statute. It would hamper the Agency in discharging its functions, and would 
strike at the principle of universality which was fundamental to the United 
Nations system, while doing nothing to eliminate apartheid. It was important 
to keep South Africa in the Agency precisely because it had a significant 
civil nuclear programme. 
43. It had been argued that the IAEA, under its relationship agreement with 
the United Nations, was bound to implement resolutions of the United Nations 
General Assembly. However, Article I of that agreement stated clearly that 
the Agency was an autonomous body and that its Members were bound solely by 
the provisions of its Statute. He considered that the Secretariat and the 
Board had acted properly in their handling of the relevant General Assembly 
resolutions. What was important was that the Agency should be enabled to 
continue to discharge its essentially technical task of increasing the 
benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy without unleashing the 
destructive potential of the atom. 
44. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that, although the 
United States delegation claimed to be concerned with depoliticizing the IAEA, 
United States imperialism had in fact been using the Agency as a political 
tool for the past twenty-six years, and the United States delegation had begun 
to speak of "depoliticization" only after it had realized - at the 
Conference's previous session - that the Agency could no longer be used in 
that way. However, all were aware that the Agency, as an international 
technical community, was inevitably concerned also with political affairs. As 
far as the principle of universality was concerned, that principle would be 
better served, and the Agency would be healthier, if both South Africa and 
Israel were expelled from membership; their inhuman record undoubtedly 
warranted expulsion, and the Islamic Republic of Iran called upon the General 
Conference to remove those two cancer tumours from the Agency. 
45. The PRESIDENT, noting that no other delegation had requested the 
floor, put the draft resolution set forth in document GC(XXVTI)/702 to the 
vote. 
46. There were SO votes in favour and 6 against, with 19 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 

GC(XXVTI)/OR.256 
page 12 


47. Mr. ALHOLM (Finland), speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries, 
said he had abstained from voting on the draft resolution because he 
considered that operative paragraph 4 went beyond the scope of the tasks 
entrusted to the Agency within the United Nations system. The draft resolution 
also contained references to resolutions of the United Nations General 
Assembly which the Nordic countries had not supported. He would nevertheless 
strongly urge that South Africa submit all its nuclear installations to IAEA 
safeguards. 
48. Mr. HENDERSON (United Kingdom) said that he had voted against the 
draft resolution because both preambular paragraph (b) and operative 
paragraph 1 referred to General Assembly resolutions to which the United 
Kingdom was opposed. The Agency was under no obligation to implement 
resolutions of the General Assembly. The suspension of rights and privileges 
which the Board was being asked to consider under operative paragraph 4 of the 
resolution could only be put into effect under Article XIX of the Statute, 
following persistent violation of the Statute. Since South Africa had not 
committed any such violation, there was no need for the Board to consider the 
question. 
49. His delegation's vote did not imply that there would be any change in the 
current United Kingdom policy of not co-operating with South Africa in its 
nuclear programme. His delegation supported operative paragraph 2, calling 
for safeguards on all nuclear facilities in that country. 
50. Mr. NOE (Italy) said his delegation had abstained in the vote 
because the draft resolution was based on a number of United Nations 
resolutions which Italy was unable to support. Operative paragraph 4, in 
particular, ran counter to the principle of universality, which should always 
be adhered to by an organization such as the Agency. Despite his delegation's 
abstention he wished to reaffirm his whole-hearted condemnation of the policy 
of apartheid. 
51. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) said the resolution proposed restrictions 
which could constitute a de facto suspension of the privileges accorded by the 
Statute of the Agency to its Members. He had therefore voted against it, 
although Switzerland unreservedly condemned the doctrine and practice of 
apartheid, which was contrary to its own beliefs and practices as well as 
being contrary to recognized principles of international law. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 13 


52. Mr. MATSUMURA (Japan) said his delegation had abstained from voting 
because it considered the IAEA to be an international organization of a 
technical character, the aim of which was to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and to ensure global non-proliferation. The principle of 
universality on which the Agency was based should therefore be protected, and 
infringement of that principle avoided. 
53. His delegation nevertheless wished to urge South Africa to accede to NPT 
as early as possible, and to submit all its nuclear installations and 
facilities to Agency safeguards. The position of his Government remained 
unchanged, furthermore, in that it did not condone the racial policies of the 
South African Government. 
54. Mr. SUAREZ de PUGA y VILLEGAS (Spain) said that, although Spain 
condemned the policy of apartheid, it had not previously supported resolutions 
adopted by international organizations requesting Member States to cease 
co-operation with the South African regime, because it believed that isolation 
tended to be counterproductive. His delegation also had reservations about 
the wisdom of preventing a country such as South Africa from participating in 
the technical work of the Agency. 
55. Mr CLADAKIS (Greece) said he could not support the draft 
resolution despite the fact that it contained a number of worthwhile 
elements. The last part of operative paragraph 4 could be interpreted as a 
challenge to the principle of universality of membership, which was the 
cornerstone of every organization in the United Nations system. However, he 
could readily have supported operative paragraph 2, which demanded that South 
Africa place all its nuclear installations and facilities under safeguards, 
and operative paragraph 3, which called for the ending of all transfer of 
fissionable material and technology to South Africa. 
56. Mr. OTALORA (Colombia) wished to place on record his delegation's 
support for the important work done by the Agency, and its belief that the 
Agency should remain a technical organization which tolerated no political 
interference in its activities. His delegation had felt unable to support the 
draft resolution because it considered it political in character. He trusted 
that the organization's work would be able to go forward in a harmonious 
atmosphere, notably its technical assistance programme for the benefit of 
developing countries concerned in utilizing nuclear energy for peaceful 

GC(XXV11)/0R.256 
page 14 


purposes under the Agency's safeguards system. Everything possible should be 
done to spare the Agency the kind of confrontation which regrettably so often 
darkened the international scene. 


57. Mr. DARTOIS (Belgium) said his delegation had voted against the 
resolution because the request that South Africa be excluded from 
participating in the Agency's technical groups ran counter to the rights and 
privileges of Member States, and thus to the principle of universality that 
should govern international institutions. However, Belgium's condemnation of 
South Africa's apartheid policies remained unchanged. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXVII)/704) 


58. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that 11 Members had to be 
elected to the Board from the geographical areas specified in paragraph 2 of 
document GC(XXVlI)/704 to ensure that the Board would be constituted in 
accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute. 
59. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Egyptian delegation 
and a member of the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany acted as 
tellers. 
60. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members of the Board of 
Governors. 
61. The PRESIDENT said that the counting of votes would take some time 
and therefore suggested that the remaining business under item 18 be deferred 
until the tellers had reported to him. 
CONSEQUENCES OF THE ISRAELI MILITARY ATTACK ON THE IRAQI NUCLEAR RESEARCH 
REACTOR AND THE STANDING THREAT TO REPEAT THIS ATTACK FOR: (a) THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF NUCLEAR ENERGY FOR PEACEFUL PURPOSES; AND (b) THE ROLE AND 
ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY (GC(XXVII)/703/Rev.2) 


62. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the draft resolution submitted 
jointly by Algeria, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, 
Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab 
Republic, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates and Zambia contained in document 
GC(XXVII)/703/Rev.2. There had already been extensive informal discussions on 
the text, which he hoped would help to expedite its further consideration. 
63. Mr. AL-ZAHAWI (Iraq), introducing the draft resolution, said 
inclusion of item 8 on the Conference's agenda did not, as had been alleged by 

GC(XXVH)/OR.256 
page 15 


the representative of the Zionist entity, affect the role and activities of 
the Agency. On the contrary, it was Israel's unprecedented armed aggression 
against a safeguarded nuclear facility which had inflicted irreparable damage 
on the Agency and on its activities, and the Conference was in duty bound to 
investigate the consequences of that aggression. 


64. The representative of the Zionist entity had claimed that Israel had no 
policy of attacking nuclear facilities. It was true that Israel had not 
explicitly declared such a policy, but it had repeatedly declared its 
readiness to ward off any possible threat to its security by preventing its 
enemies from developing nuclear weapons. 
65. Since the debate in the General Conference the previous year on the 
subject of Israeli aggression, new evidence had come to light regarding 
Israel's nuclear capabilities. It had been learned that Israel had, in fact, 
had nuclear missiles ready for deployment since the late sixties, and had also 
been doing its utmost to prevent its Arab neighbours from developing their own 
nuclear capability. 
66. Referring to the Agency's annual report for 1982 (GC(XXVII>/684>, he 
pointed out that there were some glaring omissions in the section entitled 
"Matters of special interest to the Agency discussed by the General Assembly 
of the United Nations" (paragraphs 58 to 63 of the Introduction). That 
section should have referred specifically to General Assembly 
resolution 37/82, which demanded that Israel renounce possession of nuclear 
weapons, called upon all States to terminate nuclear collaboration with 
Israel, and condemned Israel's declared intention to repeat its armed attack 
against nuclear facilities. The report should also have referred to General 
Assembly resolution 37/19, which stated that Israel's threat to repeat such an 
armed attack constituted a serious threat to the role and activities of the 
IAEA. Those two resolutions formed the basis of the draft resolution he was 
now introducing. 
67. Operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution called for action which was 
the very minimum that could be expected from the Agency in response to the 
criminal act committed by Israel. It had been claimed that that action 
amounted to suspension of membership, but in fact it had nothing to do with 
suspension, and was concerned purely with sanctions. It should be considered 
in the context of the set-back caused to Iraq's peaceful nuclear programme, 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 16 


and also in the context of the damage done to the Agency's activities, by 
Israel's action. Operative paragraphs 5 and 6 should be seen in relation to 
General Assembly resolution 37/18, which called for consideration at the 
international level of legal measures to prohibit armed attacks against 
nuclear facilities. 


68. He urged all delegations who were concerned about the future of the 
Agency and its credibility, and who favoured international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, to vote in favour of the draft resolution. 
His delegation requested a roll-call vote. 
69. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), speaking on behalf of the States belonging to 
the Group of 77, said that the majority of those countries supported the draft 
resolution. 
70. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) recalled that his 
country's reaction to the violation of the Agency's Statute by the Zionist 
aggressor Israel was to suspend that country from the exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership. He regretted that, as a result of 
manipulation by the United States and because of Iraq's weak position, a 
brutal regime, guilty of aggression against Lebanon, and responsible for 
massacres at the Sabra and Shatila camps, continued to be a Member of an 
organization devoted to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. His country would 
bear no responsibility for any future aggressive acts of Israel as a Member of 
the Agency; rather, that responsibility should lie primarily on the United 
States and its allies. However, it was in a spirit of solidarity with the 
Group of 77 that the Islamic Republic of Iran was supporting the draft 
resolution. 
71. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), strongly opposing the draft 
resolution, observed that adoption of a resolution restricting Israel's rights 
and privileges of membership would seriously harm the Agency and its basic 
functions. The draft resolution represented a politically motivated attack on 
a Member State; it would damage the Agency's reputation as a technically 
competent organization and impair its credibility. 
72. In spite of the Israeli Government's official declaration to the United 
Nations Secretary-General that it had no policy of attacking nuclear 
facilities, the draft resolution noted that the statement had not removed the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 17 


apprehensions of Member States. That was tantamount to the General 
Conference's acting as a tribunal to judge the official statement of a Member 
State. Such a course of action would compromise the Agency's reputation for 
objectivity and involve it in political controversies. The draft resolution 
involved the General Conference in decisions which lay outside its competence 
under Article V of the Statute. 


73. While sympathetic to the need for an international convention prohibiting 
attacks on peaceful nuclear facilities, his Government considered that the 
Agency was not the appropriate forum. It might be recalled that the matter 
was being discussed by the United Nations Committee on Disarmament. 
74. By calling for further consideration of the subject at the following 
session of the General Conference, the draft resolution was likely to initiate 
another year of harmful political controversy and to divert the Agency from 
its technical tasks, which were of vital interest to all Members. 
75. Mr. EILAM (Israel) recalled that a sufficient number of responsible 
Member States had upheld the principle of universality by rejecting, at the 
twenty-sixth session of the General Conference, the politically motivated 
proposal of Iraq calling for suspension of Israel's rights and privileges as a 
Member of the Agency. The draft resolution now before the Conference did in 
effect discriminate against Israel. His Government wished to state 
categorically that it had no policy of attacking nuclear facilities and that 
it supported international efforts to arrive at an early arrangement with a 
view to prohibiting such attacks. 
76. The draft resolution was based on extraneous political considerations 
outside the scope of the Conference's statutory mandate, and sought to 
introduce a further harmful element of politicization and discrimination. 
Urging all responsible delegations to reject the draft resolution, he 
emphasized that what was at stake was not only the quality and universality 
but the very future of the Agency as an international instrument and as a 
technical organization with a specific mission in the nuclear field. 
77. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the statement of the 
United States delegate to the effect that Israel had no policy of 
systematically bombing nuclear facilities was meaningless: Israel itself had 
never previously claimed to have such a policy, yet it had bombed the Iraqi 
facility. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 18 


78. Nor could the Arab States accept the United States view that they were 
diverting the Agency from its technical tasks for political reasons. If they 
had had any such intention, they would have raised the issue of Israel in 1967 
and again after the occupation of almost half of Lebanon. But aggression 
against a peaceful nuclear facility was not merely a political act, it was an 
attack directed at the very heart of the Agency and its safeguards system. It 
was precisely in defence of the Agency's reputation and the credibility of its 
safeguards that the matter had been raised. 
79. The delegates who claimed to champion the principle of universality in 
the Agency's membership seemed to have a wrong understanding of that 
principle. The Arab States had always supported the right of any State to be 
a Member of the Agency and other United Nations organizations. They were not 
calling for Israel's expulsion but for sanctions. Any Member State which 
endangered mankind was subject to sanctions. Lastly, it was worth recalling 
that many of those States which were clamouring for universality had for long 
kept the People's Republic of China out of the United Nations. 
80. Mr. AL-ZAHAWI (Iraq) said the United States delegate had alleged 
that the action which the General Conference was being asked to take against 
Israel was in violation of the Statute. The draft resolution submitted at the 
twenty-sixth session of the General Conference had sought Israel's suspension 
under Article XIX of the Statute, which provided for suspension of "a member 
which has persistently violated the provisions of the Statute ....". Israel 
had in fact violated Article IV.B by flouting the United Nations Charter and 
the Agency's Statute and also Article IV.C, which called for sovereign 
equality of all Members, by putting itself above the United Nations, the 
Agency, its safeguards system, the Non-Proliferation Treaty and so on. It was 
only in the face of the United States threat to destroy the Agency by 
withdrawing from it that Iraq was refraining from calling for Israel's 
expulsion. And it was worth recalling in that connection the statements made 
by various United States leaders expressing their apprehensions about the 
consequences of the Israeli attack against the Iraqi facility. 
81. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that the delegate of Iraq had 
requested a roll-call vote on the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXVII)/703/Rev.2. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 19 


82. Iraq, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote 
first. 
83. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, 


Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, 


Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, 


German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, 


Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Republic of Korea, 


Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, 


Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, 


Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab 


Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 


Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, 


Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia. 


Against: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Colombia, Denmark, France, 
Federal Republic of Germany, Guatemala, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay. 


Abstaining: Austria, Ecuador, Finland, Gabon, Greece, Holy See, 


Ivory Coast, Kenya, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Spain, Sri Lanka, 


Sweden, Thailand, United Republic of Tanzania, Zaire. 


84. There were 49 votes in favour and 24 against, with 17 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 
85. Mr. HENDERSON (United Kingdom) regretted that his delegation had 
been unable to vote in favour of the draft resolution because paragraph 3 
amounted to discriminating against a Member State in violation of the 
principle of universality. Reiterating his Government's condemnation of the 
Israeli attack, he hoped that the Government of Israel would without delay 
take the action called for in operative paragraph 2. 
86. Mr. VAN BARNEVELD KOOY (Netherlands) emphasized that his Government 
condemned the Israeli attack and would not like to see such acts repeated. It 
was in favour of an international agreement prohibiting attacks on safeguarded 
facilities containing significant amounts of nuclear material. Although the 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 20 


Netherlands subscribed to much that the resolution contained, it was bound to 
oppose the resolution as a whole because it infringed the principle of 
universality of participation in international organizations. The lines of 
communication between States should be left open, and his country could not 
approve any action depriving a Member State of participation in activities 
normally associated with membership. Furthermore, the procedure was of 
doubtful constitutional validity. 


87. In conclusion, he called upon Israel to state clearly that it had no 
intention of attacking safeguarded peaceful nuclear facilities. 
88. Mr. ARZUBIAGA ROSPIGLIOSI (Peru) said that he had abstained from 
voting because the action called for in operative paragraph 3 was of a 
political nature; it lay outside the Agency's competence and affected the 
principle of universality, which Peru regarded as basic. 
89. Nevertheless, he wished to reiterate his Government's strong condemnation 
of the Israeli attack against the Iraqi facility under Agency safeguards. His 
Government supported the call for an international agreement prohibiting 
military attacks against peaceful nuclear facilities. In that connection, he 
wished to reaffirm the right of developing countries to acquire and develop 
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. 
90. Mr. DIDIER (Brazil) said that, although his delegation had voted 
for the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVTI)/703/Rev.2, it would 
have been happier if a different wording had been used in operative 
paragraph 3. 
91. Mr. MIYAZAWA (Japan) wished to explain why he had voted against the 
draft resolution. 
92. The Agency was an organization of a technical nature. Its function was 
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the world, while 
ensuring non-proliferation. The principle of universality must therefore be 
respected and any infringement of that principle avoided. He wished to stress 
that Japan had strongly condemned the Israeli attack on the Iraqi reactor and 
that its stand had not changed since June 1981. It once again urged the 
Government of Israel to accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and accept 
Agency safeguards on all its nuclear facilities. In that connection, he 
reiterated Japan's basic position in support of an international convention 
prohibiting attacks against peaceful nuclear facilities. 

GC(XXV1I)/0R.256 
page 21 


93. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece) said that his delegation might have been able 
to support the draft resolution had it not been for the fact that operative 
paragraph 3 could be interpreted, indirectly, as questioning the principle of 
universality. For that reason he had abstained in the voting. If a vote had 
been taken paragraph by paragraph, he would have voted for all but 
paragraph 3, on which he would have abstained. 
94. Mr. LEVRERO PUIG (Uruguay) said that he had voted against the draft 
resolution because it was political in nature. Uruguay had always maintained 
that the United Nations was the appropriate forum for the discussion of 
political issues. 
95. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said that Israel's attack on the Iraqi reactor 
was a res judicata, having been dealt with on two occasions. The case could 
not be reopened, especially as the Israeli Government, in a letter to the 
United Nations Secretary-General (set forth in document GC(XXVTI)/699), had 
declared that it had no policy of attacking nuclear facilities. Paraguay had 
therefore abstained in the vote. The General Conference was not the competent 
forum to judge Member States for political misdemeanours. 
96. Mr. OTALORA (Colombia) recalled that his delegation had already 
condemned the Israeli act before the United Nations General Assembly. 
However, it considered the Agency to be a technical body, which meant that the 
General Conference was not competent to pass judgement on political matters. 
He had accordingly been unable to support the draft resolution. 
The meeting was suspended at 6.55 p.m. and resumed at 8.45 p.m. 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXVII)/704) (resumed) 


97. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of the 
voting: 
98. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Latin America 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 39 
Valid votes: 147 
Required majority: 37 



GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 22 


Votes obtained: 


Chile 68 


Cuba 79 


99. Having obtained the required majority. Chile and Cuba were elected to the 
Board. 
100. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Western Europe 
was as follows; 
Abstentions; 7 
Valid votes: 177 
Required majority; 45 
Votes obtained: 
Austria 89 
Italy 88 

101. Having obtained the required majority. Austria and Italy were elected to 
the Board. 
102. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Eastern Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 14 
Valid votes: 172 
Required majority: 44 
Votes obtained; 


Hungary 84 
Yugoslavia 88 


103. Having obtained the required majority. Hungary and Yugoslavia were 
elected to the Board. 
104. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was as 
follows: 
Abstentions; 13 
Valid votes: 173 
Required majority: 44 



GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 23 


Votes obtained; 


Nigeria 87 


Tunisia 86 


105. Having obtained the required majority, Nigeria and Tunisia were elected 
to the Board. 
106. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 14 
Valid votes: 78 
Required majority: 40 
Votes obtained: 
Islamic Republic of Iran 2 
Iraq 2 
Syrian Arab Republic 74 

107. Having obtained the required majority, the Syrian Arab Republic was 
elected to the Board. 
108. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Far East 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 19 
Valid votes: 66 
Required majority: 34 
Votes obtained: 


Mongolia 1 
Philippines 65 


109. Having obtained the required majority, the Philippines was elected to the 
Board. 
110. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific or of the Far East was as 
follows: 
Abstentions: 12 
Valid votes: 81 
Required majority: 41 



GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 24 


Votes obtained: 
Islamic Republic of Iran 11 
Iraq 58 
Mongolia 1 
Philippines 9 
Syrian Arab Republic 2 

111. Having obtained the required majority. Iraq was elected to the Board. 
112. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, 
recalled that under Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold office from 
the end of the current session until the end of the twenty-ninth regular 
session of the General Conference, i.e. for a period of two years. 
113. He thanked the delegations of the Federal Republic of Germany and Egypt, 
which had provided tellers, the two tellers themselves, and their Secretariat 
assistants. 
ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


114. Mr. SINGH (Malaysia), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the Committee's report on items 5(b), 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 
and 16 of the agenda, which had been referred to it for initial discussion. 
115. The Committee of the Whole recommended that the General Conference adopt 
the following draft resolutions: 
The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/697 


(item 5(b) - Chinese as a working language of the General 
Conference); 


The draft resolution contained in Part I of document GC(XXVII)/685 
(item 9 - The Agency's accounts for 1982). 


116. With regard to item 10 (The Agency's budget for 1984), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt draft resolution A set out in 
document GC(XXVII)/686/Mod.1 and draft resolutions B and C set out in document 
GC(XXVII)/686, on the understanding that no part of the amount of $85 000 
allocated under the 1984 budget for a study on international plutonium storage 
would be spent before the Board of Governors had taken a decision on the 
matter in 1984. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 25 


117. Still on item 10 of the agenda, the Committee had studied the draft 
resolution entitled "The International Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material" contained in document GC(XXVTI>/706, and a majority had 
been in favour of recommending the General Conference to adopt that draft 
resolution. The representatives of a number of countries, including the 
Islamic Republic of Iran, had not been able to support that recommendation and 
had expressed reservations regarding the draft resolution. 
118. On item 11 (The financing of safeguards), the Committee recommended that 
the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXVTI)/687. 
119. In deciding to make that recommendation, the Committee suggested that the 
Conference request the Board of Governors to initiate, immediately after the 
current session of the General Conference, consultations open to all 
interested Member States on the financing of safeguards after 1984. 
120. With regard to item 12 (Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 
1984), the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/691 with the annex reproduced in 
document GC(XXVII)/691/Mod.1. 
121. However, in making that recommendation, the Committee suggested that the 
General Conference request the Board of Governors to investigate various ways 
of establishing the scale of assessment of Members' contributions and submit a 
report on the results of its work to the General Conference at its next 
regular session. 
122. The representative of Brazil, while supporting the suggestion that the 
Board should undertake such a study, had objected in the Committee to the 
scale set forth in the annex to document GC(XXVII)/691/Mod.1. 
123. With respect to item 13 (The financing of technical assistance), the 
Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXVII)/707. 
124. As to item 14 (Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat), the. Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXVTI)/708. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 26 


125. During the Committee's examination of that item a large number of 
representatives of developing and industrialized countries, while insisting on 
the importance they attached to the provisions of Article VII.D of the 
Statute, had nonetheless expressed concern at the under-representation of 
their countries within the Secretariat. 
126. In connection with that same item, France, together with Canada, Ivory 
Coast and Zaire, had submitted a draft resolution concerning the use of the 
Agency's working languages in the Secretariat. That draft resolution had been 
studied by an informal working group presided over by one of the Vice-chairmen 
of the Committee, Mr. de Castro Neves (Brazil), who had indicated in his 
report to the Committee that the members of the working group had not been 
able to reach agreement on the draft resolution, but were agreed that France 
could, if it so desired, raise the questions forming the subject of that draft 
resolution in the Board of Governors. The Committee of the Whole had taken 
note of the agreement reached on that matter. 
127. With regard to item 15 (Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute), the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXVII)/709. 
128. During the Committee's examination of that item the representatives of 
Egypt and the United Republic of Tanzania had urgently recommended that the 
General Conference request the Board of Governors to set up a working group to 
study the implementation of General Conference resolution GC(XXV)/RES/389. 
Another representative had suggested that the summary record of the 
Committee's deliberations on the matter be transmitted to the Board of 
Governors and that it be left to the Board to decide what action to take. The 
representative of the Soviet Union had stated that his country, together with 
several others, felt that the Board should decide for itself what procedure it 
wished to adopt in examining that issue. It had been agreed that the summary 
record of the Committee's deliberations should be transmitted to the Board for 
its information. 


129. Finally, with respect to item 16 (Review of the Agency's activities), the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXVII)/710. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 27 


130. The PRESIDENT thanked the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole 
and suggested that the draft resolutions relating to the items of the agenda 
that had been referred to the Committee could now be considered by the 
Conference with a view to their adoption. 
131. It was so agreed. 
Application for Membership of the Agency 


(b) Chinese as a working language of the General Conference 
132. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/697 was adopted. 
The Agency's accounts for 1982 


133. The draft resolution contained in Part I of document GC(XXVII)/685 was 
adopted 
The Agency's budget for 1984 
134. Draft resolution A contained in document GC(XXVII)/686/Mod.1 and draft 
resolutions B and C contained in Annex VI to document GC(XXVII)/686 were 
adopted on the understanding that no part of the amount of $85 000 allocated 
under the 1984 budget for a study on international Plutonium storage would be 
spent before the Board of Governors had taken a decision on the matter in 1984. 
135. Mr. ERNEMANN (Belgium) said that there were two reasons why his 
country could not approve the budget for 1984 which had just been adopted. 
Firstly, that budget did not observe the constraint of zero growth which 
Belgium considered to be imperative for international organizations at a time 
when all countries were experiencing budgetary difficulties, some of them 
quite severe. Secondly, his Government considered that the safeguards budget 
showed unjustifiable growth. There could be no doubt about his Government's 
firm belief in the policy of non-proliferation, but at the same time it felt 
that safeguards policy should be reviewed. He hoped that account would be. 
taken of his remarks when the 1985 budget was prepared. 
Draft resolution on "The International Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material" (GC(XXVII)/706) 


136. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/706 was adopted. 
137. Mr. SINGH (India) said that his delegation had reservations 
regarding the resolution which had just been adopted. He recalled that during 
the deliberations of the Committee of the Whole it had been proposed that the 
resolution in question be approved by acclamation and that India had opposed 

GC(XXV1I)/0R.256 
page 28 


that proposal, not only because it had not signed the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material but also because the Convention 
contained elements which India considered discriminatory. The final 
sub-paragraph of its preamble, for example, would in the final analysis serve 
to place the nuclear-weapon States, as distinct from the non-nuclear-weapon 
States, beyond the scope of the Convention. Similarly, Article 2 of the 
Convention contained a number of provisions which India deemed unacceptable 
for the same reasons. Finally, he stressed that, while to date only 37 Member 
States had signed the Convention, 13 of them had expressed serious 
reservations about it. 


The financing of safeguards 


138. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/687 was adopted. 
139. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
assume that the General Conference wished to request the Board to initiate, 
immediately after the current session of the Conference, consultations open to 
all interested Member States on the financing of safeguards after 1984. 
140. It was so decided. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1984 


141. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/691 and the annex 
reproduced in document GC(XXVII)/691/Mod.1 were adopted. 
142. The PRESIDENT said that, in the absence of any objections, he would 
assume that the Conference wished to request the Board to investigate various 
ways of establishing the scale of assessment of Members' contributions and to 
submit a report on the results of its work to the General Conference at its 
next regular session. 
143. It was so decided. 
The financing of technical assistance 


144. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/707 was adopted. 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


145. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVII)/708 was adopted. 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 29 


Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


146. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVTI)/709 was adopted. 
Review of the Agency's activities 


147. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVTI)/710 was adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 


148. The PRESIDENT recalled that an External Auditor had been appointed 
by the General Conference at its twenty-fifth regular session to audit the 
Agency's accounts for 1982 and 1983. The Conference now had to appoint an 
External Auditor to audit the Agency's accounts for 1984 and 1985. Since the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of Kenya had indicated his willingness to 
serve as External Auditor for a further period of two years, he (the 
President) proposed that the General Conference appoint him as External 
Auditor for 1984 and 1985. 
149. The President's proposal was accepted. 
150. The PRESIDENT thanked the Comptroller and Auditor General of Kenya 
for the work he had already done for the Agency. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


151. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was at present 
represented on the Staff Pension Committee by two members - Mr. Aman 
(Indonesia) and Mr. Hofland (Netherlands) - and by Mr. Rybka (Hungary) and 
Mr. Ugalde Bilbao (Chile) as alternates. Since three of them were no longer 
able to serve on the Committee, he proposed that the General Conference elect 
Mr. Lozada (Philippines) and Mr. Ugalde Bilbao (Chile) as members and 
Mr. Dartois (Belgium) and Mr. Nitzsche (German Democratic Republic) as 
alternates. 
152. Mr. Lozada (Philippines) and Mr. Ugalde Bilbao (Chile) were elected as 
members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee and Mr. Dartois (Belgium) and 
Mr. Nitzsche (German Democratic Republic) as alternates. 

GC(XXV11)/0R.256 
page 30 


REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1984 (GC(XXVII)/695/Rev.4> 


153. The PRESIDENT said that document GC(XXVII)/695/Rev.4 contained 
information on the voluntary contributions for 1984 pledged by 10 p.m. on 
13 October 1983. By that time the total amount of contributions pledged by 
the Agency's Member States had been US $10 852 382. Since then Nigeria, Spain 
and Australia had announced pledges of $42 750, $30 000 and $336 036, 
respectively. Thus, the aggregate amount so far pledged was $11 261 168. 
154. The pledges announced so far represented 50.5% of the target. Various 
delegations had indicated that, given the dates set for the adoption of their 
national budgets, their Governments could not announce their pledges until 
some time later. He appealed to those Member States which had not yet done so 
to pledge their voluntary contributions as soon as possible; that appeal was 
addressed in particular to those States which could easily afford their base 
rate share of the target recommended. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


155. Mr. MANOUAN (Ivory Coast), speaking on behalf of the African group, 
expressed admiration and appreciation to the President for the remarkable way 
in which he had guided the work of the Conference at its twenty-seventh 
session to a successful conclusion. He wished, through the President, to 
extend that tribute also to the other Members of the General Committee. 
156. The twenty-seventh session of the General Conference had marked an 
historic turning-point in the Agency's endeavours to increase the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. 
157. The countries of the African continent, which stood in greater need of 
technology than others if they were to satisfy their legitimate aspirations 
for the well-being of their peoples, and which were accordingly firmly 
committed to the Agency's objectives, were delighted with the success of the 
twenty-seventh session of the General Conference, a success which was due not 
only to the President, but also to the work done and the spirit of 
co-operation shown by the various groups. 
158. The African group was grateful for the support services provided by the 
Secretariat, which had done so much to facilitate the work of the Conference, 
and wished to thank the Austrian Government for its generous hospitality. 

GC(XXVII)/0R.256 
page 31 


159. Mr. MOLITOR (Luxembourg), speaking on behalf of the Western Europe 
group, complimented the President on his diligence, shrewd judgement and 
competence, which, at all levels, had enabled the General Conference to 
complete its often difficult work successfully. 
160. He also thanked the members of the General Committee and the Director 
General and his colleagues for the care they had taken in planning and 
preparing for the Conference, contributing thereby to the furtherance of 
international co-operation. 
161. The Western Europe group was deeply appreciative of the traditional 
hospitality extended by the Austrian Government and people, to whom it wished 
to express its sincere gratitude. 
162. Mr. SINGH (India), speaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Middle East and South Asia, commended the staff serving the General 
Conference, who, under the guidance of the Director General, had enabled its 
meetings to take place in a relaxed and business-like atmosphere. 
163. A special tribute was due to the President, under whose outstanding 
guidance it had proved possible to avoid the tensions which had marked the 
previous session; that remarkable achievement was due, in particular, to the 
regular consultations held with the "friends of the President". His efforts 
in the direction of conciliation and compromise and his desire for consensus 
had enabled the Conference to avoid a number of errors made at previous 
sessions. 
164. The Middle East and South Asia group considered that the General 
Conference had adopted three particularly important resolutions, namely those 
on the protection of nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes 
against armed attacks, the nuclear capabilities of South Africa and the 
consequences of the military attack by Israel on the Iraqi nuclear research 
reactor. Thanks to the skill and conciliatory spirit shown by the Chairman of 
the Group of 77 and thanks also to the co-operation of other groups, the 
General Conference had been able to adopt all three resolutions by a majority 
of two thirds. 
165. Mr. BELTRAMINO (Argentina), acting as spokesman for the Latin 
American group, congratulated the President, who, fulfilling the expectations 
of the delegations which had elected him, had guided the proceedings in a 

GC(XXV1I)/0R.256 
page 32 


quite remarkable way and had, in particular, succeeded in avoiding the various 
problems and obstacles which had arisen by seeking, wherever possible, common 
ground where agreement could be reached and hence effective decisions taken. 


166. He also thanked the Director General and his colleagues and expressed his 
gratitude to the host country. He was convinced that the atmosphere and style 
at the twenty-seventh session of the General Conference would continue to 
prevail in the future for the greater good of the Agency's work. 
167. Mr. MIYAZAWA (Japan), speaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Far East, joined the preceding speakers in complimenting the President on the 
skill and wisdom with which he had tackled a full and difficult agenda. A 
tribute was also due to Mr. Blix and his colleagues, whose work and commitment 
had contributed to the success of the session, and, finally, to the Austrian 
Government and the City of Vienna for their hospitality. 
168. Mr. WILLIAMSON (United States of America), speaking on behalf of 
the North American region, wished to associate himself with the preceding 
speakers in paying tribute to the competent and efficient way in which the 
President had guided the work of the General Conference. 
169. For the first time in the Agency's history, the President of the General 
Conference had also been the Chairman of the Board of Governors, and his 
exceptional wisdom, his talents and his devotion to the task had contributed 
in an unprecedented way to the success of the session. 
170. Mr. CHUTHASMIT (Thailand), acting as spokesman for the region of 
South East Asia and the Pacific, complimented the President on his wisdom and 
good judgement, qualities which had won him the admiration of all. Thanks 
were due also to the Vice-President and to the other members of the General 
Committee, who had facilitated the Conference's work. He wished to mention, 
in particular, the contribution made by the countries of South East Asia 
through Mr. Singh of Malaysia, who had served as Chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole. 
171. The Director General and his colleagues in the Secretariat also deserved 
special thanks for their efficient work. 
172. In the course of its deliberations, the Conference had come up against 
differences of opinion, which was entirely to be expected. Nevertheless, the 
spirit of co-operation which had reigned, enabling acceptable solutions to be 

GC(XXV1I)/0R.256 
page 33 


found to problems shared by all participating countries, was a rare 
achievement; all delegations could be justifiably proud of the part they had 
played in the success of the twenty-seventh session of the General Conference. 


173. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) stated that his country and the entire region 
of Eastern Europe, for which he was speaking, wished to express their sincere 
gratitude to the President, whose tireless efforts and keen sense of diplomacy 
had justified the hopes of those who had elected him. 
174. The wisdom and tolerance which he had displayed had greatly facilitated 
the work of the Conference, which he had successfully guided around various 
rocks and reefs, thus confirming the Agency's ability to foster both the 
development of co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and the 
progress of the non-proliferation concept. Having also thanked the Director 
General and his colleagues, he wished the President every success in his 
future career. 
175. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77, 
expressed satisfaction at the way in which the atmosphere of the current 
session of the Conference had compared with that of the previous year's 
session. He was deeply appreciative of the skill with which the President had 
guided the deliberations of the Conference and also thanked the General 
Committee and the "friends of the President" for their valuable 
collaboration. Having expressed his sincere gratitude to the Austrian 
Government and people, he thanked the delegates who had supported draft 
resolution GC(XXVII)/702 and also those who had abstained from voting on the 
matter. He had taken note of the reasons for which other delegates had 
opposed the resolution and wished to express his appreciation of the efforts 
made to reach a consensus. He concluded by thanking the Director General and 
his colleagues. 
176. The PRESIDENT thanked the speakers for the kind words addressed to 
him and to his colleagues in the General Committee. It had been a privilege 
to serve as President of the General Conference at its twenty-seventh session, 
and through his election he felt that his country and his regional group had 
also been honoured. He would miss his work for the Agency, which had brought 
him great satisfaction, especially during the past two years. He thanked the 
Austrian authorities and the City of Vienna for their hospitality and also 

GC(XXVII)/OR.256 
page 34 


paid tribute to the Director General for his advice and to the staff of the 
Secretariat for their assistance during his presidency. 


177. In accordance with Article 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence for prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


178. The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-seventh session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 10.5 p.m. 



