GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
March 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Monday, 24 September 1984, at 10.20 a.m. 


Temporary President; Mr. KEBLUSEK (Czechoslovakia) 
President; Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
- Opening of the session 1 6 
Election of the President 7 14 
Opening statements 15 16 
2 Message from the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations 17 22 
3 Statement by the Director General 23 87 
4 Statement by the Director General 
of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations 88 - 114 
6 Voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1985 115 - 116 
1 Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 117 - 120 
7 General debate and annual report 
for 1983 121 145 
Statement by the delegate of; 
United States of America 121 - 145 

_*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 4 October 1984. 


**/ GC(XXVIII)/711. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-0200 


0186e 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the twenty-eighth regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed the delegates, observers, 
representatives of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and 
representatives of other intergovernmental organizations. 
4. The significance of the present session was emphasized by the 
participation of ministers from a large number of countries. The Directors 
General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and of 
the Agency deserved congratulations on twenty years of successful co-operation 
in the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic 
Energy for Food and Agricultural Development. 
5. The experience of the past year had shown that the Agency had consolidated 
its position in a number of areas and emphasized the importance of the tasks 
facing the Agency and its Members. Unfortunately, international tension and 
the threat of nuclear war had increased, so that the Agency's work on behalf 
of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, aimed at preventing the emergence 
of new nuclear-weapon States, would have to be strengthened. There would have 
to be close co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, a field in 
which the Agency was a recognized international body with substantial 
authority, and the preservation of a climate conducive to discussion of the 
complex problems arising in that sphere was bound to have particular 
importance. 
6. He hoped that the present session of the General Conference would assist 
the Agency in carrying out its tasks and enhance the practical value of 
nuclear energy for all mankind, ensuring at the same time that it would never 
be used for destruction and annihilation. In its multilateral activities, the 
Agency could contribute to the cause of peace and help to remove the threat of 
war. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 3 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


7. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
8. Mr. CASTRO DlAZ BALART (Cuba), speaking on behalf of the Latin 
America regional group, proposed Mr. Barreda Delgado, delegate of Peru, as 
President of the General Conference at its twenty-eighth regular session. 
Mr. Delgado's wide experience, among other things as President of the Peruvian 
Nuclear Energy Institute, justified every confidence that he would guide the 
work of the Conference to a successful conclusion. 
9. Mr. NISIO (Italy), speaking on behalf of the Western Europe regional 
group, seconded the nomination of Mr. Barreda Delgado and assured him of the 
full co-operation of the delegates of the West European Member States. 
10. Mr. OSZTROVSZKY (Hungary), on behalf of the Eastern Europe regional 
group, Mr. BADDOU (Morocco), on behalf of the Africa regional group, 
Mr. RAMANNA (India), on behalf of the Middle East and South Asia regional 
group, Mr. ONGKILI (Malaysia), on behalf of the South East Asia and the 
Pacific regional group, and Mr. SIAZON (Philippines), on behalf of the Far 
East regional group, supported the nomination. 
11. Mr. Barreda Delgado (Peru) was elected President of the General Conference 
for its twenty-eighth regular session by acclamation. 
12. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT congratulated Mr. Barreda Delgado on his 
election. 
Mr. Barreda Delgado (Peru) took the Chair. 


13. The PRESIDENT thanked the representative of the Latin America 
regional group for nominating him and expressed his gratitude to the delegates 
from the other regional groups who had supported the nomination. His election 
gave him personal satisfaction and was also a recognition of the efforts being 
made by Peru in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Through the work of the 
Agency, a tool first used for military purposes had been converted into an 
instrument for the tasks of peace} in that way, the Agency's activities had 
contributed to the technical, economic and social development of Member States. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 


page 4 


14. The General Conference had to examine the best ways in which the Agency 
could fulfil its objective of enlarging the contribution of nuclear energy to 
human well-being and prosperity, and he appealed to delegates to approach 
their work in a spirit of co-operation which would make it possible to 
establish programmes well adapted to that objective. 
OPENING STATEMENTS 


15. The PRESIDENT proposed that, in view of the fact that consultations 
were still being held on the composition of the General Committee, the 
Conference waive Rule 42(a) of the Rules of Procedure and proceed immediately 
to items 2, 3, 4 and 6. 
16. It was so decided. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


17. Mr. ALLAF, the representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations, said that, at a time when doubts were being expressed about the 
capacity of multilateral institutions to deal effectively with the world's 
complex problems, the Agency had demonstrated that such institutions could in 
fact bring substantial benefits to the world community. 
18. The management of nuclear energy should be such as to ensure that the 
benefits to be gained from its peaceful uses were accessible to all countries 
and that the dangers inherent in its use for military purposes were first 
controlled and then eliminated. Although the threat posed by nuclear weapons 
had continued to grow, it might have been still more grave without the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the safeguards provided by the 
Agency. 
19. For 27 years, nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States had worked 
together effectively in the Agency. It was essential that Member States 
should not allow political tensions to jeopardize the Agency's work and it was 
equally important that ways be found to enhance still further the benefits 
which the Agency could confer on countries in need of peaceful nuclear 
technology and the assurances it could give to the world community. The 
safety of peaceful nuclear installations needed to be improved and the problem 
of nuclear waste still had to be resolved. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 5 


20. The United Nations was going ahead with plans for its Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
and was also deeply involved in preparations for the Third Review Conference 
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The 
co-operation and assistance of the Agency was essential for both Conferences. 
Each Conference could be expected to highlight the indispensable role that the 
Agency played in a nuclear world. 
21. If multilateral institutions such as the Agency and the United Nations 
itself were fully supported, international security and confidence would be 
enhanced. Increased confidence was essential in order to reduce nuclear 
arsenals and to facilitate the enjoyment by all countries of the benefits to 
be gained from the peaceful and well-considered utilization of atomic energy, 
a purpose which both Conferences would pursue. 
22. He wished the General Conference success in improving the capacity of the 
Agency to fulfil the great tasks which lay ahead and personally congratulated 
Mr. Barreda Delgado on his election to the post of President of the General 
Conference. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


23. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that, from the beginning of human cultures, 
exchange of experience and the transfer of knowledge had been among the 
strongest promoters of development. That remained so at the present time, 
although now experience was exchanged and knowledge transferred not so much in 
market places, in ports and at caravan crossings as at thousands of meetings 
between persons with specialized professions, in the pages of scientific 
publications, through the use of computer-stored scientific information and 
data, and through the visits of experts and students. 
24. One of the main functions of the IAEA was to promote the peaceful 
development and uses of nuclear energy through the exchange of knowledge, 
experience and technology, and one very important way of achieving that 
exchange was through the organization of meetings. Indeed, the General 
Conference itself was a meeting place for the governmental sector of the 
nuclear world, and it was to be hoped that, apart from fulfilling its 
constitutional and policy-making tasks, it would serve as an instrument for 
contact at the professional and political level. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 6 


25. The General Conference was the biggest and most representative meeting 
place of the Agency's Members, but most of the meetings organized by the IAEA 
were technical. Some 290 technical meetings had been organized during the 
previous year under the auspices of the Agency. The important transfer of 
knowledge in the nuclear field that had been initiated so magnificently by the 
Geneva Conferences was thus continuing on a large scale, though in a less 
spectacular manner. 
26. The impact of the meetings organized under the auspices of the Agency was 
usually enhanced by the publication of proceedings, technical reports or 
conclusions; the experience reported at Agency meetings was thus disseminated 
to many who were unable to attend them. During the past year the Agency had 
published over 150 separate books or journal issues. 
27. Another powerful means of exchanging knowledge was the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS). Research and development was rapidly 
expanding knowledge and capabilities in the nuclear field. Traditional 
libraries were no longer sufficient, but through the "computerized central 
library" researchers all over the world could have rapid access to the latest 
literature in the nuclear field from anywhere in the world. At present INIS 
contained some 860 000 items, and some 6000 to 7000 items were added each 
month. An exchange of information also took place through the Agency's 
nuclear data programme, whose principal objective was to provide the best 
available data to scientists and engineers in Member States. In response to 
more than 5000 requests during the past 20 years, over 6000 technical reports, 
almost half a million sets of numerical data and some 500 data processing 
computer codes had been distributed. Two thirds of those services had been 
requested by developing countries. 
28. Much of the Agency's activity in technical co-operation with developing 
countries involved the transfer of knowledge and technology for development through 
expert missions, fellowships, scientific visits, seminars and 
courses. The International Centre for Theoretical Physics had been and 
remained a remarkable instrument for the exchange of knowledge and experience 
which had brought together thousands of scholars and researchers and 
stimulated them to further work in their own countries. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 7 


29. Other Agency activities did not aim primarily at the transfer of 
technology, but helped to create conditions under which technology transfer 
through international trade and co-operation in the nuclear field was 
facilitated. The elaboration of norms of various kinds - guides, standards, 
recommendations, conventions - in the areas of waste management, transport and 
safety facilitated international transfers of equipment and materials. Also, 
the operation of the Agency's safeguards system had a vital role to play in 
creating the confidence necessary for trade and co-operation in the nuclear 
field. 
30. All the Agency's activities served the same two aims - namely, to promote 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to help prevent the further spread of 
nuclear weapons. Those two aims were linked. If the spectre of vertical and 
horizontal nuclear weapons proliferation could be removed, then there would be 
less hesitation about the acceptance of all the peaceful uses of the atom. At 
the same time, full access to the tremendous resources of the atom for power 
and heat generation and for agriculture, medicine and industry would help to 
create conditions conducive to peace. 
31. The impression might sometimes arise that the Agency, in dealing with a 
highly sophisticated technology, was far removed from the grim realities of 
many Member States; poverty and under-nourishment. It was true that the 
Agency was dealing with some of the most advanced techniques in the world, but 
it had to be made clear that many of those techniques could be both useful and 
cost-effective in the fight against starvation, illness and under-development. 
32. For many years the Agency had engaged, together with the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), in efforts to promote 
world food production, and the present year marked the twentieth anniversary 
of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic 
Energy for Food and Agricultural Development. The Agency was privileged to 
celebrate that anniversary together with the Director General of FAO, 
Dr. Edouard Saouma, who would soon be addressing the Conference. For two 
decades FAO and the Agency had been linked in close and harmonious 
collaboration, achieving results which they could not have achieved singly. 
Through that collaboration they had also set an example of how international 
organizations should act when their mandates touched or overlapped. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR. 257 
page 8 


33. The Agency and FAO were co-operating in the use of the "sterile insect 
technique", based on sterilization by irradiation, to combat the Mediterranean 
fruit fly, which spoiled large quantities of fruit, and the tsetse fly, which 
still plagued huge tracts of land in Africa. The results so far were very 
promising. The Agency, through its Laboratory at Seibersdorf, was also 
collaborating closely with FAO in the use of the new and far-reaching 
possibilities offered by biotechnology in agricultural research and 
development, where nuclear techniques could make unique contributions. 
Irradiation was, of course, one of the main methods of inducing mutations in 
plants, and the employment of radioisotopes had created vast and valuable 
opportunities for crop plant improvement. In the field of biotechnology, 
where training had been stepped up, close contact was also maintained with the 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), which was 
launching a major effort to establish international centres for biotechnology 
and genetic engineering. 
34. During 1984 interested Member States had established an International 
Consultative Group on Food Irradiation to provide advice in the field of food 
irradiation to the Agency, FAO and WHO. The technique of food irradiation was 
evoking increasing interest, not least because it offered an alternative to 
chemical additives for food disinfestation and shelf-life extension. The 
latest issue of the Agency's Bulletin, which was devoted to applications of 
nuclear science in food and agriculture, contained reports on food irradiation 
activities. 
35. The Agency's programme for technical co-operation with developing 
countries was a mechanism for facilitating the acquisition not only of 
technology relating to nuclear power but also - indeed primarily - of nuclear 
techniques employed in areas such as agriculture, medicine and industry. The 
Agency's technical co-operation activities had expanded considerably. In 1982 
the Secretariat had been engaged in implementing about 500 projects, whereas 
the corresponding figure for 1983 had exceeded 700, and the Agency was at 
present implementing more than 800 projects. The growth in actual assistance 
delivered could be illustrated by comparing the first six months of 1983 and 
the same period in 1984, between which there had been an increase of 35% in 
expert assignments, of 24% in dollars spent on equipment, and or 13% in 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 9 


the number of fellows in the field. That increase had been achieved without 


increasing the number of staff involved in the administration of the 
programme. However, more staff resources would be needed if the larger 
programme was to maintain its effectiveness. 


36. More than half of the resources for technical co-operation came from 
Member States' pledges of voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund. By the end of June 1983, 83% of the 1983 target ' 
of US $19 million had been pledged; by the end of June 1984, 91% of the 
1984 target of US $22.5 million had been pledged. However, it was somewhat 
disappointing that, at the end of July 1984, 50 Member States had still not 
pledged their contributions for the current year. 
37. While, in absolute terms, the Agency's technical co-operation programme 
had expanded considerably in recent years, it had been rightly pointed out in 
a recent report by the United Nations Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) that account 
must be taken of inflation, of the Agency's increased membership and of the 
decline in resources available through UNDP. Nevertheless, as had been also 
pointed out by the JIU, the rate of growth of technical assistance funds had 
been more pronounced in the case of the Agency than in that of other 
UN organizations and the share of the Agency's total resources allocated to 
technical co-operation was among the highest in the UN system. 
38. A year ago he had mentioned a number of measures approved by the Board of 
Governors to enable the Agency to respond more quickly to the changing needs 
and priorities of developing Member States. Among those measures, the 
introduction of dynamic programming had already resulted in a more effective 
utilization of resources. During the current year it had already been 
possible to make 13 footnote a/ projects operational with funds released by 
rephasing projects. The Joint Inspection Unit had commented favourably upon 
that as a more realistic form of project budgeting which enabled more 
effective use to be made of the funds available for technical co-operation. 
39. Another of the policy measures which had been approved by the Board of 
Governors in June 1983 was the placing of increased emphasis on regional and 
interregional projects. In that context two regional endeavours which 
included both technical co-operation and co-ordinated research programmes 
deserved specific mention. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 10 


40. The first of those, the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for Asia and 
the Pacific, was continuing to serve as an important vehicle for the 
development of nuclear science and technology in the region covered by it. It 
was a matter for satisfaction that India was continuing in the role it had 
recently assumed as one of the donor countries, along with Australia and 
Japan. The 15 projects being carried out within the framework of the RCA, 
including the large-scale UNDP project on applications of isotopes and 
radiation in industry, were proceeding on schedule. It was to be hoped that 
regional participation in the RCA would be further enhanced in the not too 
distant future through the membership of the People's Republic of China. 
41. The second regional endeavour was generally referred to as ARCAL - the 
Spanish acronym for a kind of RCA which had been established in Latin 
America. During the current year, several projects had been initiated within 
the framework of ARCAL by five Andean countries which had taken the lead in 
forming the nucleus for a broader programme at present envisaged for the 
region. Contributions from donor countries would be greatly appreciated at 
the present juncture in order to help the programme gather momentum. 
42. It was in the interest of all - developing countries, donors and the 
Agency - that development co-operation resources be used effectively. One 
mechanism which had been set up to that end, the Technical Co-operation 
Evaluation Unit, was now starting on its second year of operation. It would 
soon have completed a comprehensive review of all Agency training courses held 
during the period 1977 to 1983 and it was hoped that useful lessons could be 
drawn from it. The questionnaire designed by the Agency for that evaluation 
exercise had already been taken as a model by other United Nations agencies 
undertaking similar reviews. 
43. The JIU report, which praised the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme, nevertheless contained a number of recommendations as to how the 
programme could be improved. Governments had been sent copies of the report 
along with the Secretariat's comments earlier in September and the JIU's 
recommendations would be submitted to the Board's Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Committee for detailed examination when it met in December. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 11 


44. In spite of the lower than expected growth in electricity demand 
accompanying the recession, nuclear power had maintained its position as a 
safe, economic and reliable source of energy in 1983. Twenty-five new nuclear 
power plants had gone into operation, bringing the total to 313. Nuclear 
power plants represented over 8% of worldwide electrical power generating 
capacity and accounted for about 12% of the electricity generated 
during 1983. In the past year, seven Member States - France, Belgium, 
Finland, Sweden, Bulgaria, Switzerland and Japan - had produced between 20% 
and 50% of their electricity by nuclear power. 
45. There had been some set-backs, however, caused mainly by a decline in the 
growth of electricity demand, by political constraints and difficulties with 
public acceptance, and by financing problems. Orders for eight plants already 
under construction had been cancelled and some projects had been postponed. 
Those developments, together with the paucity of new orders, would inevitably 
lead to a "flattening" of the curve for world nuclear capacity growth. 
46. The nuclear industry, after a period of very rapid growth, had entered a 
period of slower expansion. Several countries had already begun to use the 
"breather" in order to devote more attention to simplifying regulatory 
procedures and standardizing nuclear plants. They were taking a serious look 
at the possibility of broadening the nuclear energy market through the 
inclusion of district heating and process heat production schemes. Also, they 
were examining ways of further improving the efficiency and performance of 
power reactors. Information collected by the Agency through its Power Reactor 
Information System (PRIS) showed a trend towards steadily improved plant 
reliability, which was an important factor in the economics of nuclear power. 
That information also pointed to significant variations in performance in 
different countries, thus demonstrating that there was room for improvement 
and an opportunity for learning from one another. 
47. In the longer term, however, the resumption of economic growth would 
increase electricity needs and nuclear plant orders would pick up again in 
countries where ordering had been suspended. There was a growing awareness of 
the need to reduce emissions of sulphur oxides and other pollutants from 
fossil fuel plants, and one means of doing that was to include more nuclear 
plants in the energy mix. Moreover, to quote Mr. Petrosyants, Chairman of the 
USSR State Committee on the Utilization of Atomic Energy, at the celebration 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 12 


of the thirtieth anniversary of the world's first nuclear power station, at 
Obninsk, burning oil in boiler furnaces was "rather like burning banknotes". 


48. Nuclear power trends in developing countries remained very uncertain. 
Only three new units had been connected to grids in developing countries 
during 1983, and most of the growth of nuclear power capacity in developing 
countries up to the year 2000 was likely to be in the ten Third World 
countries which already had nuclear power plants either in operation or under 
construction. The constraints lay in different areas - infrastructure, 
personnel and finance. 
49. One constraint was the size of most of the units commercially available at 
present, which were too large for the grids of most developing countries. 
Over the past year, the Agency had devoted considerable attention to a 
proposed study of small and medium power reactors (SMPRs) - a concept which 
might help to overcome the size constraint. It was gratifying to be able to 
report that the study had been launched, largely on the basis of contributions 
in cash and in kind from a number of Member States. 
50. Reactor suppliers would want to see a clear potential market for SMPRs 
before they committed themselves heavily in that area/ so far, however, the 
response of potential buyers to a questionnaire distributed by the Agency had 
been disappointing. More data would be needed from interested countries if 
the study was to be completed successfully. 
51. One of the most important areas in which the Agency served as an 
instrument for the exchange of experience and for the joint elaboration of 
guidelines of various kinds was nuclear safety. 
52. The annual Nuclear Safety Review, initiated three years earlier, 
summarized safety-related events and developments on a global basis. It had 
been designed to provide an open and dispassionate account of nuclear safety 
worldwide. The account could be open because nuclear power had nothing to 
hide, and it could be dispassionate because the safety record was in fact very 
good. The 1983 review showed that, with more than 300 nuclear power plants in 
operation, there had been no accidents at any nuclear plant which had 
jeopardized human health or threatened the environment. However, some 
accidents associated with nuclear activities other than nuclear power had 
taken place, which underscored the need for devoting more attention to 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 13 


radiation protection in areas not related to power generation. He would 
return to that problem later. 


53. The Agency had initiated an operational safety review team (OSART) scheme 
a year earlier, and the third OSART review had been completed recently. The 
response from the Member States visited indicated that the teams, which 
visited Member States on request and examined the operational safety of 
nuclear power plants in order to provide recommendations to their regulatory 
bodies, could make a valuable contribution to reactor safety. Not only were 
problem areas noted, but the team of experts also identified good practices 
deserving of consideration in other power plants. It must be made clear, 
however, that the teams by no means relieved the State authorities concerned 
of their basic responsibility for safety. Their functions were purely 
advisory. 
54. The IAEA Incident Reporting System, which was still at an early stage of 
development, now had the full or partial participation of more than 20 Member 
States. The potential of the system for assisting in learning as much as 
possible from operational experience by collecting, assessing and distributing 
information on plant operation had been discussed in July 1984 at a joint 
meeting of the IAEA and the Nuclear Energy Agency of OECD at which 
representatives of 14 countries belonging to OECD, CMEA and the developing 
world had presented reports on significant abnormal events. 
55. In that connection, the Agency was active in the preparation of guidelines 
aimed at facilitating mutual assistance among Member States in the event of a 
nuclear accident or a radiological emergency - including co-operation between 
Member States when such incidents occurred in border areas. 
56. Over the years, one of the most successful areas of activity within the 
Agency had been the development of regulations for the safe transport of 
radioactive materials. He was glad to report that an important updating and 
revision of the Agency's regulations had been completed in the past year and 
was soon to be published in the Agency's Safety Series. 
57. Following discussions the previous year in the General Conference and in 
the Scientific Advisory Committee, consultations with a group of distinguished 
experts and discussions in the current year within the Board of Governors, he 
intended to set up an International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group dealing with 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 14 


broad safety issues. The Advisory Group, which would report to the Director 
General, would review and analyse safety information, provide a forum for 
exchange of information on generic issues and, if possible, formulate commonly 
shared safety concepts. Only experience would show whether the latter task 
was feasible, given the wide differences in technological background and in 
political and socio-economic conditions between countries. 


58. The Advisory Group, which would be set up for an initial period of three 
years, would not deal with licensing policy, would not interfere with the work 
of national regulatory bodies and would not involve itself in the development 
of standards. Its main functions would be to examine current and evolving 
safety issues which could have an international impact and to advise the 
Director General on the best way of securing progress in nuclear safety. 
59. The Agency's Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection, jointly 
sponsored by the Agency, ILO, WHO and NEA, had been updated at the end of 1982 
so as to implement the new system of dose limitation recommended by the 
International Commission on Radiological Protection. However, the updated 
standards had not yet been fully incorporated into the national practices ot 
Member States, particularly where there was a shortage of trained radiation 
protection personnel. Moreover, some Member States did not as yet have 
effective mechanisms for promulgating standards and regulating practices which 
involved the use of ionizing radiation. 
60. That situation, together with the fact that there had been several serious 
accidents in recent years due to the erroneous handling of radiation sources 
used in medicine and industry, raised the question whether more could not be 
done to ensure better radiation protection and thereby to reduce the risk of 
further accidents which might undermine public confidence in nuclear 
activities. 
61. One way of further assisting Member States to implement the Basic Safety 
Standards was to send radiation protection advisory teams on request to Member 
States in order to help them to identify potential or existing radiation 
protection problems and draw up plans for the solution of those problems. 
62. Such teams would consist of people with expertise relevant to a wide 
variety of radiation protection measures - ranging from regulatory to 
technical preventive and emergency measures - and would cover all uses of 
radioactive materials and other sources of ionizing radiation in a country. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 15 


63. It was not expected that additional costs to the Agency's budget would 
arise from such a scheme, as the work of the advisory teams would reduce the 
need for groups which, under the Agency's current practice, were set up on an 
ad hoc basis. The ideal solution would be to have a tailor-made, long-term 
radiation protection component built into the technical co-operation programme 
for any country so wishing. 
64. Two topics on which the General Conference had adopted resolutions in 1983 
had a bearing on nuclear safety. The International Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material had already been signed by 38 States and one 
international organization and ratified by 10 States. Eleven instruments of 
ratification were still needed for its entry into force. In response to a 
note verbale sent to those Member States which were not yet parties to the 
Convention, a number of Governments had indicated that they were taking steps 
to become parties. 
65. With regard to developments in the area of the protection of nuclear 
installations devoted to peaceful purposes against armed attack, discussions 
within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament had continued during the 
year. The Conference had considered the possible scope of a prohibition of 
attacks on such installations and had looked into relevant legal questions, 
but a consensus on the approach to be taken in that important matter had not 
yet been reached. 
66. In spite of the consensus in the scientific community that there were no 
technical barriers to the adequate and safe management of nuclear wastes, the 
question was still a highly emotional one for segments of public opinion in 
several countries. Public concern had had a positive effect in prompting 
utilities and atomic energy authorities to work out policies and plans for the 
long-term disposal of nuclear wastes. It was lamentable, however, that 
legitimate concern had sometimes been replaced by politically or emotionally 
motivated obstructionism directed against any activity relating to the nuclear 
fuel cycle, including steps to find suitable repositories for nuclear wastes. 
67. He remained optimistic that, in the long run, the environmental advantages 
of nuclear power would be generally recognized. The wastes arising from the 
use of nuclear power were very limited in volume and could therefore be 
isolated from the environment. The handling of nuclear wastes had always been 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 16 


subject to strict regulations, which was unfortunately not the case tor the 
toxic wastes of some other industries. 


68. While responsibility for waste management and disposal would and must 
remain in the hands of States - i.e. in the hands of Governments internationally 
developed guidelines were of assistance to national 
authorities and might contribute towards harmonizing approaches among 
nations. International codes and standards for waste disposal might also help 
to increase public confidence that the wastes would be dealt with safely. In 
that connection he pointed out that, NUSS documents aside, more than one third 
of the documents in the IAEA's Safety Series dealt with various aspects of 
radioactive waste management. 
69. A Code of Practice on the Management of Radioactive Wastes from Nuclear 
Power Plants was being completed by the Secretariat for issue as a Safety 
Series document. It defined the minimum requirements for the design and 
operation of systems involved in the management of wastes produced at nuclear 
power plants. It was expected that the Code of Practice would provide Member 
States, and especially those just embarking on nuclear power programmes, with 
useful general guidance on related safety matters. 
70. The need for internationally accepted standards and criteria for the 
underground disposal of high-level radioactive wastes had been increasingly 
recognized in recent years. Such standards and criteria would be useful both 
to regulatory authorities and to national organizations with direct 
responsibility for waste disposal. The Secretariat had begun work relating to 
underground disposal; as a first step, a comprehensive report on relevant 
policies and proposals was being prepared. The aim was to highlight areas of 
agreement and issues which needed to be resolved. 
71. Lastly, as many older reactors were approaching the end of their useful 
service life there was an increasing interest in Member States in the 
decontamination and decommissioning of nuclear facilities. The Secretariat 
was accordingly stepping up its activities in that area and intended to 
publish documentation designed to help ensure that decommissioning was done in 
a timely, safe and cost-effective way. 
72. Having dealt with a wide range of applications of atomic energy, he turned 
to the Agency's safeguards verification system, which helped States to create 
confidence in the peaceful nature of those applications. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 17 


73. There might sometimes be a tendency to view Agency safeguards as a kind of 
appendage to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
especially at a time when the preparations for the Third NPT Review Conference 
were accelerating and the Treaty was increasingly at the focus of attention. 
The Treaty had in fact enabled a very large number of non-nuclear-weapon 
States, larger than the number of Agency Member States, solemnly to commit 
themselves to foregoing nuclear weapons and to ensure that their compliance 
was verified through safeguards. At the request of the Preparatory Committee 
for the Third NPT Review Conference, the IAEA Secretariat had submitted, in 
provisional form, three papers dealing with the Agency's activities related to 
Articles III, IV and V of the Treaty since the 1980 Review Conference. 
74. However, notwithstanding the very great importance of NPT, it should be 
borne in mind that IAEA safeguards were based directly on the Agency's 
Statute. NPT made use of the Agency's safeguards, as did the Tlatelolco 
Treaty, and most safeguards agreements with the Agency were concluded pursuant 
to obligations entered into by States parties to those two Treaties. It 
should not be overlooked, however, that a State so wishing could still, 
through a bilateral agreement with the Agency, commit itself to safeguards 
verification that all its present and future nuclear activities were for 
peaceful purposes. 
75. The organization and administration of safeguards, and especially matters 
relating to costs, continued to provoke discussion among Member States. While 
a special payment schedule substantially reduced the amount that most 
developing countries contributed for safeguards, it was universally 
acknowledged that safeguards operations, and hence the safeguards budget, 
should contain only what was strictly necessary. Safeguards were not an end 
in themselves. Their purpose was to enable States to create confidence in 
their respective regions and in the world at large that all the nuclear 
activities which they had placed under safeguards were being conducted without 
any diversion of fissionable material. 
76. It was in the interest of all that the best possible instruments and 
techniques be employed in the Agency's verification activities, and 
appreciation was due to the many Member States - and EURATOM - which were 
helping to design improved instruments and to work out improved techniques. 
Appreciation was also due to the two States - Canada and Japan - which had 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 18 


invited the Agency to operate safeguards offices in their territories; he was 
confident that those arrangements would result in reduced operating costs, and 
he knew that they had already had a beneficial effect on efficiency. 


77. While it was certainly useful to discuss how extensive and intensive 
verification needed to be for different types of nuclear activities, it was 
also important that discussion should not be allowed to undermine the broad 
support which existed for the only universal verification system that had so' 
far been developed in the nuclear field. Given the vital interest of the 
entire world in having a verification system that functioned well and provided 
confidence, the costs of safeguards were relatively small. If the Agency was 
to err in its ambitions, they should be set a little too high rather than a 
little too low. 
78. The rapid expansion of the Department of Safeguards necessitated by the 
rapid expansion of nuclear power had brought with it some growing pains. The 
reorganization of the Department was now almost complete, however, and it was 
looking forward to a period of consolidation. 
79. He was pleased to report that negotiations with the Soviet Union on its 
voluntary offer to submit some nuclear installations to safeguards were 
proceeding well and that an agreement was in sight. The negotiations on the 
text of the main agreement had been concluded successfully the previous week 
ad referendum. Such an agreement was most welcome, not only because it would 
broaden the Agency's safeguards experience, but also because it would 
strengthen the precedent of verification measures being carried out in 
nuclear-weapon States. 
80. Lastly, he wished to refer to another development which related to 
safeguards and which would certainly be considered under one of the 
Conference's agenda items. In resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408, the General 
Conference had the previous year requested the Director General to take 
measures to ensure that South Africa submitted all its nuclear activities to 
safeguards. While the response from South Africa to the General Conference 
resolution had so far been negative in that respect, negotiations had recently 
started between the Agency's Secretariat and representatives of the South 
African Government on the submission of a semi-commercial enrichment plant to 
safeguards. For the Secretariat, those negotiations were without prejudice to 
its requests for discussions on comprehensive safeguards. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 19 


81. On another matter which related to South Africa and which had been taken 
up the previous year in the General Conference resolution just referred to, he 
could report that there were no longer any technical groups, sponsored or 
co-sponsored by the Agency, in which South African experts were 
participating. A group that was preparing for the 27th International 
Geological Congress had finished its work and the Agency had withdrawn from 
the joint IAEA/NEA working groups on uranium. However, it was intended that 
the so-called "Red Book" on uranium resources, which was regarded as a 
valuable publication by many Member States, would continue to be produced 
through co-operation between the Secretariats of NEA and the Agency. 
82. There was a further agenda item which he wished to mention. In 1983 the 
General Conference, in resolution GC(XXVII)/409, had requested the Director 
General to "report to the Board of Governors with respect to Israel on the 
Agency's research contracts, purchase of equipment and materials, and the 
holding of meetings outside Agency Headquarters" and to report to the 
Conference itself "on the consequences of an armed attack on peaceful nuclear 
installations and the threats thereof on the Agency safeguards system and the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy". In June, the Board had decided that 
the report submitted to it pursuant to the former request should be 
transmitted to the General Conference, and that report was now before the 
Conference together with the report prepared in response to the latter request. 
83. The Agency had stepped up its activities in nuclear safety, nuclear waste 
disposal, safeguards and technical co-operation. Efforts to secure broad 
agreement on the principles of nuclear trade, however, had made little 
progress which he could report. There was a demand, on the one hand, for 
unfettered access to all technologies relevant to the nuclear fuel cycle, but 
concern, on the other, about any technology transfers that might facilitate 
the spread of nuclear weapons. The Agency's Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS) had not been able so far to reconcile the conflicting positions on that 
central issue, although it had made some progress in other matters. The Third 
NPT Review Conference and the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy might also 
face that intractable issue. 


84. He had no recipe for its solution and could only point to a few elements 
of significance. First, and most evidently, tangible progress among the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 20 


nuclear-weapon States towards nuclear disarmament would increase support and 


understanding among non-nuclear-weapon States for conditions and restrictions 
which aimed at ensuring horizontal non-proliferation. Second, there needed to 


be an increased awareness that, frustrating and frightening as the current 


failure in the field of nuclear disarmament might be, it was in no way a 


reason for relaxing efforts, which were really in the interests of all, to 
prevent a further horizontal spread of nuclear weapons. Third, while present' 


restrictions in nuclear trade might well constitute an inducement to autarchy, 
economic considerations certainly pointed to advantages in international trade 
and co-operation in the fields of enrichment, reprocessing and waste 
disposal. The degree of dependence which was inevitable in international 
nuclear trade and co-operation could conceivably be somewhat mitigated if the 
economic management of enterprises providing nuclear fuel cycle services were 
opened to a measure of user participation. Also, dependence in the field of 
fuel services might be more attractive if such services were coupled with 
services related to waste disposal. 


85. The current period was one of political and economic friction. Payments 
problems and budget deficits in many countries had imposed restrictions on 
expenditure and were affecting, among other things, States' contributions to 
international organizations. Technical international organizations were not 
immune to the repercussions of political conflicts, nor - just because they 
financed international co-operation - were their budgets immune to cuts. The 
famous Spirit of Vienna and the understanding atmosphere in the host country 
and host city could not shield the Agency from the cold gusts of wind that 
reached it from the prevailing international climate. However, he knew that 
Member States considered the Agency's work to be of vital importance, and he 
trusted that they would make every effort to avoid jeopardizing the 
co-operation that took place within and through the Agency; indeed, he was 
confident that they would wish to strengthen such co-operation. 
86. For its part, the Secretariat had tried to meet the budgetary concerns of 
many Member States and had submitted to the Board what was essentially a 
zero-real-growth budget for 1985. The Secretariat's restraint was not due to 
any dearth of ideas for new or expanded activities which might be useful to 
Member States; in fact, expansion had been possible in a few areas, thanks to 
economies elsewhere - particularly in the administrative sphere. The 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 21 


presentation of the budget had been significantly changed so as to focus on 
the allocation of resources to various programmes rather than on their 
allocation to various organizational units. He believed that that new 
approach would make it easier for Governments to assess the Agency's 
programmes from the viewpoint both of usefulness and of implementation costs. 
He hoped that it would thus facilitate decision-making, lead to greater 
overall efficiency in the organization and make the organization even more 
responsive to the needs of Member States. 


87. While the short-term perspective that he had described was characterized 
by stringency, he had no doubt that in the longer run there would be more not 
less - co-operation between States in the nuclear field, more transfer of 
knowledge and technology, more trade. He had no doubt that there would be 
greater use of nuclear power and wider applications of nuclear methods in 
agriculture, medicine and industry. Lastly, he had no doubt that Governments 
would turn to the Agency which they had created and to the competent and 
dedicated staff that served it and that they would find in it a vital tool for 
further expanding the safe and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF THE FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION 
OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


88. Mr. SAOUMA (Director General, Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations) said that in 1945 the world had had its first glimpse of 
the destructive force of the atom. Today the nuclear arsenal was sufficient 
to obliterate civilization several times over. Some scientists had predicted 
that following a nuclear conflict the entire planet could be plunged into a 
long dark winter with devastating impact on human life and the environment. 
89. Those were sombre thoughts and one could not ignore them, not only because 
the arms race could only end in global catastrophe, but also because it was 
absorbing enormous resources which could be spent on ending famine and 
hunger. The ideas of "atoms for peace", a slogan from the 1950s, however, 
still survived. And nowhere was their survival better shown than in the 
application of nuclear energy to agriculture, as pioneered by the joint 
programme of FAO and the IAEA. 
90. The FAO/IAEA programme for the application of atomic energy in food and 
agriculture had begun on 1 October 1964, with the establishment of the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 22 


Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic Energy 
for Food and Agricultural Development. 


91. Previously, both organizations had had limited programmes exploring the 
use of nuclear techniques in agriculture. It said much for the wisdom and 
vision of their respective heads, Dr. Binay Rajan Sen of FAO and 
Dr. Sigvard Eklund of the IAEA, that they had chosen to pool resources and 
establish a joint approach that had more than stood the test of time. 
92. The Joint Division carried out a single programme of work, which was 
approved by the governing bodies of both organizations. While that formula 
had proved successful from an organizational point of view, the key to the 
continuing support enjoyed by the Joint Division was the problem-oriented 
nature of its work. There could be no interest in applications of nuclear 
tools and techniques unless they had real practical value in food and 
agricultural development. 
93. That pragmatic approach was exemplified by research programmes which 
brought some of the world's best brains and research institutions within the 
orbit of the Division's work. At present, more that 360 research contracts 
were being undertaken in some 50 countries. The network approach, involving 
institutions in both the developing and the developed world, also brought 
nuclear and related techniques within the experience of developing countries 
and encouraged the establishment of "centres of excellence", where basic 
research was linked to studies and applications of a practical nature. 
94. Practical assistance and the full use of resources - guiding principles 
for the Joint Division - had never been more important. During the 1980s, one 
had witnessed a serious decline in multilateral funding for development and 
far too many people had yet to secure the basic human right of an adequate 
daily diet. 
95. Seldom in recent history had the world food situation shown so many 
contradictory tendencies. In 1983, production had declined for the first time 
since the food crisis a decade before. Yet in the Far East, whose vast 
population was perhaps the most important single element in the world food 
problem, output had made a major recovery from the set-backs of the previous 
year. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 23 


96. The United States of America/ Japan and the European Community had 
continued to grapple with the problem of cutting surplus production while 
maintaining farm incomes. At the same time, Africa was struggling to maintain 
agricultural output in the face of drought, pests and diseases. 
97. The same contradictory picture was mirrored in the movements of the world 
economy as a whole. The strong recovery now under way in the United States 
had yet to spread convincingly to the rest of the industrialized world. Some 
economists argued that the combination of a strong United States dollar and 
high interest rates was hampering recovery elsewhere. Certainly, there were 
few signs of an early solution to the debt problems that had beset many 
developing countries. 
98. Although no region, developed or developing, had escaped the recession, 
the situation in Africa was particularly acute. While Africa's economy had 
been battered by the storm of recession, its agriculture had had to contend 
with a no less hostile environment, and in many areas the internal conflicts 
and tensions of the continent had kept farmers from the land. 
99. The present food emergency had begun to take shape about a year and a half 
earlier. In February 1983, FAO had issued an alert regarding the drought in 
Southern Africa and FAO's first general appeal for aid had been made in May 
the same year. The donor community had responded generously to appeals for 
help and the efforts of the international community had been instrumental in 
averting a major disaster. Though drought had remained the principal enemy, 
widespread damage had also been caused by plant diseases and pests, and by 
livestock diseases, 24 countries being particularly hard hit. 
100. Conditions during the 1983/84 growing season were now being anxiously 
monitored, though recovery seemed to be well under way in West Africa. That 
was unfortunately not the case in Southern Africa, where drought had shattered 
the hopes of farmers for the third year running, and in some parts of 
East Africa. The preliminary estimate was that 1.3 million tons of food aid 
would be required. 
101. Unfortunately, the short-term problems confronting agriculture in Africa 
reflected much deeper issues. A major policy reorientation in Africa toward 
strengthening domestic food production was clearly called for. But such an 
undertaking could not be regarded solely as an exercise in planning the food 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 24 


sector, or even agriculture as a whole. It was the entire development model 
that needed changing. Africa would also have to face up to the problems of 
high population growth rates, urbanization and increasing dependence on 
imported foods not growable locally. 


102. Action to cope with drought and other disasters was particularly urgent, 
but FAO's principal task in Africa and elsewhere in the developing world was 
to achieve a long-term strengthening of agriculture and food production. It 
was in that respect that advances of the kind being explored by the Joint 
Division world-wide could come into play. 
103. Since its inception, the Joint Division had been instrumental in helping 
to eliminate the Mediterranean fruit fly in Mexico, to control the tsetse fly 
in parts of Nigeria, to increase the productivity of the water buffalo, and to 
develop new crop varieties. It had improved knowledge of the fate of 
fertilizers in the soil and plants, devised techniques for monitoring 
pesticide residues and developed ways of preserving food. 
104. Those highlights demonstrated that the Joint Programme focused directly 
on prevailing problems in agricultural and food production. The following 
examples showed how its work fitted into the much wider priorities and 
programmes of FAO. The first was the tsetse fly and the parasitic disease, 
trypanosomiasis, which it transmitted to cattle and humans. Since 1980, FAO 
had had in operation a Special Action Programme for the Control of African 
Animal Trypanosomiasis and Related Development, the aim of which was to open 
up a new frontier in Africa - a vast tract of land totalling seven million 
square kilometres - to agriculture and permanent human settlement. 
105. The Joint Programme was helping efforts to control the tsetse fly by 
investigating the value of the sterile-insect technique, which involved 
releasing millions of sterilized male flies into the wild where they bred with 
females, which then failed to reproduce successfully. It was also helping to 
assess how trypanocidal drugs work. At present, some 25 million doses of such 
drugs were being given to livestock annually in Africa. 
106. Radiotracer research into the fate of fertilizers in the soil and plants 
was complementary to FAO's efforts to encourage the effective use of 
fertilizers in the developing world. But it also touched upon broader issues 
of concern to it. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 25 


107. About 2% of the world's fossil fuel was used to produce artificial 
fertilizer, and its cost was now a major drain on foreign exchange in many 
developing countries. And yet, with conventional applications, only 30-50% of 
the nitrogen in the fertilizer was actually taken up by the crop. By 
following the pathway between the fertilizer and the plant, more effective 
means of applying it had been devised. The savings from that work were now 
estimated at millions of dollars worth of fertilizer every year. 
108. In the mid-1980s, the relationship of those and other techniques to the 
"peaceful atom" of the 1950s tended to have become obscured. For example, 
radioactive tracers now had a wide range of applications in research. 
Similarly, the use of radiation to increase the variation in potential 
plant-breeding material was commonplace and the use of radiation to preserve 
food, despite some suspicion by the general public, was gaining acceptance. 
109. Today, those applications of nuclear and non-nuclear techniques were 
usually grouped together as biotechnology. Interpreting the term broadly, the 
majority of the programmes of the Joint Division and nearly all of its 
supporting activities at the IAEA Laboratory at Seibersdorf involved 
biotechnology. 
110. The role of nuclear techniques and biotechnology in agricultural 
development and the food-processing industry seemed assured. One had to be 
realistic, however. Nuclear techniques and biotechnology had a great 
potential for the future; but for the time being - and for some time to come developing 
countries were a long way behind in support for the more 
traditional forms of research and in ensuring the availability of existing 
research results. Governments of the poorer countries should not be lured 
into expensive endeavours which did not meet their needs or were beyond their 
means. 
111. Within that context, the growing militarization of the world economy 
presented a serious threat. As an ever larger proportion of the world's raw 
materials, labour and capital was spent on the production or purchase of arms, 
it was increasingly difficult to find the resources necessary to finance 
essential investments in agriculture and other key economic sectors. 
112. Considering the parlous state of the world economy and what was needed to 
ensure secure supplies of food for all, the continuing growth in military 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 26 


spending, which now stood at well over one million dollars a minute, was 
completely unjustified. Equally disturbing was the fact that, in addition to 
the major powers, a number of Third World countries were acquiring arms. 


113. During the 20 years since the formation of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division, 
the vision of nuclear energy as a panacea had dimmed. The early promise of an 
abundance of cheap energy had never been fulfilled. Instead, people had 
become obsessed with the relationship between nuclear power and weapons 
materials and with the vexing question of how to dispose of nuclear wastes. 
114. No one would deny that such issues were of global concern, nor doubt the 
need for public debate. But, equally, in working to discard the sword one 
should not forget the ploughshare. When it was considered what nuclear and 
related techniques had achieved and still had to offer, not just in food and 
agriculture, but in many other fields of human endeavour, it was perhaps time 
to revive the "atoms for peace" slogan. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1985 


115. The PRESIDENT said that in 1982 the Agency's Board of Governors had 
agreed to continue - for the years 1984, 1985 and 1986 - the practice of 
recommending indicative planning figures to serve in fixing targets for 
voluntary contributions to the Fund in order to allow a certain degree of 
predictability in the financing of technical assistance. 
116. As early pledging was extremely helpful for the Secretariat, he urged all 
delegations in a position to do so to notify the Secretariat, before the end 
of the current session, of voluntary contributions to be made by their 
Governments to the Fund in 1985. He hoped that towards the end of the current 
session he would be able to report that a large percentage of the target 
figure for 1985 had been pledged. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


117. The PRESIDENT proposed that, in conformity with Rule 34 of the Rules 
of Procedure of the General Conference, the delegates of the following Member 
States be elected as Vice-Presidents of the General Conferences Australia, 
Canada, France, Iraq, Japan, Uruguay, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
and Zambia. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 27 


118. Pursuant to Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure, he proposed 
Ambassador J.K. Umar, the delegate of Nigeria, as Chairman of the Committee of 


the Whole and the delegates of the following States as additional Members of 


the General Committees Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the Islamic Republic of 


Iran, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States of America. 


119. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
120. The General Committee was thus duly appointed. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 


121. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) read out the following 
message to the Conference from President Reagan: 


"Mr. President, Mr. Director General and distinguished 
delegates, on behalf of the people of the United States of America, 
I salute your continuing efforts to support the International Atomic 
Energy Agency and to strengthen its important programmes. In an 
increasingly interdependent world, we are all beneficiaries of the 
vital work pursued by the IAEA. The quality of life for many 
peoples has been significantly enhanced by IAEA programmes designed 
to make the benefits of the peaceful atom ever more widely 
available. At the same time, the world has been made safer and more 
secure as a result of the IAEA safeguards system, which assures that 
nuclear activities remain dedicated to peaceful purposes. 


"Since its inception, the Agency's safeguards system has played 
a vital role in reinforcing international security and facilitating 
peaceful nuclear co-operation and commerce among nations. 
Strengthening this role and maintaining our shared efforts to 
restrain the further spread of nuclear explosives remain of highest 
priority to the American people and to me personally. 


"Since the establishment of the IAEA over 25 years ago, working 
together we have accomplished much in pursuit of the goals and 
objectives envisaged by the Agency's founders and embodied in its 
Statute. The United States is proud to have been able to contribute 
to that enviable record of accomplishment. We must redouble our 
efforts, however, if we are to preserve and strengthen the IAEA so 
that it can serve our common goals while respecting our diverse 
interests. To this end, the United States is committed to continue 
working closely and actively with all Member States in the important 
work of the IAEA, and I offer my sincere best wishes for a 
successful General Conference." 


122. When President Eisenhower had launched the Atoms for Peace Programme 
in 1953, he had envisaged a world in which all nations could, in peace, reap 


the benefits of the awesome technology of the atom and hoped that the nations 


of the world would work to curb the spread of nuclear weapons. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 28 


123. It was no coincidence that the dual mission of the Agency essentially 
corresponded to the indispensable notion of that time; that peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and the undertaking of good faith and verifiable commitments to 
those peaceful uses were inseparable. The tandem mission of the IAEA was 
purposeful and had for the most part been successful - only a few States 
possessed nuclear weapons, while numerous others had foresworn the option, and 
many of those which had not so pledged had submitted their nuclear facilities to 
IAEA safeguards. At the same time, great progress had been made in 
developing applications of nuclear energy in a wide variety of fields, 
including medicine, agriculture, the life sciences and industry. 
124. The longer-term success of the Agency would, in the last analysis, depend 
on the Member States' commitment not only to its principles but also to the 
universality of its membership. Welcoming the accession to membership by the 
People's Republic of China, he pointed out that it was an important step 
towards the realization of that goal. That country was embarking on an 
extensive programme of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Moreover, with its 
accession all nuclear-weapon States were now Members of the Agency and the 
United States was looking forward to working with the People's Republic of 
China in a co-operative and constructive manner. 
125. The United States also attached great significance to the adherence by 
the Agency and its Members to the organization's Statute and rules. Attempts 
either to deny membership or limit the rights and privileges of a Member for 
political reasons could only damage the credibility of the Agency and weaken 
it to the detriment of all of its Members. 
126. Referring to the peaceful use of nuclear energy in his country, he 
pointed out that although the achievements in its nuclear power programme had 
been substantial in the preceding year, the earlier expectations about the 
role of nuclear power had not been wholly realized because of institutional, 
regulatory and economic factors, including a recession in the general economy 
in the 1970s and a consequent general slowdown of energy consumption. There 
had also been an unmistakable erosion of public confidence, compounded by 
extraordinary delays and cost overruns in recent plant construction. 
127. Nevertheless, there were reasons for optimism. Of the 25 new plants 
which had gone on line in the preceding year, five or 20% had been in the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 29 


United States. Although a number of plants had recently been cancelled or 
delayed, the United States had 86 plants in operation and 48 more under 
construction. Moreover, the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
estimated that as many as nine additional reactors were expected to be 


licensed by the end of 1984, which would bring the 1984 total to 16. That 
would be no mean achievement. At present, nuclear energy supplied about 13% 
of the country's electrical generating needs and was expected to deliver over 


20% when the plants now under construction were commissioned. Furthermore, 
the economics of nuclear power in America continued to be favourable: the 
production cost of a kilowatt-hour of electricity from nuclear sources was 
slightly less than that from coal and less than half that from oil. 


128. Optimism about the future of nuclear power in the United States was based 
in part on the fact that the economic slowdown of the preceding few years 
seemed to have ended. With economic recovery under way, the annual rate of 
growth in the demand for electricity had increased from about zero to nearly 
3%. A sustained growth of 3% meant that the generating capacity had to be 
doubled over the following 25 years, to say nothing about replacement of 
retired plants. At the same time, the comprehensive nuclear regulatory reform 
legislation now under consideration by Congress would streamline the licensing 
process and should lessen the delays in bringing new nuclear power plants on 
line. 
129. The extent of the United States' commitment to nuclear power was amply 
demonstrated by the resources which it was investing on research and 
development: over 0500 million by the Government and an additional 
$100 million by private industry (including about $60 million by the Electric 
Power Research Institute). Nuclear power in America was not an option but a 
necessity and would continue to be an important part of the energy mix of the 
United States. 
130. Apart from nuclear power, his country was actively engaged in increasing 
the use of radioisotopes in agriculture and medicine. 
131. The field of nuclear medicine was expanding almost exponentially and the 
peaceful atom was assuming an ever greater role in the diagnosis and treatment 
of disease. Increasing numbers of doctors, nurses and medical technicians 
were being trained in the use of the many new and vital tools now available in 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 30 


that field and even greater benefits could be expected in the treatment of 
some of the most pressing problems of human health. 


132. The peaceful atom was also playing an increasingly important role in 
agriculture. The Director General had in his statement referred to the 
20th anniversary of collaboration between the IAEA and PAO in the use of 
isotopes and radiation in agriculture, including uses in insect and pest 
control and plant cultivation. An informative report on the subject had also 
been made by the Director General of FAO. The United States commended the 
Agency's work in that area, and intended soon to join the International 
Consultative Commission on Food Irradiation. 
133. The United States was pleased to be an important contributor to those 
activities of the Agency. That technology could not only increase the 
shelf-life of food but also provide useful plant mutations and help to 
eradicate the insect pests which inhibited the transport of food across 
national and regional borders. The United States Food and Drug Administration 
had recently approved the use of radiation to assist in eliminating insect 
infestations in the country. It was hoped that the new tool would reduce the 
dependence on environmentally damaging pesticides. 
134. Turning to the Agency's accomplishments, he said that his delegation had 
appreciated the comprehensive review of the Agency's activities by the 
Director General. The Agency's accomplishments had been in many areas. It 
had developed ways of reducing hunger, alleviating malnutrition, increasing 
food production, and improving the world's health. It had facilitated the 
introduction of safe nuclear power into areas with critical energy shortages, 
had developed standards which had contributed to the safe transport of nuclear 
materials, had elaborated techniques for safe handling and storing of nuclear 
waste and had drawn up an effective safeguards system. 
135. Over the past year there seemed to have been an increasing willingness 
among Member States to put contentious political issues of little relevance to 
the Agency behind them and to focus on the urgent matters that demanded their 
attention. It was to be hoped that the trend would continue. For, were the 
Agency's deliberations to become mired in political issues unrelated to its 
basic purposes, the achievements and spirit of co-operation that long 
characterized the organization would be endangered. Nothing would more 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 31 


discredit the Agency and erode its essential base of support that had been 
built up over many years than for it to surrender to a process of 
politicization and to turn its back on the original ideals and principles of 
its founders. The mission of the IAEA was to function basically as a 
technical agency with a narrowly defined mandate, and attention should not be 
diverted from its statutory responsibilities. 


136. Turning to the Agency's major programme, he said that the IAEA's record 
in promoting technical co-operation was impressive. The Director General's 
report had not only set forth an impressive array of technical assistance 
projects, but had shown the Secretariat's dedication to improvement of the 
Agency's performance in that area. The expansion of the Agency's activities 
in the last year or two had been particularly impressive. The United States 
wished to commend the Secretariat on its vigorous efforts in making the 
Agency's technical assistance programme more efficient and effective. The 
programme was an essential part of the Agency's mission. Nevertheless, it 
must be borne in mind that more than half of the funds for technical 
assistance and co-operation projects derived from voluntary contributions. 
The fact that the IAEA currently had 800 projects under way was impressive, 
but the reduction in the number of countries supporting footnote a/ projects 
was a matter for concern. 
137. His Government also welcomed the emphasis on nuclear safety in the 
Director General's report. It was becoming evident that completion of the 
IAEA's work in devising safety codes and guides would provide an opportunity 
for Member States to consider other directions for the Agency's nuclear safety 
work. Noting with interest the progress reported by the Director General in 
the creation of an international nuclear safety advisory group, he commended 
him on his proposal that the Agency make available nuclear safety teams to 
assist Member States in identifying and dealing with potential or existing 
radiation protection problems. 
138. The United States had already expressed its views to the General 
Conference on the importance of the Agency's safeguards system on many 
occasions. Effective IAEA safeguards were essential if the benefits of the 
peaceful atom were to be realized throughout the world. Nuclear commerce 
could flourish only when all had confidence that nuclear energy intended for 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.257 
page 32 


peaceful purposes would not be misused. Safeguards were, indeed, a lynchpin 
of nuclear commerce, and they enjoyed broad international support. Because of 


the importance of safeguards, a commitment needed to be made to continued 


improvement and reforms in the safeguards system itself. Safeguards must be 
made as efficient and effective as possible. 


139. For its part, the United States provided substantial support that took 
many forms. A major aspect of that support was the training of inspectors. 
His Government provided regular courses at nuclear facilities and it also made 
technical experts available to assist on particular topics or problems. In 
addition, United States technical staff had developed equipment that had 
helped to make safeguards more effective. 
140. The Agency's credibility was an essential ingredient for the success of 
international safeguards. Although improvements could and certainly should be 
made - in better communications, improved management, greater numbers of 
better trained inspectors, and wider use of more advanced safeguards 
equipment - to dwell perpetually on earlier or alleged failings, without fair 
recognition being given to the progress being made to overcome them, could 
irreparably damage that credibility and decrease the effectiveness of Agency 
safeguards activities. 
141. Similarly, there should not - indeed, there could not - be a conflict 
between the resources dedicated to the safeguards programme and those to 
technical co-operation. Both programmes were vital to the organization and it 
was not possible for one to be carried out without the other. 
142. It had been particularly gratifying to hear the Director General's report 
on the progress made in the negotiations with the Soviet Union regarding its 
voluntary offer to submit certain of its nuclear reactor facilities to Agency 
safeguards, and he hoped that the offer would soon be extended to additional 
types of facility. His Government also looked forward to the time when all 
nuclear-weapon States volunteered to place civil nuclear installations under 
IAEA safeguards. The safeguards agreement with the Agency arising from the 
United States' voluntary offer was being implemented. His Government took its 
obligations under that agreement very seriously indeed, and all civil nuclear 
facilities in the United States had been opened to Agency inspectors. Among 
those facilities were several plants incorporating advanced technology, such 
as the gas centrifuge enrichment plant currently under construction at 
Portsmouth, Ohio. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR. 257 
page 33 


143. The strengthening of technical safeguards was, of course/ only part of 
the task. The political and institutional framework that supported safeguards 
also needed to be fortified if public confidence in the use of nuclear energy 
were to be maintained. That could best be done through universal adherence to 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). That Treaty, 
with 124 parties, was the arms control treaty with the largest membership in 
history and it made a vital contribution to the security of all its parties'. 
Adherence to the Treaty of Tlatelolco could, of course, serve the same goal. 
It was to be hoped that those countries that had not yet become party to 
either Treaty would soon do so. 
144. At the same time, he noted the Director General's observation that States 
which, for whatever reason, were not party to NPT or the Tlatelolco Treaty 
could voluntarily accept IAEA safeguards on all their nuclear facilities. The 
IAEA was both willing and able to apply safeguards to all facilities not yet 
covered. He urged countries which did not wish to join NPT or the Tlatelolco 
Treaty to submit all their nuclear facilities to IAEA safeguards. It was by 
such means that safeguards would continue to be strengthened, and the 
confidence needed for realization of the benefits promised by nuclear energy 
would be fostered. 
145. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director General on the work of the 
Secretariat over the past year, which had been a year of continued progress 
for the Agency. It had not been without difficulties, but it had been a 
period in which the Agency had fulfilled its responsibilities and made 
progress. He looked forward to another year in which the Secretariat 
continued its efforts to increase its effectiveness. His Government remained 
dedicated to the Agency's Statute and to the principles on which it was based, 
and it renewed its pledge of support to the Agency and its mission. 
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 


March 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 24 September 1984, at 3.25 p.m. 


President: Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) 
later: Mr. THABAULT (France) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda ** 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annual report 
for 1983 (continued) 1 - 112 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Japan 1-2 6 
India 27 38 
Germany, Federal Republic of 39 55 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 56 74 
France 75 - 101 
China 102 112 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 16 October 1984. 


* GC(XXVIII)/711. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-206 
0189e 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 (continued) 


1. Mr. ISURUGI (Japan) noted that, according to the Agency's annual 
report for 1983, aggregate nuclear installed capacity in the world had reached 
191 GW by the end of the year, with nuclear power plants providing about 12% 
of the world's electricity production. Recent operating experience with 
nuclear power plants, in particular their availability, was steadily improving 
and one could well say that nuclear power generation was now playing a vitally 
important role in energy supply as a whole. 
2. In the present situation, with nuclear power acquiring more and more 
importance in many countries, one of the main objectives must be to achieve 
better cost-effectiveness than other energy sources by improving the 
reliability of nuclear power plants - through improved safety and better 
operating conditions. In that way more countries would be able to benefit 
from the advantages of nuclear power. 
3. Japan had been encouraging nuclear power generation in a long-term 
perspective, realizing as it did that that was one of the important options in 
an energy strategy aimed at stabilizing power production. Japan was operating 
28 nuclear power plants, one of which was devoted to research and developmentj 
the aggregate capacity of those plants amounted to 19.9 GW, representing about 
20% of the country's total energy production. Thirteen nuclear plants with an 
aggregate output of 12.4 GW were under construction and five others with a 
total power of 4.3 GW were planned. 
4. In emphasizing nuclear power production, Japan was striving to make the 
best possible use of the potential energy contained in uranium. With that 
goal in mind it was endeavouring to perfect an advanced thermal reactor for 
Plutonium utilization, a breeder reactor and a technology for recycling 
Plutonium in light-water reactors. 
5. Japan's foremost objective at present was to set up a national nuclear 
fuel cycle. In July 1984 private electric power companies had announced that 
they were planning to build a uranium enrichment facility, a reprocessing 
plant and a repository for low-level nuclear waste on a proposed site, and 
various steps had already been taken towards the realization of that project. 
Since it was bound to have a considerable influence on the future 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 3 


development of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy in Japan, the 
Japanese Government was giving active support to the project, aware as it was 
of the vital importance of ensuring safety and securing public acceptance. 


6. At a time when the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were making steady 
progress, the Government of Japan wished to reaffirm its strong support for 
th'e cause of nuclear non-proliferation, on which the peace of the world 
depended. Peace, so precious to all, could not be preserved otherwise than in 
a spirit of equality and freedom. That being so, all the nuclear-weapon 
States were under an obligation to embark on the path of nuclear disarmament; 
and all States, whether in possession of nuclear weapons or not, should 
redouble their efforts to avoid any further proliferation of nuclear armaments. 
7. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) played an 
important role in that connection. Although the Treaty was inequitable in 
certain respects, Japan had nevertheless acceded to it. As the only nation 
ever to have suffered directly from atomic bombs, Japan was a strong proponent 
of the ideal of peace. 
8. The nuclear-weapon States should cherish the spirit of freedom and 
equality and act in such a way as to guarantee the non-nuclear-weapon States 
the opportunity of pursuing policies aimed at the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy. 
9. Recent developments in international co-operation in the nuclear energy 
field were much to be welcomed - though, there too, it should never be 
forgotten that the utilization of nuclear energy had to be confined to purely 
peaceful purposes. Japan had adopted a rigorous national policy of pursuing 
solely the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and it applied that principle in 
its co-operation with foreign countries, whether the country in question 
possessed nuclear weapons or not. The present occasion was a good one for 
laying stress on the fact that it was vital for all countries to ensure that 
all co-operation in the nuclear energy sphere should serve only peaceful 
purposes. 
10. All countries should accept the application of Agency safeguards to all 
their peaceful nuclear activities. In that connection, noted as a positive 
development the announcement that the Spviet Union and the Agency had now 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 4 


reached agreement ad referendum on the text for the implementation of the 
Soviet voluntary offer. Japan appealed to all countries which had not yet 
done so to adhere to NPT as soon as possible in order to strengthen the 
nuclear non-proliferation system. The Agency's safeguards system had provided 
effective services in the cause of non-proliferation, as could be seen from 
the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1983. 


11. In view of current developments in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and the progress achieved in safeguards technology, every effort should be 
made to improve IAEA safeguards further while endeavouring to maintain an 
appropriate cost-effectiveness balance in the implementaton of the system. 
Japan hoped that the deliberations of the Standing Advisory Group on 
Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) would make it possible to define a new 
approach for that purpose. The Japanese Government had co-operated with the 
Agency in its efforts to achieve effective and efficient implementation of 
safeguards through numerous meetings, such as those of the Japan/IAEA Joint 
Safeguards Committee, and it would continue to pursue that policy. Safeguards 
technology was being steadily improved, moreover, under the Japan Support 
Programme for Agency Safeguards (JASPAS). His delegation noted with great 
satisfaction that some of the results obtained in that programme had already 
been turned to good account in the implementation of Agency safeguards. 
12. In March 1985 Japan would be playing host to the first training course on 
State Systems of Accounting for and Control of Nuclear Materials to be held in 
the Asia and Pacific region, a fresh example of Japan's co-operation with the 
Agency in the safeguards field. Japan had extended various forms of 
co-operation designed to facilitate the work of the Agency's inspectors. The 
Agency's Tokyo Office had been set up in June, and he hoped that it would be 
effectively utilized. 
13. Nuclear non-proliferation was an essential element of progress in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The measures required in the interests of 
non-prolifertion should not, however, place any undue restrictions on the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy in the name of non-proliferation. He 
hoped that further discussion would take place on the question of the 
compatibility of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear 
non-proliferation. And, also in that connection, he hoped that there would be 
fruitful exchanges of views within the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS). 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 5 


14. Nuclear safety was exceptionally important if the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy was to prosper, a fact of which Japan had always been aware. 
Japan had consistently done everything in its power to advance the cause of 
nuclear safety, and its efforts were going to continue. The country's nuclear 
power plants had excellent operating records, most of them having achieved 
.availability factors of more than 70% during the past year. 
That percentage 
was close to the maximum figure attainable in view of the fact that the 
regular inspections carried out on nuclear power plants at present required 
about four months. In large degree it was thanks to the steady efforts Japan 
had made in relation to nuclear safety that that result had been achieved. 


15. A nuclear accident in one country could have most unfortunate 
consequences for the nuclear programmes of other countries - one more reason 
why international co-operation in nuclear safety should be steadily 
strengthened. 
16. The transport of radioactive materials was an important question for 
public acceptance of nuclear power because it inevitably involved close 
contact with the public. Such transports had, by their very nature, an 
international aspect, and for that reason the Agency was being called upon to 
play an increasingly important role in connection with them. His delegation 
particularly welcomed the recent updating of the Agency's Transport 
Regulations, approved by the Board the previous week, in which the provisions 
relating to maritime transport - a subject of particular interest to Japan were 
considerably strengthened. He would await the Agency's future work in 
that sphere with interest. 
17. His country was also interested in the Agency's activities in the 
elaboration of nuclear safety standards, the promotion of information 
exchange, the dispatch of the operational safety review teams, and other 
items. It was hoped that the advisory group on nuclear safety, which it was 
planned to set up, would take full account of the discussions that had taken 
place in the Board of Governors. 
18. The Nuclear Safety Review for 1983, which was a fuller version of the 
document published the year before, and the arrangement of a special programme 
on nuclear safety during the General Conference were commendable, for they 
would help to provide the policy makers with adequate information on nuclear 
safety issues and to promote public acceptance in each Member State. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 6 


19. His delegation felt that the principal objectives of the Agency-sponsored 
technical co-operation programmes with developing countries were to share the 
benefits of the peaceful use of nuclear energy as a common heritage of 
mankind, and to contribute to the advancement of those countries. The steady 
expansion of the Agency's activities in response to requests from the 
developing countries showed that Member States duly appreciated them. 
20. In that connection it was pleasing to see that the Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division of the Department of Research and Isotopes, which had been created to 
speed up the application of isotopes and radiation in food and agriculture, 
had now been in existence for 20 years. The Secretariat's tireless efforts to 
that end were greatly appreciated and its accomplishments deserved tribute. 
21. Recognizing the importance of the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities, his country had always paid its full share of the voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. Although 
faced with a stringent financial situation, his Government would make every 
effort to continue paying its contributions. 
22. Japan would continue to send experts, receive fellows, host study tours, 
organize training courses, and donate equipment, and he hoped that the Agency, 
for its part, would take full advantage of those possibilities. Of all the 
technical co-operation projects with developing countries, he appreciated most 
the headway made in some of the projects falling under the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to 
Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA). Japan had actively assisted several 
projects implemented in the area of isotope and radiation applications with a 
view to resolving the most important and urgent problems encountered by RCA 
Member States in food and agriculture, industry and medical care. It was 
hoped that RCA activities in various other areas would continue to expand and 
strengthen. At the same time, it was felt that co-operation in human resource 
development was one of the basic approaches to helping developing countries to 
make progress, and it was in pursuit of that principle that Japan would go on 
improving contacts with the developing countries. It was also planned to 
intensify Japanese co-operation in research and development in nuclear 
techniques, especially with regard to neighbouring countries. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 7 


23. With reference to the way in which the Agency organized the budget used 
to finance those activities, he recalled that the Agency's budget for 1985 was 
based on zero real growth. He was certain that that budget resulted from a 
thorough study of the Agency's activities and structures by the Board of 
Governors and its subsidiary bodies for more effective promotion of those 
activities through close collaboration between Member States and the 
Secretariat. He urged the Secretariat to continue its efforts to achieve a 
balanced allocation of resources and to make more effective use of them. 
Regarding the implementation of the Agency's programmes, its basic functions, 
namely technical co-operation, safeguards and nuclear safety, should obviously 
receive particular attention when allocating funds. Not to be overlooked, 
however, was the fact that basic research was also important as a mainstay for 
those important activities. 
24. In conclusion, he pointed out that the growing importance of the Agency's 
role in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had made its activities 
indispensable for the future success of that cause. Many technological 
problems remained, however, to be overcome in furthering the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy and, as a consequence, the Agency would have to devote itself 
to solving them. 
25. Differences or conflicts of interest among Member States of the Agency 
had never reached the stage of confrontation; rather the opposite, such 
problems had been tackled without losing sight of the common aim and a spirit 
of co-operation had always prevailed. That invaluable tradition was the 
Agency's greatest asset for the future and should be encouraged in every way. 
26. The General Conference was an opportunity to recall the Agency's 
raison d'etre and its status as an international organization which 
contributed to the prosperity and welfare of humanity as well as to world 
peace. Member States should renew their determination to unite their efforts 
for its future development. The combined wisdom and endeavour of all Member 
States would make it possible to meet the challenges and to make the Agency an 
indispensable tool for the progress of mankind. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 8 


27. Mr. RAMANNA (India) commended the Director General for his efforts 
to promote the Agency's activities in the realm of nuclear power? the 
implementation of programmes designed for that purpose would come up against 
difficulties, due mainly to misguided public opinion in certain countries as 
to the economics and safety of nuclear reactors. His delegation felt, 
however, that economic and safety aspects had been better coped with in the 
case of nuclear power than in that of other energy sources. Further, 
difficulties might also arise from the fact that while, on the one hand, the 
Agency could do much more to promote nuclear power in developing countries, on 
the other, restrictions of various kinds were being imposed. He did not see 
the purpose of such restrictions on developing countries, which were only 
concerned with peaceful nuclear energy programmes, when countries with the 
potential to destroy the world several times over had not made the slightest 
headway towards nuclear disarmament. 
28. The Indian Government was pleased to welcome China as a Member of the 
Agency. In 1956, at the time of the Conference on the Statute, India had 
stated that China's membership would be essential if the Agency was to be 
truly representative. 
29. The development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes had made 
particularly good progress in India during the past year. The performance of 
India's power reactors had been considerably improved. The first indigenously 
built heavy-water reactor (235 MW(e)) had started commercial operation at the 
Madras power station in January 1984, and in the course of the year it had 
attained an availability factor greater than 80%; the second reactor of the 
Rajasthan power station had had an availability factor greater than 86%, and 
for the Tarapur power station reactors the figure was close to 93% (if one 
excluded outages for refuelling). Indian industry was now quite capable of 
providing all necessary support for India's future nuclear power programmes. 
The heavy water plants at Tuticorin and Baroda had overcome their 
long-drawn-out teething troubles and were now operating satisfactorily, and 
the Kota heavy-water power plant had begun production. 


30. Following those successes, a programme had been drawn up for installing 
10 000 MW(e) of nuclear power capacity, representing approximately 10% of 
India's total electricity generating capacity, by the end of the century. The 
successful operation of India's indigenously built reprocessing plants had 

GC{XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 9 


enabled his country to embark upon the second phase of the nuclear power 
programme, based on fast breeder reactors. The plutonium-uranium carbide fuel 
for a fast breeder test reactor was currently being fabricated and it was 
expected that the reactor would go critical by the end of the year. 
Purnima-II, a small uranium-233 solution reactor, had gone critical in 
May 1984, and studies on the thorium cycle were in progress. Dhruva, 
a 100 MW(th) heavy-water research reactor for the production of isotopes and 
for basic research and engineering studies, was expected to go critical 
in October 1984. 


31. During the early sessions of the General Conference and the historic 
Geneva Conferences of the 1950s, the majority of scientists had hoped that the 
Agency, dealing with advanced fields of research in science and technology, 
would be able to make a major contribution to the world's economic 
development. While nuclear energy today played an important part in 
electricity generation in developed countries, and to a lesser extent in 
developing countries such as India, most developing countries had derived 
disappointingly little benefit from it; not because they did not need energy, 
but because the anti-nuclear propaganda spread so frequently in developed 
countries, themselves major consumers of nuclear energy, had created 
misconceptions in the minds of planners in developing countries. The Director 
General had stated that anti-nuclear propaganda was perhaps motivated first 
and foremost by political factors. The Indian delegation was firmly convinced 
that the time had come to remedy that situation. India's experience had shown 
that nuclear energy was both safe and competitive in comparison to other, 
alternative sources of energy. 
32. As the Director General had pointed out in his statement, more than 
300 nuclear power plants were now in operation, providing 12% of the world's 
electrical energy, while another 200 were under construction. After more than 
3100 reactor years of operation, the overall nuclear safety record continued 
to be positive. Although there had been some incidents due to human error or 
technical faults, no accident with major consequences had occurred in any 
power reactor. The contribution by the nuclear industry to radiation exposure 
in the world remained minimal, representing less than 1% of that from natural 
sources. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 10 


33. If it was not the safety record of the nuclear industry, was it then the 
fear of nuclear-weapons proliferation that lay at the root of the gloom about 
nuclear energy? Nuclear-weapons proliferation created a terrible threat to 
the existence of mankind, yet the installation of a nuclear power plant in a 
developing country did not necessarily lead to the production of nuclear 
weapons. The nuclear weapons which threatened mankind with extinction were 
still being manufactured under dedicated weapons programmes in the 
nuclear-weapon States. The record of nuclear power programmes outside those 
States did not justify fears and propaganda of a kind that even led to the 
imposition of restrictions on the free exchange of scientific ideas and 
information. After years of progress in the worldwide spread of knowledge, 
those restrictions seemed ridiculous? history had proved time and again that a 
country which was denied information always generated that information itself. 
34. Supply constraints had hampered and were still hampering India's nuclear 
power programme, in violation of well-established codes of international trade 
and law. Situations had arisen where contracts mutually agreed on had not 
been fulfilled because they did not comply with legal provisions or 
regulations adopted by supplier countries subsequent to their conclusion. 
Some developed countries were continuing to meet - not quite so secretly in 
recent times - for the purpose of further tightening the restrictions on 
supplies to developing countries. 
35. India had never been opposed to safeguards. It had always co-operated 
with the Agency, agreeing to improvements in measures for their application 
and willingly allowing the Agency to install any proven new equipment capable 
of detecting the diversion of nuclear material as long as the equipment did 
not interfere with normal operations. His country felt that safeguards should 
be applied in all States, wherever sensitive materials such as separated 
Plutonium or enriched uranium had been imported. On the other hand, it seemed 
unreasonable to extend safeguards to all the equipment at a nuclear facility. 
The application of Agency safeguards had become entangled in diplomatic and 
legal niceties instead of being concentrated on their real aim as set forth in 
the Statute. The Agency should look into that matter more closely and not let 
itself be influenced by the opinions and interests of a few Member States. It 
should commit itself to the free exchange of scientific ideas and 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 11 


discourage embargoes on equipment as mundane as pumps or piping. To seek more 


cumbersome, difficult and intrusive safeguards would ultimately affect the 


utility and credibility of the system. Verification was obviously important/ 


but should not be an end in itself. The goal should be general and complete 
disarmament and not a mere tightening of safeguards in order to disarm the 


unarmed, without any disarmament on the part of the nuclear-weapon States. As 
his delegation had stated in the Board of Governors, a sense of balance and 


realism was lacking in the Agency's documents - for example, in the Annual 
Report and the Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR) for 1983. The Agency's 
task was no more and no less than to determine whether there had been any 
departure from the terms of the safeguards agreements freely and voluntarily 
entered into by the parties concerned. 


36. The Agency provided an ideal forum for dispelling doubts of a technical 
nature about nuclear power, and India welcomed the study initiated on small 
and medium power reactors. Unfortunately, less than 9% of the proposed Agency 
budget for 1985 had been allotted to programmes related to nuclear power and 
the fuel cycle. The Agency could take further positive measures to promote 
nuclear power, especially in developing countries. Within the framework of 
the RCA, for instance, India had suggested using research reactors as a means 
to assist developing countries with the training and development of manpower 
for nuclear power programmes. Although it was for developing countries to 
work out their own solutions, the Agency had a useful role to play in 
identifying specific requirements in the field of nuclear power development 
and areas for collaboration between countries in the same region. A start 
could be made with sectors such as nuclear minerals prospecting, nuclear power 
planning and implementation, power reactor operations and the management of 
wastes - with a view to the establishment of nuclear power stations. 
37. As part of its own nuclear power programme, India could consider 
supplying know-how, equipment and materials to other developing countries for 
their own programme needs. It continued to support the promotional activities 
of the Agency, and its expertise and facilities were at the disposal of other 
developing countries through Agency channels. In 1985, besides paying 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 12 


its full share of the target for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund, India would make a contribution equivalent to US $50 000 for RCA 
activities of particular interest to countries of the region. 


38. In conclusion, he recalled that the nuclear energy programmes of 
different countries had been embarked upon in order to satisfy growing energy 
needs in the long term. It was ultimately the extent to which the Agency 
helped to meet those needs, rather than its concern with peripherals, that 
would determine its relevance and utility to Member States. 
Mr. Thabault (France) took the Chair. 


39. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) said that during the 
past year there had been observed a further increase in the world's nuclear 
capacity, which now accounted for 12% of its electricity; that fact indicated 
a widespread confidence in nuclear energy. In effect, it reflected the 
existence of an international consensus that nuclear power played an essential 
and ever-growing role in safeguarding the stability of energy supplies. As 
nuclear energy grew in importance, the Agency would be relied upon even more 
to promote and strengthen international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
the atom for the benefit of the expanding world population. 
40. As far as his own country was concerned, normal progress could be 
reported in all spheres of nuclear power and its fuel cycle. At the present 
stage, 16 nuclear power plants representing a total capacity of approximately 
11 000 MW(e) were in operation. In 1983, they had produced 18% of the total 
electrical power. Eleven nuclear power plants representing a total of 
12 000 MW(e) were under construction. The aggregate capacity would increase 
as a result and reach 19 000 MW(e) by 1987 and 23 000 MW(e) by 1990. The 
reliability of German nuclear power plants was shown by their very high 
average load factor. Given a total production of 9 969 000 MW/h in 1983, the 
Grafenrheinfeld power plant with a capacity of 1240 MW(e) had generated more 
electricity than any other nuclear plant in the world in any one year. 
41. All projects relating to advanced reactors and the nuclear fuel cycle 
were proceeding according to plan: 
The Schmehausen plant with a 300 MW(e) high-temperature reactor 
would be put into operation in the coming year; 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 13 


The 300 MW(e) fast breeder reactor plant at Kalkar would be 


completed in 1985 and start operation in early 1987; 


- The first enrichment plant in the Federal Republic of Germany URENCO 
- would start operation in the coming year; 


A 1500 tonne irradiated fuel storage centre located at Gorleben was 
ready for operation; a second centre, at Ahaus, was under 


construction; 


- 
A decision was expected by the end of the present year on the siting 
of the first commercial reprocessing plant; 
The PAMELA demonstration plant for the vitrification of high-level 
waste at Mol/Belgium would be started up with cold tests in the 
current year; 


The construction of the exploratory mine in the Gorleben salt dome 
for final storage of high-level waste had been begun; 


The KONRAD mine, currently being converted into a repository for 


low-level waste and wastes from the decommissioning of nuclear 


facilities would become operational by 1989. 


42. In addition, a five-year investigation on the direct disposal of spent 
fuel was now nearing an end. According to preliminary evaluation of the 
results, the technique could not be considered at the present juncture as an 
alternative solution to the conditioning of nuclear waste after reprocessing. 
In a few years time, following more advanced studies and tests, direct storage 
might become acceptable in the case of a certain quantity of spent fuel. It 
was clear that the method would give rise to new problems as regards the 
application of safeguards. 
43. An important event marking the present year had been the conclusion of an 
intergovernmental agreement between several West European countries (five to 
date) on co-operation in the design and construction of the next commercial 
breeder in Europe. That agreement was a landmark for further breeder reactor 
development in Western Europe as well as for the long-term outlook for that 
technology. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 14 


44. Generally speaking, in the Federal Republic of Germany nuclear energy was 
considered more and more a normal and well-established source of power. Such 
was the case with the public at large, since the nuclear power problem had 
been eclipsed by concern about the risks of using coal and other fossil 
fuels. It was also true of the economic sector, where industry was assuming 
ever greater responsibility for the development and application of advanced 
nuclear technology. 
45. The People's Republic of China had become a Member of the Agency 
in 1984. His delegation welcomed that decision, which reinforced the 
universal nature of the Agency and provided additional support for its 
objectives and responsibilities. His country already maintained very good 
bilateral relations with China with regard to co-operation in research and 
technology, which had been extended to cover the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. The Federal Republic of Germany would be glad to broaden the scope 
of and intensify co-operation with China through the Agency. 
46. Turning to the Agency's activities, he first wished to mention the 
safeguards programme, which was one of fundamental importance, since it gave 
assurances that Member States would honour their legal and political 
commitments in respect of non-proliferation. The programme, as a basis for 
co-operation in the nuclear field, was clearly in the interests of all Member 
States. It was gratifying that the Secretariat had been able once again in 
its Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR) to arrive at the conclusion that 
all nuclear materials under safeguards had been duly accounted for. After a 
period of rapid advances over the last few years, the safeguards system had 
now entered a period of consolidation and gradual improvement. No major 
increase in the number of safeguarded facilities was expected in the near 
future. Everyone was aware of the budgetary constraints under which the 
Agency had to function. Under those circumstances he urged the Agency to 
improve the efficiency of its system still further in order to ensure 
effective and credible safeguards implementation. The Secretariat, with the 
aid of the Board of Governors and the various committees involved, should 
persist in its efforts to make the system more transparent. Within that 
context greater attention should be given to the possibilities of an approach 
geared to the whole fuel cycle rather than primarily to individual facilities. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 15 


47. The Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty was to be held at Geneva in 1985. His delegation was convinced that 
the Agency would be able to provide a valuable input for that conference, 
especially as concerned safeguards application and co-operation in the nuclear 
field. His Government recognized the fundamental merits of NPT and the 
EURATOM and Tlatelolco regional systems. It was sad to see that the aim of 
universal application of NPT had not yet been attained, and his delegation 
therefore endorsed all political action that could be undertaken to extend the 
application of that treaty, urging States which had not yet done so to 
subscribe to it and to its underlying political commitments. 
48. His Government was convinced that the goal of a truly worldwide 
non-proliferation regime could be attained only in an atmosphere of 
co-operation and trust. The Federal Republic of Germany pursued that policy 
in its bilateral nuclear agreements. In the multilateral field, it 
consistently supported the efforts of the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS), of which it had been Chairman in 1983. The path towards a consensus on 
issues central to non-proliferation and nuclear co-operation was thorny, but 
he did not believe that it was unnegotiable - and it had to be followed. The 
Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT in 1985, and the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy, in 1986, should both benefit from the results which 
CAS continued to strive for. 


49. His delegation had listened with great interest to the address given by 
the Director General of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and looked 
forward to the "scientific afternoon", two events which highlighted the 
twentieth anniversary of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation 
Applications of Atomic Energy for Food and Agricultural Development. The work 
of that Division was a prime example of the broad range of applications of 
nuclear techniques. It was also a typical field where multilateral research 
and development efforts brought tangible results for a large number of 
developing countries. His Government therefore strongly supported a number of 
long-term co-ordinated research programmes monitored by the Joint Division on 
topics such as protein improvement, sterile insect technique, nitrogen 
residues in fertilizers, hydrology research and pesticides. The overall 
voluntary commitment of the Federal Republic of Germany for those areas since 
1971 had amounted to approximately 14 million deutschmarks. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 16 


50. The work of the Joint Division had to be viewed within the context of the 
technical co-operation programme, one of the Agency's fundamental tasks. As 
far as available resources were concerned, 1983 had set new records with a 25% 
increase over the previous year, or a total of almost 35 million dollars, not 
including the programmes of other divisions, earmarked chiefly for the 
developing countries. That development, which would enable the Agency to 
provide useful support for a number of Member States, was praiseworthy. The 
Agency was urged to increase the implementation rate for that programme. The 
importance of evaluating projects, especially a detailed assessment on the 
spot, which added to the reputation of the programme, should be stressed. 
Thorough evaluation and presentation of the results in detail were vital in 
explaining the technical co-operation programme to the parliaments of Member 
States. 
51. His Government was happy to be in a position, despite budgetary 
constraints, to make a significant contribution to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities. Subject to approval by Parliament, it was also ready 
to pledge its full contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund and to provide additional resources in cash and in kind in 1985. 
52. The Agency played an important part in the field of nuclear safety by 
serving as a forum for the exchange of information and affording Member States 
an opportunity to have expert advice. The Agency's Nuclear Safety 
Standards (NUSS) programme and other activities in that area, such as 
operational safety review teams and the incident reporting system enjoyed his 
country's keen support. The yearly Nuclear Safety Report represented a useful 
reference document. 
53. The Director General's statement to the effect that the Agency's 
Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials had been revised 
and updated and would shortly be published was welcomed. His Government 
strongly supported the application of those recommendations in all Member 
States. Recent events had shown the importance of stringently applying the 
safety requirements in gaining public acceptance of the transport of 
radioactive materials. It was sincerely hoped that those requirements would be 
strictly observed by all organizations responsible. The Secretariat was 
planning to set up an international advisory group on nuclear safety. It had 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 17 


been stated by the Director General during the previous meeting that the 
activities of that group would not clash with those of the national regulatory 
bodies. His delegation would like to have an active share in the work of that 
group and would also take part in the round table on nuclear safety to be held 
during the present session of the General Conference. 


54. Despite the severe national and international budgetary restraints, the 
Secretariat and Member States were encouraged to pursue their aim of optimum 
utilization of resources and clear definition of programme priorities. The 
accomplishments of the Agency were due to the competence and dedication of its 
Director General and its staff. The spirit of co-operation which had always 
been such a great asset and had enabled the Agency to cope with the arduous 
tasks facing it would need to be preserved. 
55. In conclusion, his delegation pledged its continued support of the IAEA. 
56. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) pointed out 
that the present General Conference was being held in an atmosphere of 
international tension created by the actions of the aggressive forces of 
imperialism. The political goals and, more important, the practical actions 
of those forces were clearly aimed at further aggravation of international 
tension. One of the main reasons for that world tension and the increased 
threat of nuclear war lay in the unbridled arms race to which those forces 
were committed. The build-up of nuclear, chemical and conventional weapons 
continued at a forced pace and a new type of armament - outer-space strike 
systems - was being developed. 
57. Under those circumstances countries, more especially those present at the 
Agency's General Conference, were confronted by an extremely acute worldwide 
problem, namely the task of preventing nuclear war. The heads of political 
parties and Governments of the countries making up the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA) had adopted a special declaration at their meeting 
in June of the present year, in which they stressed the need to take the most 
resolute and immediate action to save humanity from the threat of nuclear 
annihilation. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 18 


58. The Soviet Union, faithful to Leninist principles in its foreign policy, 
had always been and remained a steadfast advocate of the prohibition and 
elimination of all types of nuclear weapons. His country had given an example 
of goodwill by undertaking not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. If all 
nuclear powers adopted the same commitment, it would be a great step forward 
along the path of restoring trust between States. 
59. At the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations an overwhelming majority of countries had approved the declaration 
condemning nuclear war, and the resolutions on a nuclear-weapons freeze and on 
prevention of the militarization of outer space, documents drawn up at the 
initiative of the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. The Soviet 
Union considered that the prevention of nuclear arms proliferation was one of 
the main points to which the efforts to ensure international peace and 
security should be directed. In a speech on that subject, Mr. Chernenko, 
Secretary-General of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the USSR 
and President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, had stressed that there 
was need to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all forms, to 
refrain from transferring such weapons or the control of such weapons to 
anyone else, to refrain from deploying them on the territories of countries 
which did not possess such weapons, and to refrain from extending the nuclear 
arms race to other spheres such as outer space. 
60. The Agency was a recognized international body whose duty was to 
co-ordinate the efforts of different countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. No programme related to strengthening international security and 
limiting the arms race, above all in the case of nuclear weapons, should 
escape its attention. 
61. The Soviet Union therefore attached great importance to improving the 
efficiency of Agency safeguards. The Agency should apply its efforts, on a 
priority basis, to areas where the risk of the diversion of nuclear material 
for the manufacture of nuclear weapons was greatest. In that respect his 
delegation believed that the effectiveness of Agency safeguards should be 
strengthened in "near-nuclear" States, especially those which were not parties 
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The Agency should focus its verification 
activities on the "sensitive" stage of the nuclear fuel cycle in those 
countries. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 19 


62. His delegation had supported and would support the Agency in every 
possible manner in discharging its statutory function of guaranteeing the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In 1985, the Soviet Government planned 
to spend more than 800 000 roubles on activities in the USSR under its 
programme of scientific and technical support for Agency safeguards. In that 
way the total figure for sums appropriated for the Agency safeguards support 
programme would amount to 2 200 000 roubles for the period 1983-1985. 
63. To meet the wishes of numerous non-nuclear-weapon States the Soviet Union 
had, as an act of good will, expressed its willingness to place some of its 
peaceful nuclear activities under Agency safeguards. It thereby hoped to 
create more trust between nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States, to 
strengthen the Agency's authority and to improve still more its safeguards 
system. 
64. The Soviet Union attached very great importance to active participation 
by the Agency in the preparations for and holding of the Third Review 
Conference of the Parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. NPT was one of the 
most important international agreements in the field of nuclear weapons 
limitation. It was a symbol of the political goodwill of an overwhelming 
majority of States in the world which believed that by limiting the number of 
nuclear-weapon States one could appreciably reduce the risk of a nuclear war. 
That Treaty reflected the conviction of the contracting parties that the fact 
of renouncing nuclear weapons constituted for non-nuclear-weapon States an 
important guarantee of their security. By helping to recreate trust between 
States, NPT had opened up fresh prospects for international co-operation in 
the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. The Non-Proliferation Treaty, 
in essence, therefore reflected the interests of all countries, whether large 
or small, whether in possession of nuclear weapons or not, and whether 
developed or developing, and there was no alternative to it under the present 
circumstances. His delegation would strive resolutely for the success of the 
Review Conference, which would be a new landmark in the process of 
strengthening the non-proliferation regime. It would be in the interest of 
all parties to the Treaty and all States, as well as in the interest of world 
peace. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 20 


65. There was no doubt that the successful outcome of it would create 
conditions favourable for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. The Agency 
was effectively discharging the responsibilities vested in it under 
resolution 35/112 of the United Nations General Assembly with regard to that 
Conference. The Agency's experience in matters of co-operation and its 
knowledge of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would be of great value to  
those attending the Conference and would make it possible to find the right 
approach for dealing with the issues which that Conference dealt with. 
66. The Soviet Union actively supported other activities of the Agency 
associated with the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS), it had supported the creation of an international 
system for assuring supplies. An important pre-condition for the success of 
the Committee's work was for all its members to realize the existence of a 
close link between guaranteeing the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
the long-term guarantee of nuclear supplies. Action to strengthen the 
non-proliferation regime and set up a nuclear supply system should be taken in 
a spirit of co-operation and dialogue based on equal rights. His country saw 
in that a genuine guarantee of fruitful international co-operation in the use 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
67. The Soviet Union appreciated the part that the Agency had played in 
drafting an international convention on the physical protection of nuclear 
materials. It believed that the text should come into force as soon as 
possible and that a larger number of States should accede to it, since the 
convention was an international legal instrument of importance that helped to 
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. If not all, then at least a 
large majority of the countries which undertook the international transport of 
nuclear materials, or on the territory of which such transport occurred, 
should sign the convention. 
68. The Soviet Union attached great importance, now as before, to the 
Agency's activities in the field of technical co-operation. That was shown by 
the regular increase in its voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund, which normally exceeded the figures 
recommended by the Secretariat. In 1985, the Soviet Union's contribution 
would be 2 250 000 roubles. Those resources were to finance the provision of 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 21 


equipment and instrumentation manufactured in the USSR to developing Member 
States, the organization of training courses in the USSR and the provision of 
services by Soviet experts. Furthermore, 1 000 000 roubles had been allotted 
in 1984 and 1985 to technical assistance to be provided through the Agency for 
States party to NPT, and 150 000 roubles had been allocated to cover costs 
incurred in the Soviet Union under the Agency's technical assistance programme. 


69. The twenty-eighth session of the General Conference of the IAEA was being 
held in the same year as the thirtieth anniversary of the startup of the 
world's first nuclear power plant at Obninsk (USSR). On 27 June 1954, the 
Obninsk power plant had started supplying energy to the Moscow grid, thereby 
inaugurating the use of a new source of electricity for mankind. In a span of 
30 years nuclear energy had passed from the stage of scientific research and 
experiment in the USSR to becoming a rapidy developing branch of the national 
economy, despite the existence of large reserves of coal, oil, natural gas and 
hydraulic resources which had still not been tapped. The construction of 
nuclear power plants in the European part of the Soviet Union where the bulk 
of the population resided, made for better energy supplies for those areas, 
and the plants had shown themselves to be an economic source of energy as well 
as being advantageous and reliable. At the present time 40 nuclear reactors 
with a total installed capacity of more than 22 million kW were in service in 
the USSR. In 30 years the unit capacity had been multiplied by a factor 
of 300. Whereas the total capacity of the Obninsk power plant amounted to 
5 MW, the unit capacity of the Ignalinsk power plant recently commissioned 
was 1500 MW. It was the most powerful reactor that had ever been built in the 
world. Quite recently, in mid-September, the Central Committee of the Soviet 
Communist Party and the Council of Ministers of the USSR had adopted a 
decision which brought out the fact once more that the success in developing 
nuclear power was essential if the efficiency of the national economy was to 
improve still more. 


70. Concurrently with nuclear power, the Soviet Union was rapidly making 
advances in nuclear energy as applied to industry, agriculture, medicine and 
scientific research; for example, more than 5000 industrial and scientific 
establishments (in sectors such as machine-building, metallurgy, 
ship-building, chemicals and coal production) were making use of 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 


page 22 


radioisotopes. Medicine had become the main consumer of radioisotopes and 


ionizing radiation. Nuclear techniques were now well established in medicine 


as a means of clinical diagnosis and treatment. Their advantages were 
manifold, for example they were non-invasive and safe, permitted repeated 
analyses, gave accurate and highly reproducible results, and provided 
quantitative information on the functional state and anatomo-topography of 
body organs and systems. 


71. A number of specialized research institutes in the Soviet Union were 
engaged in developing and further improving techniques for irradiating 
foodstuffs and were studying the effects of the processing on living organisms 
and human beings. 
72. The number of Soviet ice-breakers was on the increase and those ships had 
been used successfully and with great advantage for a number of years in the 
Arctic Ocean. 
73. The Soviet Union was sharing its knowledge and experience in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and was ready to go on doing so. Co-operation 
between the Soviet Union and the socialist countries was conducted on a 
partiuclarly broad and productive scale. Through technical assistance from 
the Soviet Union, nuclear power plants had been built and started up in 
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic and Hungary. They 
produced electricity without interruption and in a reliable and economic 
manner. The construction of nuclear power plants in Poland, Romania and Cuba 
had been begun. As a result of intense development of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes in the socialist countries, active co-operation between all 
the parties interested had replaced the aid which had previously been supplied 
by the Soviet Union alone. Conditions had been created for pooling the 
efforts of Member States of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) 
in their nuclear programmes; for example, there had been agreement on the 
construction of power plants, standardization of units, specialization and 
co-operation in the manufacture of equipment, and the joint solution of 
certain nuclear fuel cycle problems. Within the framework of CMEA, technical 
and economic co-operation was being extended more and more to joint research 
and development activities in nuclear science and engineering on the basis of 
co-ordination, co-operation, agreements and contracts. The experience of 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 23 


Member States of CMEA in scientific and technical, industrial and economic 
co-operation as applied to nuclear energy might perhaps be of interest for 


regional co-operation in other parts of the world. The Agency would do well 


to review the experience of CMEA and look into the possibility of using it as 


a basis for improving co-operation between developing countries. 


74. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation joined other delegations which had 
expressed their support for the Annual Report for 1983, and the Director 
General, together with the Secretariat staff, were to be commended for their 
efficient and productive work during the past year. He was confident that the 
Agency would remain a reliable instrument at the service of the development of 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, while still 
keeping watch over the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
75. Mr. RENON (France) noted with satisfaction that since China's 
decision to join the Agency arrangements enabling it to take part in the 
Agency's work as one of the most advanced nuclear powers had been formulated 
by the Board of Governors and that they would be adopted as well by the 
General Conference. That fact was a success for the Board, and its Chairman, 
as well as for the international community as a whole; it would boost the 
Agency's effectiveness in that China would be called upon to play an important 
part in international nuclear trade and exchange for peaceful purposes. 
76. The economic crisis continued to have an adverse effect on energy 
investments, especially in the case of nuclear power, the economic viability 
of which could be appreciated and seen objectively only in the middle term. 
On the other hand, in a number of industrialized countries the decrease in 
psycho-political manifestations that had tended to slow down the development 
of that energy source seemed to be confirmed. Indeed, those were still 
sensitive issues, as the reaction by the Press had shown at the time of the 
sinking of the Mont-Louis, although the experts had agreed that there would be 
no risks involved in terms of radioactivity. The efforts deployed by the 
nuclear industry in the matter of safety - which made it an exemplary industry 
in that respect - should therefore be continued; experience showed, however, 
that one had to know how to assess the extent of such efforts correctly. 

GC{XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 24 


77. Steps had been taken to improve or modify the legal situation in order to 
facilitate, in the long run, a return to nuclear power development; in certain 
countries, for instance, attempts had been made to ease licensing procedures, 
without detriment to safety, and to reduce construction deadlines, which 
occasionally hindered the competitiveness of the investments. Efforts were 
usually focused on action relating to waste management. 
78. The record for nuclear energy was impressive: 325 reactors in service, 
more than 270 units under construction or ordered throughout the world, and 
12-13% of the world's electricity produced in that way, and probably 20% 
by 1990; but it was right now that the ground was being prepared for the 
status of nuclear power by the end of the century, and from that standpoint 
the low investment level was disturbing. Nuclear energy had passed its tests 
and constituted, along with coal, the basic source for mass-scale energy 
needs - except for the specific domain of oil. It was already realized that 
nuclear energy had an irreplaceable part to play in seeking a world energy 
balance, and it was clear that a more voluntaristic approach to energy 
policies was called for. 
79. France, whose nuclear power programme was the second biggest in the 
world, had in 1984 become a country in which nuclear power covered its needs 
to the greatest extent; 55% of its electricity was accounted for by 
37 nuclear power reactors, and 22 units were under construction, 16 of them 
with a capacity of 1300 MW. Thus 70% of its electricity would be covered by 
nuclear power by 1990, and the national energy independence factor would 
attain 50%, as against 40% in 1984, and 20% in 1973. 
80. The availability of French power plants (some of which were the 
load-following type) had been 75% over the past year. A first unit with an 
output of 1300 MW(e) had been commissioned and construction of the first 
French-designed reactor of a new standard series with four 1400 MW(e) loops 
had been begun. The Phenix fast breeder (250 MW(e)) had now been supplying 
the national grid for ten years and its availability factor, which had been 
95% over the first six months of 1984, confirmed the quality of that reactor 
line. The Super-Phenix (1300 MW(e)) had just reached the stage of 
incorporation of the sodium coolant and it would become critical before the 
end of 1985. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 25 


81. The interest of European countries in breeder reactors had led 
in January 1984 to the signing of an intergovernmental agreement by which 
Great Britain joined the co-operation existing already for a long time between 
Prance, the Federal Repbulic of Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands; a 
set of specific agreements was being negotiated between the interested 
industrial concerns and research institutes, on the one hand, and the 
utilities, on the other. When the time came that European co-operation.would 
be logically extended to cover other countries, the possibility of which was, 
furthermore, recorded in the mentioned intergovernmental agreement. 
82. In addition, France possessed a complete fuel cycle industry. The 
Eurodif enrichment plant had reached its rated capacity of 11 000 000 SWU/y 
in 1983, and had passed on to the stage of industrial operation; it had 
operated highly satisfactorily in 1984. A new unit for fabricating fuel 
assemblies had been started up. 
83. The extension of the La Hague reprocessing plant had continued as 
planned; the investment would make it possible, in a few years' time, to 
possess a reprocessing capacity of 1600 t/y, which would be able to process 
spent fuel from about a hundred 900 MW(e) power plants. Plant UP2 had already 
reprocessed 920 tonnes of fuel from light-water reactors, 190 of which related 
to the first six months of 1984, or a figure equal to more than half the total 
amount reprocessed throughout the world. Those achievements, together with 
the record for facility safety, made it clear that the industrial option 
chosen by France to close the cycle was a worthy one. 
84. As far as waste management was concerned, basis safe storage regulations 
dealing chielfy with the acceptability thresholds for surface storage centres 
had been adopted. A waste management programme had been published and the 
Commissariat a l'energie atomique (CEA) was to propose, before the end 
of 1985, two new surface storage sites; siting studies for an underground 
laboratory to investigate storage conditions were already underway in 
connection with a proposition that would be made to the Government in 1987. 
85. As was known, France was willing to share its nuclear experience and to 
co-operate with States anxious to launch nuclear power programmes; it had 
already done so on a broad scale and was prepared to promote the transfer to 
technology, with due regard for the needs of its partners and their industrial 
development potential. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 26 


86. In consideration of the effects of the world crisis, the Agency had 
concentrated its efforts in the past year on its statutory functions promotion 
of nuclear energy and verification of the peaceful use of it. It 
had sought, among other things, to keep abreast of developments in the nuclear 
field in a number of Third World countries and was preparing for the future so 
that when the time came the development of nuclear energy on a broader scale 
would be made easier. The Agency had also endeavoured to publicize the use of 
nuclear techniques in agriculture, food and health, and finally, it had 
effectively carried out verification of the peaceful uses of safeguarded 
materials. Promotion and verification were, furthermore, two aspects 
inextricably linked to its mandate. 
87. But the international situation had brought to bear severe constraints on 
the Agency. The necessity for a zero-real-growth Regular Budget in 1985 was a 
serious challenge - the Agency had responded to the challenge by seeking to 
keep down operational expenditure to a minimum, and the Director General was 
to be commended for the action he had taken along those lines. It had to be 
realized that the Agency's finances would remain critical at a period when, 
because of the world economic situation, the budgetary policy of Member States 
was particularly stringent; as a result it was essential to define priorities 
in the implementation of programmes. 
88. The preparation of the budget for 1985 had resulted in more intense 
consultations with Member States for the very purpose of identifying 
priorities; that was a positive innovation. In the same way, the new 
presentation of the budget, which emphasized its objectives, imparted to it a 
transparence that would facilitate the evaluation and the follow-up of 
programmes and sub-programmes, as well as assisting with the choice of 
priorities. 
89. During the past few years the Agency's budget for technical assistance 
and co-operation, financed essentially on a voluntary basis, had been brought 
back to the former level; it represented 33% of the funds for 1984, which was 
evidence of the efforts made in that area. In the present situation, however, 
it would not be possible to maintain that growth rate; it was noted, for 
example, that there were delays in the payment of voluntary contributions by 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 27 


certain Member States, or in the payment of sums below those pledged. At the 


same time, the decrease in the project implementation rate recorded in 1983 
indicated that there were limits to the absorption capacity of the receiving 
countries. The Technical Co-operation Evaluation Unit recently set up would 
certainly help to suit the means to the needs more effectively. 


90. The three-year indicative programming for the financing of technical 
assistance and co-operation activities, decided on in 1980, had proved 
useful. That approach, which endowed the Agency's activities with a certain 
"predictability" should be maintained. 
91. His delegation considered technical co-operation to be a fundamental part 
of the Agency's activities; since it had so often hoped for them in the past, 
it approved the new trends which now marked the Agency's activities in that 
respect; those were, first, the stress placed on the applications of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, medicine and food preservation, which represented 
50% of the technical assistance projects; that broad range of activities could 
in the long run considerably influence the economy and living standard of many 
developing countries. And, secondly, the increase in the number of 
multi-year and multi-national projects, and finally, an effort to integrate 
training into the actual design of the project. 
92. The Agency's activities in promoting nuclear power were positive. In 
particular, the initiative launched by the Agency in 1983 to encourage a 
dialogue between potential suppliers and consumers on prospects for small- and 
medium-sized reactors was welcome. It would be worthwhile ascertaining 
whether there was an interest, especially in the Third World, for that type of 
reactor, adapted to the samll and medium electric grids. The dialogue had 
obviously not yet brought the full results, but it was hoped that the 
determination with which the Secretariat was following up that matter would 
make for useful consultations during the year to come. 
93. The Agency had important functions in the area of safety; the publication 
of the NUSS guides and codes, now in its final phase, was to its credit. The 
same applied to the development of guidlines for assisting geographically 
close countries to conclude agreements on joint action in the case of nuclear 
accidents. His country appreciated the initiative recently taken by the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 28 


Agency to meet the requests for assistance or expertise on general or special 
aspects of safety - two missions of that type had taken place during the past 
year and if those activities continued to increase the Agency would have to 
call on safety experts from countries which had had long experience with 
nuclear power programmes. 


94. With regard to the plan to establish a high-level safety advisory group, 
he recalled his delegation's position, which coincided with that of many other 
countries, that it was up to each State, in line with its own way of thinking, 
to draw up its safety regulations and the procedures for applying them. 
International co-operation, whatever its framework might be, should never be 
an alternative to the regulatory power of States, nor even encroach upon it in 
any way. Furthermore, countries with nuclear programmes had already been 
consulting each other frequently for a long time? they had in practice arrived 
at a consensus on the criteria, methods and, by implication, the objectives of 
safety and protection. 
95. Lastly, the ever-growing importance attached by the Agency to matters 
associated with waste management appeared to be fully justified. 
96. Once again the Agency had concluded that in 1983 the nuclear materials 
placed under its safeguards had been used solely for peaceful purposes. Their 
knowledge of the work of the Department of Safeguards enabled delegations once 
again to note both the reliability and credibility of the Agency's safeguards 
system. Such was indeed essential, for certainty that the mission had been 
properly accomplished was the condition necessary for fostering exchanges and 
commerce, and consequently for developing nuclear power, which was itself 
vital in overcoming the world's energy problems. That was why, moreover, his 
country favoured a system of safeguards financing which took that principle 
into account and established equitable participation by all Member States. 
97. The Agency was improving its safeguards techniques at a rate commensurate 
with technological progress and was promoting research in that area. For its 
part, his country continued to take part in the scientific safeguards support 
programme, the value of which had been given prominence by the Secretariat. 
Reorganization of the Department of Safeguards was a good idea, for it had 
enabled the Department's efficiency to be improved, for example, by ensuring 
better utilization of inspectors or by setting up regional offices. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 29 


98. The methods used to safeguard the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had 
stood the test of time; but for all that they were not inflexible. The 
increase and diversity expected in the case of nuclear facilities and a 
foreseeable growth in the quantity of fissile materials to be safeguarded 
inevitably implied a significant rise in the safeguards budget. It was just 
with that in mind that further improvements had to be sought in those methods 
so as to ensure, along with the results, a curb on the costs and the 
restrictions imposed upon operators. In that respect the ideas entertained by 
the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) were 
reasonable; those matters should continue to be a subject for in-depth 
discussion by the Board of Governors. 
99. The discussions on international plutonium storage had not yet ended. 
His country was convinced that the Agency ought to play a role in the 
regulation of international plutonium movements and hoped that concerted 
agreement could be reached; a study of that matter should be resumed within 
the Agency. 
100. There had been discussions within the Agency and in other organizations 
aimed at finding new policy guidelines to facilitate the development of 
nuclear energy in the world. His country, which had also given thought to 
that matter, believed that each State, subject to its requirements, should 
have access to nuclear energy, while complying with the accepted requirements 
of non-proliferation. 
101. In conclusion, he wished to pay tribute to the Agency's competence and 
experience, which had helped so much to enhance its credibility. 
Mr. Barreda Delgado (Peru) resumed the Chair. 


102. Mr. JIANG (China) read out a message of congratulations to the 
General Conference from Mr. Zhao Ziyang, Prime Minister of the People's 
Republic of China. In that message he stated that the Agency, since its 
foundation, had done much useful work in promoting the use of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes in the interests of the whole of mankind, thereby 
winning world-wide acclaim; he expressed the hope that the twenty-eighth 
session would contribute even more to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
to the technical assistance and co-operation in that field. The Chinese 
Government was ready to take an active part in that common effort. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 30 


103. The Chinese delegation was very pleased to be able to take an official 
part in the work of the General Conference and wished to thank all those 
delegations which had supported China on the occasion of its request for 
admission to the Agency. He also thanked the previous speakers for their 
words of welcome/ as well as the Director General for his assistance. Once 
again his delegation wished to express its appreciation, to Romania and other 
countries which had submitted and supported, in 1971, the proposal for 
recognition of the right of the People's Republic of China to represent China 
in the Agency; his delegation would do all it could to help the success of the 
General Conference. Finally, he congratulated the FAO and the Agency on their 
20 years of fruitful collaboration. 
104. Because of the rapid progress in science and technology, the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy assumed an unequalled importance and were called upon 
to play a central role in the socio-economic development of all countries. 
Despite the setbacks encountered by some of them over the last few years, 
nuclear energy remained a promising source of energy. It had to be noted, 
however, that its development was very well balanced? as the Director General 
had himself stated, out of 313 nuclear power plants in the world, only about 
12 of them were located in developing countries - a fact clearly accorded 
neither with the aspirations nor with the needs of the developing countries and 
one of the Agency's most important tasks was to help those countries to 
develop their nuclear potential, with full consideration for their specific 
requirements. 
105. Inseparable from that problem was the matter of non-proliferation. China 
was aware of the importance of the latter and recognized that it was essential 
to adopt adequate measures in that respect; it was, however, opposed to the 
imposition of unreasonable restrictions on nuclear co-operation which, under 
the pretext of halting proliferation, only impeded full co-operation of that 
kind. Preparations were now underway for the United Nations Conference for 
the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy and China was taking an active part in them. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 31 


106. China's activities in the nuclear field had begun in the fifties. 
Through the efforts deployed over 30 years, China had established a fairly 
complete industrial system, together with nuclear research facilities covering 
areas such as uranium prospecting, mining and enrichment, waste management and 
various others. Its modernization programme underway opened up new prospects 
for the development of nuclear science and industry. China's economic 
development strategy was aimed at a four-fold increase in the annual gross 
figure for industrial and agricultural production by the year 2000, and to 
reach that goal the development of nuclear energy was absolutely essential. 
Although coal and hydropower resources were abundant in China, they were 
lacking in certain regions where the economy was more developed; under those 
circumstances nuclear energy had to become an important source of power for 
China. The Government had decided to speed up the building of power stations, 
both for hydropower as well as the thermal and nuclear type, and a nuclear 
energy development programme was now being drawn up. Construction of a 
nuclear power plant at Quinshan and another one in Guandong Province had 
already started. 
107. China had thus laid the foundations for the development of its nuclear 
industry; but as a developing country it still needed the experience of other 
countries and had to acquire technologies and equipmment capable of speeding 
up the process, since its ultimate aim was to be able to design and construct 
by itself large-size nuclear power plants. For the first generation of such 
plants it had selected pressurized water reactors as the principal type. 
108. Isotope application was making headway in China. More than 
10 000 scientists and technical staff were now engaged in the production and 
application of isotopes or investigating that field, while several research 
institutes had been set up for that purpose. Isotopes and radiation 
technology had been found very satisfactory in various sectors of the economy, 
more especially in agriculture, where more than 160 new types of cereals, 
vegetables and fruit had been produced using radiation technology and were now 
cultivated successfully. Likewise, in industry, radiation technology was 
being employed on an ever broader scale. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 32 


109. As a country with 1000 million inhabitants, China attached great 
importance to nuclear medicine. At the present time more than 700 medical 
units were applying nuclear technology for diagnosis and therapy, and had 
obtained in certain areas outstanding results. 
110. As part of its modernization programme, China had formulated a policy of 
rapid development in nuclear energy, based on, first, self-reliance and, 
second, international co-operation. At the same time, co-operation and 
exchange in nuclear energy with other countries was part of China's policy of 
opening up to the outside world. His country was in favour of active 
co-operation in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy based on 
reciprocity and progress for all, mutual respect for sovereignty, 
non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries, equality and 
mutual benefit. It was in that spirit that China had maintained good 
relations with many friendly countries for a number of years. Agreements had 
been signed in the nuclear field with Yugoslavia, France and the Federal 
Republic of Germany, and agreements with the United States of America and 
Brazil were in process of preparation. Good relations were also enjoyed with 
Japan and the two countries were now negotiating a co-operation agreement in 
the nuclear field. China was expecting to expand its co-operation activities 
still further in that respect. 
111. His country was opposed to the nuclear arms race and spared no effort in 
seeking to attain the objective of complete prohibition and total destruction 
of nuclear weapons. Although it was true that co-operation in nuclear energy 
touched on some senitive issues, China intended to adopt a responsible 
attitude which would ensure that such co-operation could be used solely for 
peaceful purposes. In May 1984, the Chinese Prime Minister had stated that 
China, dissatisfied with the discriminatory nature of NPT, had refused to 
accede to it; but that obviously did not mean that his country favoured 
nuclear proliferation, nor that it was prepared to help other countries 
develop nuclear weapons. The policy applied by China in its co-operation 
activities with other States followed the principle of non-proliferation, and 
when exporting materials and equipment it would request the recipient 
countries to accept safeguards in line with the principles set forth in the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.258 
page 33 


Agency's Statute. By the same token, when importing nuclear materials and 
equipment, China would also make sure that they were used for peaceful 
purposes. 


112. China was not yet very conversant with the Agency's activities and hoped 
to learn from the exchange of views with other delegations. He looked forward 
to the coming co-operation and was resolved to contribute its share to 
fulfilment of the Agency's important tasks. 
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
February 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-NINTH 
PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 25 September 1984, at 10.25 a.m. 


President: Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda*"' 


Arrangements for the Conference 
1 -6 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation of 
items for initial discussion 
(b) 
Closing date of the session and opening 
date of the next session 5 -6 
General debate and annual report for 1983 7 -110 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United Kingdom 7 -19 
Argentina 20 -33 
Sweden 34 -55 
Iraq 56 -67 
Belgium 68 -74 
German Democratic Republic 75 -88 
Republic of Korea 89 -110 


*/ 
A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 September 1984. 

**/ GC(XXVIII)/711. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 

85-282 


GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXVIII)/711) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee, 
at its meeting the previous day, had authorized him to report on the result of 
its consideration of the agenda and the allocation of items for initial discussion. 
The General Committee recommended that the agenda consist of all the 
items listed in the provisional agenda as set out in document GC(XXVIII)/711. 
2. The General Committee further recommended that those items be allocated 
for initial discussion as indicated in document GC(XXVIII)/711. 
3. Finally, the General Committee recommended that, subject to any changes 
which might appear desirable in order to make the best use of the time available, 
the items listed in document GC(XXVIII)/711 be taken in the order in which 
they appeared there. 
4. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
5. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee 
had authorized him to report that it recommended fixing Friday, 28 September 1984, 
as the closing date of the twenty-eighth regular session and Monday, 
23 September 1985, as the opening date of the twenty-ninth regular session 
of the General Conference, to be held in Vienna. 
6. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/713 and Add.1 and 2) 


7. Mr. HENDERSON (United Kingdom) said that reconciling the aspirations 
of many countries to acquire nuclear technology and the normal enthusiasm of all 
countries to expand trade with the world's concern that the dissemination of 
nuclear technology might cause proliferation of nuclear weapons was a fundamental 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 3 


dilemma for the Agency, which had been established as a means of achieving 
such reconciliation and which had developed for itslf a standing in the world 
which was second to none amongst international agencies. Sadly, however, the 
search for complete resolution of that fundamental dilemma had not yet been 
successful. 


8. At a time when the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) were engaged in preparations for the Third NPT Review 
Conference it might perhaps be appropriate to give some thought to the interlocking 
problems of non-proliferation and. nuclear trade and their impact on 
the work of the Agency. The concept of "dual-use" technology was not new. The 
first viable cutting edge, made by flaking flint many thousands of years ago, 
had given rise to both tools and weapons. What was new was the scale of the 
problems now that man had a source of power which was both capable of providing 
immense benefits and of destroying civilization and possibly even life itself. 
To meet that challenge, it had been necessary to re-examine and sometimes to 
modify or discard long-held concepts relating to commercial privacy, military 
secrecy and even national sovereignty. 
9. It was clear that a technology of such potential must be used to the 
benefit of all nations. Equally clearly no Government could permit the transfer 
of nuclear material, equipment or technology to destinations outside its control 
unless it had confidence that such items would indeed be put to the stated use 
and not be diverted or otherwise used to assist the development of a nuclear 
explosive capability. Such confidence was not something which the supplier 
State could generate itself, it had to be created by the recipient. The means 
devised so far for generating confidence had been clear, unambiguous and 
credible statements of intent backed by adequate transparency of subsequent 
action, and the principal instrument used for the achievement of such transparency 
was the Agency's safeguards system. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 4 


10. The first safeguards system devised in the early days of the Agency had 
provided for the application of safeguards to specific projects, usually 
linked to specific bilateral supplier/recipient agreements. It had become 
clear that such assurances and safeguards did not give sufficient confidence 
that the recipient State might not in parallel be carrying out a military 
nuclear programme which would benefit, if only indirectly, from civil transfers. 
In order to deal with that possible weakness, the international community had 
developed the concepts enshrined in the NPT: the clear renunciation of any 
intention to acquire or develop a nuclear explosive capacity, combined with 
the acceptance of safeguards on all nuclear materials in all nuclear facilities. 


11. For those countries which applied those concepts there was undoubtedly 
a much higher degree of confidence, thus permitting a much higher rate of 
technology transfer. The success of those concepts could be seen from the fact 
that more than three quarters of the world's independent sovereign States had 
acceded to the NPT and more than 98% of civil nuclear facilities were under 
safeguards. Thus, the "quantum jump" in power for good or evil represented by 
the technical discovery of nuclear energy had been matched by a series of 
very impressive political achievements: first, the creation of an Agency 
entrusted with the verification of national undertakings, and secondly, the 
almost universal preparedness of States to make a small cession of sovereignty 
by accepting safeguards on their activities and giving the undertakings involved 
in NPT membership. 
12. The corollary of the increase in confidence generated by the acceptance 
of full-scope safeguards and the clear renunciation of a nuclear explosive 
capability was bound to be a decrease in confidence - particularly among the 
informed public - in respect of those States which refused to take either, 
or both, of those steps. Simple statements of peaceful intent could not have 
the force of a major international treaty, nor could the public be brought 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.259 
page 5 


to understand why safeguards should be refused as discriminatory or as unacceptable 
intrusions on national sovereignty by a small minority of States, when 
they were accepted by the overwhelming majority of States with different 
political systems and in all parts of the world. That was why it was his 
Government's policy to foster and to encourage adherence to the NPT. 


13. The Director General, in his opening statement, had suggested setting up 
radiation protection advisory teams to assist Member States in implementing 
the Agency's Basic Safety Standards. That approach might be very useful, as it 
would help to ensure uniformity in the radiation protection systems of Member 
States. Much would depend on the composition of the teams themselves and 
the guidance given to them on how to approach their task. His Government 
would be interested to see more detailed proposals. 
14. The Director General had also mentioned that the International Convention 
on the Physical Protection :<y.f Nuclear Material had so far been signed by 38 States 
and ratified by 10; but that 11 instruments of ratification were still needed 
for its entry into force. The United Kingdom regarded the Convention as an 
important legal framework for ensuring the safe transport of nuclear materials 
and would deposit its instruments of ratification with the Agency, in accordance 
with its obligations under the EURATOM (European Atomic Energy Community) 
Treaty, as soon as the other members of the European Community were ready to 
take the same step. 
15. In July 1982, the United Kingdom nuclear and electricity generating 
industies had established an executive agency - NIREX - responsible for 
managing and disposing of their low- and intermediate-level radioactive wastes. 
The development of new disposal facilities for intermediate-level wastes was 
NIREX1s main priority. Formal proposals to develop repositories would be 
subject to planning legislation and regulatory controls. The Government had 
conducted a public consultation exercise on the principles to be used in 
assessing proposals; the draft principles had taken full account of the 
valuable work carried out in that field by the Agency. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 6 


16. In that context, much attention had recently been directed to the levels 
of discharges from the Sellafield reprocessing plant. His Government appreciated 
the concerns that had been expressed. The discharge levels had already 
been considerably reduced, and a new plant nearing completion would be bringing 
about further very substantial reductions by 1986. His Government fully 
supported the Paris Commission's recommendation that contracting parties to the 
Paris Convention should take account of the best available technology at 
nuclear reprocessing plants in order to minimize radioactive discharges to 
the marine environment and would be submitting a first report and timetable 
on further ptoposed measures by the end of 1984. 


17. Two international projects with which the United Kingdom was associated 
had experienced encouraging developments in the past year. The Joint European 
Torus (JET) device, which was the world's largest and most versatile fusion 
experiment, had been opened and was performing well, and the United Kingdom 
had signed an agreement with Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany 
and Italy for co-operation in the field of fast reactors research and technology. 
On the national level, good progress was being made with commissioning 
of three recently completed advanced gas-cooled reactors and with the 
construction of further such reactors. 
18. The Director General was right in regarding safety as one of the most 
important areas in which the Agency acted as an instrument for the exchange 
of experience and for the joint elaboration of guidelines. The updating and 
revision of the regulations for the safe transport of radioactive materials 
was an Agency activity which the United Kingdom certainly welcomed. The recent 
sinking of the Mont Louis freighter had highlighted the importance of such 
regulations and of their gaining the widest possible level of international 
acceptance and implementation. However, although that event had demonstrated 
that the regulations were clearly effective, that had apparently not been 
enough from the point of view of public acceptance. Despite the fact that 
the cargo had carried minimal radiation hazard and that its carriage had conformed 
to stringent safety standards, the accident had been perceived by many more or 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 7 


less informed observers as a serious nuclear event and there had been calls for 
even more regulations relating to the carriage of nuclear materials. On the 
other hand, the more basic question raised by the event, namely how it had 
been possible for two large vessels, whatever their cargoes, to collide at all, 
seemed to have been overlooked by most commentators. 


19. Thus, the case of the Mont Louis had highlighted not only the importance 
of effective regulations, but also the need for a better general understanding 
by the public of the real hazards from which those regulations were designed 
to protect the public. The Central Electricity Generating Board in the United 
Kingdom had recently shown how the message could be got across by arranging 
a demonstration in which a train travelling at over 100 miles an hour had 
crashed into a full-sized transport spent-fuel flask. The train had been a 
spectacular write-off, but the flask, had survived, as expected, bruised but 
still a fully effective containment. Of course the scope for demonstrations 
of that kind was limited, and public concern about transport of nuclear 
materials was just one manifestation of the wider problem of public acceptability. 
Unless people across the world could be convinced that nuclear energy was something 
to be embraced rather than feared or rejected, well-organized and vocal 
opposition in various countries would continue its attempts to slow or actually 
halt progress. The nuclear community had learned that apart from the prerequisites 
of technology, safety, economics and fuel supply, a successful 
nuclear programme needed public acceptance. Nuclear power across the world 
would be judged by the standards achieved by the world at large in relation 
to safety, good management, economics, non-proliferation, and waste disposal. 
Governments must therefore ensure that the public was properly informed and 
must take a positive lead in relation to nuclear power. The Agency had 
an essential role to play in the debate and if the nuclear community made common 
cause it might be possible to remove one entirely unnecessary obstacle in the 
way of worldwide progress. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 8 


20. Mr. CONSTANTINI (Argentina), summarizing the main events since the 
last General Conference pertaining to the Argentine nuclear programme, said 
that on 18 November 1983 it had been announced that Argentina had mastered 
the technology of uranium enrichment by gaseous diffusion after a series 
of pilot-scale tests, which had rendered possible the design and construction 
of a medium-sized uranium enrichment plant in the neighbourhood of Pilcaniyeu, 
Rio Negro Province. A number of modules of a plant designed to produce 
uranium enriched to 207, the capacity of which had been determined in such 
a way as to supply Argentine experimental reactors and the potential market 
therefore in Latin America, were in operation. By expanding the plant as 
planned, it would be possible to enrich the amount of uranium needed to 
supply the Atucha and Embalse nuclear power stations with uranium enriched 
to 17o- The public announcement had been preceded by official notification 
from the Argentine Government to the heads of Government and nuclear 
authorities of various friendly countries, to those of countries providing 
Argentina with nuclear technology and supplies, to those of all Latin American 
States and also to the Director General of the IAEA, in which it had been 
stated that the new technology, developed by Argentine scientists and 
technicians without any help from outside, was intended exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. Argentina had been very gratified that the Director 
General had immediately accepted the invitation to visit the above-mentioned 
plant, which he had done on 22 November 1983. 


21. As regards the generation of nuclear electricity, the first Argentine 
nuclear power reactor (Atucha 1), which had completed ten years of operation, 
had continued to have an excellent availability factor of 977 during the 
year. The second power reactor, Embalse, which had been connected to the 
grid in 1983, had also operated satisfactorily, and its availability factor 
in the first eight months of 1984 had been 94%. Despite the considerable 
economic and financial difficulties of the current budgetary year, all the 
main projects under way had continued to make progress, albeit at a slower 
rate than planned. Forty-one per cent of the work on the third power reactor 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 9 


(Atucha II) and 81.57 of that on the pilot heavy-water plant based on 
Argentine technology had been completed; the figure for the industrial 
heavy-water plant based on Swiss technology with a rated capacity of 250 tonnes 
per annum was the same as that of the previous one. It was anticipated that 
the first phase of the enrichment plant would be finished in 1986 and that 
the fuel reprocessing plant would come on line in 1987. 


22. The previous year had again been a most active one in terms of both 
multilateral and bilateral international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. Where multinational co-operation was concerned, Argentina 
had intensified its activities under the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation programme. Aware as it was of the lack of funds for that 
programme and despite its own serious budgetary difficulties, his Government 
had increased to the maximum extent possible its assistance in the form 
of fellowships and training courses and by making Argentine experts available 
whenever so requested by the Agency on an exclusively non-discriminatory 
basis in all cases. 
23. An interregional training course on radiological protection and nuclear 
safety had once again been held in Buenos Aires together with the IAEA, 
which had been attended by eighteen fellows from Latin America and elsewhere. 
An undertaking had also been given to hold interregional courses in 1985 
on quality assurance and on training in energy planning in developing countries 
with special reference to nuclear power, and also a regional course on training 
of trainers in data processing for radioimmunoassay, all in co-operation 
with the Agency. 
24. In addition, Argentina undertook to pay in 1985 its voluntary 
contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in Argentine 
currency. 
25. Within the framework of the Organization of American States (OAS), 
Argentina had again offered technical assistance to all member countries 
of the Organization and had undertaken, among other things, to hold a regional 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 10 


seminar in October 1984 on applications of nuclear energy in veterinary 
medicine and animal production. Also, under the auspices of the OAS, a 


fourth course on metallurgy and technology of materials had been held, as 
had courses on fuel element technology for research reactors and on radioisotope 
techniques used in radioimmunoassay, both of which had been held 
exclusively on the initiative of the Argentine National Atomic Energy 
Commission without any support from an international organization; both 
the latter courses had been attended by many Latin American professionals 
with fellowships from the Argentine Government. 


26. Argentina had been participating in the group of co-ordinating countries 
in the sphere of peaceful uses of nuclear energy of the movement of nonaligned 
countries. His Government had also been participating in the 
Preparatory Committee of the United Nations Conference for the Promotion 
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. 
27. Turning to bilateral co-operation, he said that joint action with 
various friendly nations had borne fruit under sixteen bilateral co-operation 
agreements which had been in force, including agreements with Brazil, Peru, 
Uruguay, the Federal Republic of Germany, France and Ecuador, whereby cooperation 
with the last two countries had been intensified over the past 
year. Such joint action was the result of mutual confidence and common 
objectives in the sphere of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
28. Argentina was prepared to forge and to strengthen links of co-operation 
with all nations of the world on a basis of equality and mutual respect. 
It also continued to support world efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation, 
whether horizontal or vertical. Its return to a constitutional regime 
provided an additional assurance in that connection. The President of 
Argentina, Dr. Raul Alfonsin, had formally and clearly reaffirmed the 
exclusively peaceful nature of Argentine nuclear policy and had set up a 
commission composed of three leading Argentine personalities to draw up 
a draft act which was currently being submitted to Parliament and which 
would clearly set forth the peaceful policies and objectives of the Argentine 

GC(XXVII1)/0R.259 
page 11 


nuclear plan and the legal arrangements governing all Argentine nuclear 
activities. His Government not only intended to ensure that its own nuclear 
development was strictly peaceful but would continue to advocate in all 
international fora that disarmament be carried out under strict and effective 
international control, including nuclear disarmament without which the survival 
of humanity was seriously at risk. Argentina was also convinced that the 
Agency's safeguards system constituted the appropriate means of ensuring 
non-proliferation. Any additional requirements imposed unilaterally introduced 
an undesirable discretionary element which his Government was not prepared 
to accept. 


29. Commenting on the Agency's activities since the last General Conference, 
he congratulated the Secretariat on the commitment it had shown to the solution 
of problems relating to technical assistance, and he warmly supported the 
results achieved. However, certain Member States were still imposing 
unacceptable and discriminatory conditions in respect of technical assistance 
from extrabudgetary funds provided by them which went against the spirit 
of the Statute, as did the Revised Guiding Principles and General Operating 
Rules to Govern the Provision of Technical Assistance by the Agency; technical 
assistance could not be universal until such discrimination ceased to exist. 
The increase in funds available for technical assistance was gratifying. 
However, a real measure of the growth was given not by comparison with the 
figures of previous years but by comparing the requirements of Member States 
with the funds available. 


30. Turning to safeguards, he said that it was profoundly gratifying that 
there had once more been no failure to comply with the undertakings made 
by Member States. Greater transparency was, however, needed in the safeguards 
activities of the Secretariat so that Member States could be properly informed 
and the Board would be able to make the appropriate judgements and to take 
the relevant decisions. In that way the reasons and motivation behind the 
conclusions reached by the Secretariat and the action taken by it in the 
practical implementation of safeguards would become known. In that connection, 
Argentina had requested that the Secretariat prepare a document showing 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 12 


a complete list of all consultants, advisers and experts who had worked 
since 1981, were currently working, or would be likely to work on safeguardsrelated 
subjects. It had also requested copies of the documents produced 
and recommendations made by experts and advisers. Argentina was convinced 
that the information would be extremely useful for the continuing improvement 
of methods of measurement, verification and monitoring of the safeguards 
system, to which his Government had always attached the highest importance. 
Finally, he noted that a joint programme between Argentina and the IAEA 
on the testing of the behaviour of a containment and surveillance system 
for the Embalse nuclear power station was currently fully under way. 


31. As regards the work of the Committee on the Assurances of Supply (CAS), 
Argentina was concerned about the meagre progress achieved in the formulation 
of principles of international co-operation. It appeared that the spirit 
of compromise needed in the Committee for a constructive discussion on the 
various views put forward was lacking. That was because the concepts of 
"non-proliferation" and "assurances of supply" had not been adequately clarified, 
and it was necessary to accept that each of those concepts had different 
meanings for the various parties involved in the discussion. Greater efforts 
to clarify those concepts could offer a good basis for an understanding 
to be achieved. On the other hand, laudable efforts had been made in CAS 
on the topics of emergency and back-up mechanisms and revision mechanisms, 
and Argentina recognized that the conclusions reached required some 
reflection. 
32. Turning to the subject of international plutonium storage, he reiterated 
the Argentine position put forward in the Board of Governors to the effect 
that the information acquired by the existing safeguards system would enable 
the Agency to determine whether plutonium was being used for peaceful purposes 
or not, and that it was questionable whether an additional measure of security 
would be achieved by depositing excess plutonium with the Agency. In any 
case, if the Agency became able to decide where and how plutonium was 
deposited, it might be difficult to convince countries which intended to 
exercise control over the whole of their fuel cycles that the concession 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 13 


of such a right was one of the obligations entered into upon joining the 
Agency. Plutonium, whether used or stored, represented an energy source, 
control over which could not be ceded. Attempts to improve the present 
safeguards system, which functioned satisfactorily, might jeopardize its 
acceptability. The possibility of steps being taken, the need for which 
was not obviously justified and which would be of only dubious value since 
they would apply to insignificant stocks of excess plutonium under safeguards, 
might have a negative effect on the acceptability of the system as a whole. 


33. Finally, the Director General was to be commended on the Agency's technical 
programmes, and its nuclear and radiological safety activities deserved 
special support. Argentina had always maintained that a move in the direction 
of universally accepted, consistent and quantifiable nuclear safety concepts 
would represent substantial progress. The proposal to set up a nuclear 
safety advisory group was thus greatly to be welcomed, since that group 
would represent a useful international forum independent of existing interests 
which would provide valuable and necessary services to all countries interested 
in using nuclear energy for economic and social development. The Agency's 
activities in nuclear energy as regards physical sciences, life sciences 
and agriculture and, in particular, the activities of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, deserved recognition. In view 
of the Agency's ever more significant achievements, Argentina undertook 
to give it full support and to participate intensively in all its activities. 
34. Ms. DAHL (Sweden) said that the IAEA provided an efficient channel for 
transfer of technology. The Swedish experience showed that a realistic appreciation 
of a national nuclear energy programme should be based on a thorough 
analysis of the total energy situation, taking into account all aspects of 
safety and reliability. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR/259 
page 14 


35. The Agency was also a major channel for co-operation in other fields of 
nuclear science and its applications in research, medicine and agriculture. 
Sweden had actively supported the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme, and was pledging its share of the target for voluntary contributions 
to the fund for that purpose. Her country had been a major donor of extrabudgetary 
resources, and she noted that agreements had recently been reached on 
new programmes. It was about to start negotiations with the Agency on a new 
format of its support in order to facilitate the long-range planning of the 
Agency's activities. 
36. The safety issues connected with nuclear energy programmes had become a 
source of political controversy in many countries, including her own. After 
years of thorough studies and intensive political discussions a broad political 
consensus had been reached in Sweden. The Swedish Parliament had unanimously 
passed a new nuclear legislation comprising rules for the construction, operation 
and final decommissioning of all reactors and other nuclear facilities under the 
current programme. 
37. Sweden supported the increased emphasis on reactor safety problems in the 
Agency's programme. In particular, the Agency could facilitate the evaluation 
and transmission all over the world of the rapidly accumulating experience of 
safety-related problems. However, efficient collaboration must be maintained 
with other international and regional organizations in order to avoid duplication 
of efforts. 
38. Recent events had drawn public attention to the safety aspects of transport 
of radioactive materials. Such transports must be guided by internationally 
adopted safety regulations. The Agency had over the years prepared regulations 
which had subsequently been accepted by all international organizations 
concerned with transport and by most countries. However, those regulations 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 15 


needed to be updated from time to time, and she was pleased to note that a 
revised version was to be issued soon. That would provide an opportunity to 
re-examine the practical application of those regulations at the national and 
international level. Her country would be willing to participate in making 
further improvements in the regulations. 


39. The Swedish Government wished to underline the need for effective physical 
protection of nuclear material from theft, sabotage, extortion and similar 
acts. Most supplier countries had undertaken to observe some minimum standards, 
and a convention on the subject had been opened for signature in 1980. She 
supported the Director General's appeal to all States to sign it so that it 
could soon come into force. 
40. It was now universally accepted that adequate waste management was a 
prerequisite for the utilization of nuclear energy. Proper attention must be 
paid to all aspects of health and environmental protection in introducing and 
using modern technology. However, management of radioactive waste was of 
special significance in connection with the need to eliminate every risk of 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
41. There was an inherent risk that inadequate waste management in a country 
could affect areas beyond its own boundaries. Consequently, there was a need 
for an international agreement on basic principles of waste management and for 
an open exchange of information between the countries concerned. 
42. Since high-level waste was extremely long-lived, it was necessary to 
formulate the fundamental concepts of our responsibilities towards future 
generations. The safest methods for waste handling must be found and necessary 
resources be allocated for the purpose. 
43. International collaboration had an important function not only in establishing 
fundamental principles but also in the acquisition of basic knowledge in all 
the scientific disciplines involved, and in the development of reliable and 
economical technology, including industrial co-operation. It would also create 
the transparency of national activities so that trust and confidence between 
nations could be maintained. Countries with the most advanced waste management 
technology had a special responsibility in that regard. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 


page 16 


44. Whereas the IAEA had an important role in establishing the basis for 
regulations and in promoting exchange of information it was the States 
utilizing nuclear energy which were responsible for the practical aspects 
of waste management. Every step in the process - from the source of the 
waste to ultimate disposal - must be pursued with all possible care within 
the framework of a clearly stated overall concept. It was only on that 
basis that effective international or regional collaboration could be established. 


45. Sweden like many other countries, was concerned at the present practice 
of dumping radioactive substances at sea, and considered that other methods 
of disposal should be used so that the wastes could be kept under strict 
surveillance. 
46. The Swedish waste management programmes attached great importance to the 
problems of the back-end of the nuclear fuel cycle and to the ultimate disposal 
of high-level waste. Ambitious research and development programmes had 
been carried out on all problems connected with the process leading up to 
final disposal of the spent nuclear fuel. Solutions had been suggested 
with regard to the concepts of reprocessing as well as direct disposal. 
In 1983, a concept based on direct disposal of spent fuel without reprocessing 
had been put forward in connection with the loading of the last two reactors 
in the Swedish 12-reactor programme. The concept had been scrutinized by 
a number of organizations in Sweden and abroad, including IAEA, which had 
agreed that the proposed concept satisfied very high requirements. That 
procedure yielded many valuable recommendations which would be taken into 
account during further research and development work. 
47. The Swedish Government was an advocate of the concept of direct disposal 
because it would preclude activities which might contribute to the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. Sweden was favourably situated in that respect in view 
of the limited size of its future nuclear programme and the existence of 
good geographical conditions. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 17 


48. All Member States agreed that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy must 
be safeguarded against diversion for military purposes. Sweden considered 
that the best way a nation could demonstrate the peaceful nature of its 
nuclear activities was by adhering to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. It had 
trust in the Agency's safeguards system, for which adequate resources should 
be provided. It was also willing to increase its participation in the 
safeguards support programme. 
49. Moreover, her country advocated full-scope safeguards as a supplier 
and readily accepted them as a customer of nuclear materials and services. 
It was therefore deeply concerned that some Members of the Agency were not 
party to NPT. In her opinion, the responsibility lay especially with the 
nuclear-weapons States party to the Treaty, which had failed to pursue 
negotiations on nuclear disarmament in accordance with their undertaking 
in NPT. Sweden would continue to urge resumption of negotiations in other 
forums. 
50. However, her Government wished to offer some suggestions about how 
progress could be made under the auspices of the Agency's safeguards system. 
51. 
All participants in the international nuclear trade must be able to 
feel confident that material and equipment intended for peaceful uses could, 
under no circumstances be put to military use. That was one of the main 
principles reflected in a great number of bilateral and multilateral 
agreements and in the Agency's safeguards activities. 
52. That basic philosophy presupposed that nuclear-weapons States should 
without exception, clearly separate their civil and military sectors as 
regards both nuclear material and nuclear facilities. The application of 
Agency safeguards in some nuclear-weapons States represented a step in the 
right direction, and she urged all nuclear-weapons States to offer their 
participation. However, those voluntary and hitherto very limited safeguards 
activities were far from sufficient. In every Member State, all 
installations and material in the civil fuel cycle should, without delay, 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 18 


be placed under Agency safeguards and the Agency should be provided with 
the resources required to implement the additional task. Noting the Director 
General's statement that the strengthening of the Department of Safeguards 
had been accomplished, she stressed that the Agency's machinery should be 
further strengthened right now so that the Agency could apply equally effective 
safeguards in the nuclear-weapons States also. 


53. Placing the nuclear industries of the nuclear and non-nuclear-weapons 
States on an equal footing would certainly help to promote international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and increase public 
confidence in that field. However, the Swedish proposal calling for a considerable 
widening of the scope of the Agency safeguards should obviously be seen in 
a longer perspective. In order to make the non-proliferation regime really 
effective and to make the Agency's safeguards system fully credible, the 
nuclear-weapons States must at long last begin to fulfil their part of the 
non-proliferation deal. The measures aimed at halting horizontal proliferation 
must be matched by equally effective steps to curb vertical proliferation. 


54. Sweden was a long-time critic of the nuclear arms race and used every 
possible occasion to support vital disarmament proposals, many of which 
concerned the Agency. Referring to the United Nations resolution 38/73 E 
on nuclear-arms freeze, co-sponsored by Sweden, she observed that such a 
freeze would involve the complete cessation of the production of fissionable 
material for weapons purposes. The same proposal was also included in 
resolution 38/188 E. An agreement to that effect would no doubt call for 
an appropriate system to verify that no transfer had been made from the 
civilian to the military sector, a task which would be covered by a widened 
Agency safeguards regime. The Agency would be well suited also to undertake 
other verification activities under a future "cut-off" agreement. 
55. In conclusion, she pointed out that safety in the nuclear field as 
well as non-proliferation and disarmament ultimately depended on the 
resolution and good will of government and politicians to take the necessary 
initiatives and decisions and to ensure their conscientious implementation. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 19 


56. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that in spite of hostile attacks against 
Iraq aimed at slowing down its development in many sectors, including the 
scientific and technological sectors, which had culminated in the bombing 
of the Iraqi Nuclear Research Centre and destruction of the Tamuz reactor 
and associated facilities by the Zionist entity and in the killing and 
wounding of a number of Iraqi and French personnel, his country had continued 
its scientific and technological development and provided greater possibilities 
to its researchers and engineers to utilize nuclear energy in various peaceful 
programmes. After a comprehensive study it had decided that by the year 2000 
nuclear power should account for not less than 107 of Iraq's electricity 
generating capacity. It had signed the first contract on the siting of 
the country's first nuclear power plant. The study was to be completed 
by September 1985, and in the light of its results the decision on the 
subsequent stages of work would be taken. In the current year laboratories 
for the fabrication of ceramic fuel had gone into operation and it was hoped 
that they could be utilized to train the Iraqi staff to participate in the 
future production of fuel for nuclear power plants. In the case of research 
and development, the power of the Tamuz reactor had been raised from 2 to 5 MW(th), 
and a control system had recently been developed for it. Iraq would thus 
be able to provide better facilities for research in nuclear and solid state 
physics and for the production of radioisotopes to be used in medicine, 
agriculture and industry. The country had increased its capacity for the 
production of medical kits for radioactive labelling so that it was able 
to meet a major part of its own demands and hoped to supply such lists to 
neighbouring countries in the near future. A recent report published by 
the Iraqi nuclear energy organization contained brief descriptions of the 
scientific activities carried out at the nuclear research centre together 
with extended abstracts of the scientific papers and reports issued 
during 1981-1982. 


57. It would thus be obvious that his Government attached great importance 
to the Agency's activities in the field of technical co-operation and 
assistance and especially to its continued assistance in those activities 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 20 


which promoted international co-operation in nuclear technology transfer 
for peaceful nuclear uses in the legitimate interests of Member States which 
fulfilled their statutory obligations especially those of the developing 
countries. 


58. Commenting on some of the points in the Director General's statement, 
he stressed Iraq's interest in the International Nuclear Information System, 
and expressed his support for the proposed workshop to evaluate the system.' 
His Government also strongly endorsed the Agency's programmes on food 
irradiation and agriculture; Iraq was a member of the International Food 
Irradiation Project. Its researchers continued to participate in studies 
in those areas. Iraq had on many occasions expressed its support for the 
Agency's activities on nuclear safety and radiological production and on 


the publication of safety guides. 


59. While lauding the Director General's efforts to secure additional 
resources for technical co-operation and assistance projects, he considered 
that the actual resources fell far short of the requirements of the developing 
countries. Moreover, those resources were not assured and were subject 
to changes. He wished to reiterate Iraq's view that technical assistance 
could not be financed on a fully assured basis unless it was included as 
part of the Agency's Regular Budget. 
60. There was no dispute about the Agency's functions as a technical body 
to facilitate and accelerate the transfer of nuclear technology and to promote 
its peaceful uses for the health and prosperity of mankind. However, it 
was difficult to imagine science and technology completely isolated from 
political interests which were not necessarily consistent. 
61. Technology was affected by political factors, the Agency's effectiveness, 
too, was influenced by political decisions taken by some industrialized 
countries, which put impediments in the way of transfer of nuclear technology. 
The growth of South Africa's nuclear capability threatened Africa, and the 
Israeli aggression against the Iraqi reactor had dealt a blow to Agency 
safeguards. Those were political factors which interfered with the functioning 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 21 


of the Agency and it could not continue and survive if it ignored those 
events. He wished to emphasize that preserving the technical character 
of the Agency meant that factors which affected its effectiveness must be 
dealt with firmly. He regretted that the Director General's statement had 
not given sufficient attention to the nuclear capability of South Africa 
nor to Israel's threat to attack safeguarded nuclear facilities in Iraq. 


62. Welcoming the People's Republic of China as a new Member of the Agency, he 
pointed out that it had been deprived of its right to participate in the Agency 
for many years under pressure from those very countries which were now calling 
for universality of international organizations. He hoped that the spirit 
which had been shown in reaching the decision about China's membership of 
the Board would also prevail with regard to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 
of the Statute calling for fair representation of the areas of the Middle 
East and South Asia and Africa. However, the representation of those areas 
should not be increased in such a way as would leave the present proportion 
of seats between the different regions unchanged. 
63. Recalling the statement of the Iraqi delegate at the twenty-fourth 
session of the General Conference in September 1980, he noted that in the 
four years which had elapsed and one year before the Third NPT Review 
Conference the arms race was increasing at all levels and might even reach 
the outer space. At the same time countries which talked so much about the 
role of the Agency in promoting international co-operation in the nuclear 
field and about supporting programmes of technical assistance were placing 
further obstacles in the way of peaceful transfers of nuclear technology 
and impeding the exercise by States of their right to acquire nuclear 
technology for their development programmes. It was those countries which 
were negatively affecting many of the important activities of the Agency 
such as the work of CAS and the preparatory work for UNCPICPUNE. Furthermore, 
those measures did not seem to be applied to the racist entities in 
South Africa and in the Arab region. There was ample proof that Israel 
and its ally in racism and aggression, South Africa, had acquired nuclear 
weapons; the co-operation between those two racist entities threatened 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 22 


peace and security not only in Africa and in the Middle East but also in 
the whole world. The Iraqi Government had reaffirmed its unequivocal position 
in the matter on more than one occasion. In his message to the Conference 
on Peace and Solidarity to Prevent a Nuclear War held in Sofia in October 1983, 
President Sadam Hussein had also warned the world of the danger which the 
nuclear arms race and nuclear tests presented to the future of mankind and 
said that one could not stop and watch the acquisition of nuclear weapons 
by the racist regimes in Pretoria and Tel Aviv. 


64. The Israeli attack against the peaceful nuclear installations under 
Agency safeguards posed the greatest danger to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, to the Agency itself and to its safeguards systems, which was 
acknowledged internationally as had been pointed out in June 1981 by the 
then Director General in his statement to the Board. That position 
had been confirmed by the resolutions of the Security Council, the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, and the Agency's Board of Governors and 
the General Conference. Nevertheless, political motives and considerations 
on the part of some countries prevented international forums from punishing 
so grave a crime. The Zionist leaders had threatened to repeat such an 
aggression against Iraq or any other country whenever they deemed appropriate. 
Some Western countries were now trying to exonerate and rehabilitate the 
aggressor, saying that the Israeli representative's statement that they 
had no policy of attacking peaceful nuclear installations meant that Israel 
had withdrawn its previous threats. However, such an assertion was not 
true, the Zionist entity claimed that it had the right unilaterally to 
determine the character of the nuclear installations in the various countries 
of the world and had the right to act accordingly. It was astonishing to 
note that some countries which claimed to be keen on the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and on the safeguards system of the Agency were trying 
to convince the Conference that the note contained document GC(XXVIII)/720 
signified withdrawal of the threat by Israel to attack nuclear installations 
and that it complied with the purposes of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 23 


That letter ignored the Iraqi installations which were the target of the 
Israeli threat, claimed Israel's right to determine the character of peaceful 
nuclear installations and disregarded the Agency's safeguards system, which 
was an internationally recognized mechanism for establishing the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear installations. Those countries were following political 
policies without regard to their basic duties as Members of the Agency and 
to the conditions of membership under Article IV of the Statute. He wondered 
whether political pressure was responsible for the award of three research 
contracts to Israeli institutes. 


65. Israel tried to cover up its threatening of peaceful nuclear installations 
by various ambiguous phrases and justifications. For example, the Israeli 
Minister for Scientific Development had said in a statement published in 
Nucleonics Week in August 1983 that Israel felt compelled to disrupt any 
project when it became clear beyond doubt that the intention was to produce 
nuclear weapons. 
66. It might be appropriate to ask what the Agency had done in order to 
make Israel comply with the resolutions adopted by the General Conference 
and the Board calling on Israel to withdraw its threat to attack Iraqi nuclear 
installations and to place its own nuclear installations under international 
supervision and safeguards. He wished to warn against accepting Israeli 
statements as satisfactory responses to the General Conference resolutions. 
For that would be taken by the Zionist leaders as acceptance of their 
justifications for the aggression and they might feel free to repeat such 
aggression as they saw fit. 
67. In conclusion, he appealed to the Conference to take a clear decision 
to implement resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 and reaffirmed his Government's 
support for all international measures to prevent military attacks on 
peaceful nuclear installations and particularly those under Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 24 


68. Mr. KNOOPS (Belgium) said his country had always supported the 
Agency's activities. In the 30 years since his country's electricity producers 
had decided to utilize nuclear energy, Belgium had acquired a comprehensive 
knowledge of nuclear power production and the different stages of the fuel 
cycle. His delegation therefore welcomed the decisions of the Agency in 1983 
to elect Belgium to the Board of Governors and to grant it the Vice-Presidency 
for the current year. Those decisions were due recognition of the expertise 
and state of development of his country. 
69. The Agency and, through it, the international nuclear community had much 
to gain by co-operating with a small country such as Belgium and by taking 
advantage of its particular experience. His country did not possess nuclear 
weapons and had no intention of acquiring them, but nonetheless possessed a 
full knowledge of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. It had made the 
best choice possible by opting for PWR reactors. Belgium had no international 
political ambitions in that area other than to provide active support to the 
work of international organizations concerned with that field. Belgium's 
very active participation in the last three years might not always have met 
with the approval of others but in many respects it had been extremely successful 
and received much support. He wished to thank the country's Resident 
Representative, Ambassador Ernemann, for the determination and vigour with 
which he had taken part in the Agency's work and presented his country's 
position in the Board. 


70. With regard to his country's nuclear activities, the current programme 
of nuclear power plant construction was due to end with the commissioning in 
1986 of the Doel 4 and Tihange 3 PWR units, each of which had a capacity of 
980 MW(e). At that point, 65% of electricity in Belgium would be produced 
by nuclear means. The principal feature of the future programme was an 
agreement signed the previous May by Belgian and French electricity producers 
which would lead to Belgian participation in the 1390 MW(e) Chooz Bl and B2 
nuclear power plants. The construction of a 1300 MW(e) unit in the coming . 
decade was also planned. With that plant, Belgium would have 12 units ranging 
from 10 to 1390 MW(e). As far as plant operation was concerned, the results 
to date were very satisfactory. The load factor achieved at Belgian plants 



GC(XXVIII)/0R.259 
page 25 


was among the highest in the world. In 1983, the overall load factor of Belgian 
plants exceeded 79%, while the corresponding figure for PWR units in western 
countries was 65%. In the first four months of 1984, a figure of more than 
88% had been achieved. 


71. Turning to nuclear safety, he underlined the stringency of his country's 
national nuclear safety regulations as being another outstanding feature 
of its nuclear programme. The main reason was that Belgium had one of the. 
highest population densities in the world. In addition to scrupulously 
implementing American regulations, Belgium ensured that its own provisions 
were also observed. A few examples would serve to demonstrate that his 
country had given more attention to that question than was normally done. 
First, as soon as an operating licence was granted, a ten-yearly review 
was scheduled. That review made it possible to take into account new rules 
and to carry out - at the lowest possible cost - a programme for adapting 
installations. Secondly, the reactor containment consisted of two superimposed 
buildings. Thirdly, physical separation and the redundancy of safety systems 
were highly advanced. Three safety systems had been installed in units 
constructed recently. Fourthly, in order to provide protection against 
external accidents (earthquakes, aircraft crashes, explosions and so on), a 
part of facilities had been installed in a "bunker" in new units. Nonetheless, 
the experience gained in the development and initial operation of the latest 
units had raised certain doubts concerning certain options. Consideration 
should be given in particular to the order of priority of the risks taken into 
account and to certain excessive precautions which might in fact result in a 
reduction of the overall level of safety. That would amount to paying more 
for less safety. His country felt that its experience would enable it, through 
the Agency, to make a particularly valuable contribution to international 
co-operation on nuclear safety. Its aim was to help maintain the economic 
competitiveness of nuclear power and to avoid hasty and unnecessary action of 
the type which had followed the Three Mile Island accident in the United States. 
72. The importance of the back-end of the nuclear fuel cycle should not be 
underestimated. The current slowdown in investment in nuclear power plants 
should provide the opportunity to concentrate on the different stages of the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 26 


back-end of the fuel cycle, namely spent fuel reprocessing and the treatment 
and disposal of radioactive waste. As far as radioactive waste was concerned, 
the credibility and acceptance of nuclear power depended on three factors. 
First, the possibility of dumping low-level waste in the sea should be kept 
open. His delegation still considered that method to be acceptable since it 
was subject to strict international control and was not harmful to mankind 
or the marine ecosystem. It was with great interest that he awaited the 
results of the international re-evaluation of the scientific and technical' 
bases of sea dumping being conducted by the International Maritime Organization 
(IMO) with the support of the Agency. He urged the Agency to ensure that 
the discussions were clear and of a high standard and that at the end of the 
work an unequivocal position was adopted on the merits and demerits of dumping. 
That method of disposal was vital for countries with a high population density 
and a large nuclear programme and whose geological structure was not suitable 
for underground disposal of waste. Secondly, there was a need for all 
countries to set in motion the consultations and procedures necessary before 
low-, medium- and high-level waste storage and disposal sites could be selected. 
In the case of high-level waste, underground laboratory experiments should be 
planned and carried out. In Belgium, construction work on a 220 m deep experimental 
gallery in clay had been completed and the results would be released 
soon. Thirdly, substantial resources should be made available to study 
techniques for reducing the volume of radioactive waste. Without such 
techniques, too much space would be needed for the handling, transport, 
storage and final disposal of waste and the costs would be too high. 


73. in the field of spent fuel reprocessing, Belgium had - following parliamentary 
approval - completed an important and detailed study in conjunction 
with the Federal Republic of Germany and France on the technical, safety and 
financial requirements for recommencing operation of the Dessel reprocessing 
plant. The study had produced favourable conclusions regarding the safety of 
the project and the economic competitiveness of reprocessing. His country 
intended to offer the capacity not used by Belgian electricity producers to 
foreign customers, and consultations on that subject were currently under way 
with various countries. He was convinced that the prospect of opening, in 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 27 


the 1990s, a reprocessing plant which had international participation and was 
located in a non-nuclear-weapon State which was a party to the NPT would be 
of great political and strategic importance. 


74. Finally, he appealed for greater international co-operation in the 
nuclear field not just among developed countries but also between those 
countries and the developing ones. More specifically, he would like to see 
nuclear power plants being supplied to developing countries to enable them 
to supply the energy required by massive population and urban expansion. 
In view of the size of the financial investments involved, the only way of 
proceeding would be for the supplier countries to combine their efforts in 
order to reduce the burden on national finances. 


75. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) said that considering the 
present international situation, attainment of the Agency's objectives as 
laid down in its Statute had become more urgent than ever. That applied 
above all to the Agency's safeguards activities aimed at the preservation of 
peace. 
76. There was at present no issue more important and vital than that of 
strengthening world peace. The deployment of United States first-strike 
nuclear weapons in Western Europe has resulted in adverse effects on the 
international situation and in a growing nuclear threat. It was a matter of 
urgency to halt the arms race and to embark upon arms limitation and disarmament 
on the basis of equality and equal security. The USSR, the GDR and the 
other socialist countries had therefore repeatedly made far-reaching proposals 
for arms limitation and disarmament, especially in the nuclear field. To 
undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, to stop their deployment 
and agree to a freeze on nuclear weapons were some of the proposals on the 
international agenda. His country had repeatedly drawn attention to the 
necessity for a political dialogue between all forces in the world ready for 
an understanding aimed at preventing a nuclear war. He welcomed the Joint 
Declaration by the Six Heads of State and Government of 22 May 1984, since 
the implementation of the proposals contained in it would lead to an improvement 
of the world's economic situation and also have a favourable effect on 
the work of international organizations. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 28 


'' The progress that international co-operation had made within the framework 
of the Agency was gratifying. That such was the case was the most important 
conclusion to be drawn from the Director General's highly informative statement 
to the General Conference. It was impressive to learn about the facts 
and figures outlined in that statement and to see the Agency's achievements 
in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


78. His Government took a firm stand on the importance of nuclear power in 
meeting the world's increasing energy needs and his country's own nuclear 
power was to be expanded by completion of the Greifswald nuclear power station 
and by construction of a new power station near Stendal. By the first half 
of the 1990s the total installed capacity for nuclear-produced electricity 
would amount to nearly 5000 MW. That would be possible through close cooperation 
with the Soviet Union and other socialist countries within the 
framework of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). Following a 
decision taken at the CMEA Summit Conference in June, co-operation in further 
developing the industrial uses of nuclear power was to be expanded, and programmes 
for the construction of nuclear power and nuclear heating stations 
over the period up to the year 2000 would be prepared on a joint basis. 
79. Although nuclear power had proved to be an extremely safe and clean energy 
source, the nuclear power plant safety record did not warrant complacency; 
efforts were still required to achieve and maintain a high level of safety. 
That was the basic conclusion to be drawn from the Nuclear Safety Review, which 
was a highly valuable document. A specific conclusion that his delegation 
welcomed was that attention to non-power-related areas of nuclear energy and 
radiation uses would have to be continued, or even intensified, since it was 
primarily in such areas that radiation exposure from man-made sources originated. 
Priority had to be given to the protection of man and the environment and he 
therefore fully supported the Agency's safety-related activities. 
80. There was another activity inseparably associated with peaceful nuclear 
energy users, namely nuclear safeguards, and his delegation strongly supported 
the Agency's safeguards programme. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 29 


81. The experience his country had gained as a party to NPT and a nonnuclear-
weapon State, showed that the application of IAEA safeguards to all 
nuclear activities did not impede the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It 
believed that the regime of international co-operation would be greatly improved 
if any misuse of nuclear energy could be excluded and an atmosphere of worldwide 
mutual confidence thereby created. All States should therefore accede to 
NPT and all non-nuclear-weapon States should accept full-scope safeguards. 
82. Considerable effort was still needed to ensure that the Agency's annual 
safeguards statement would be made with ever increasing objectivity and reliability. 
The Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR) showed that although 
progress could be made in a number of areas, much remained to be done to overcome 
existing difficulties; also that in its endeavours to strengthen the nonproliferation 
regime the Agency had to rely on the constructive co-operation 
of Member States. 
83. A further point on nuclear safeguards concerned physical protection. His 
delegation wished to stress the importance of the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material. All States should accede to that Convention 
as an additional instrument for preventing the misuse of nuclear material. 
84. Technical assistance and co-operation had always been a focal point of 
the Agency's activities. While significant contributions had been made by it 
in fields of fundamental importance to economic and social development, technical 
assistance also contributed to the overall technological development. 
The Agency therefore had to be commended for its continuous and successful 
efforts to increase the effectiveness of the technical co-operation programme. 
85. The year 1983 had again been a very satisfactory year in that respect. 
The progress achieved showed that, among other things, financing on the basis 
of indicative planning figures, making full use of all types of currency and 
implementing multi-year projects, had proved to be an appropriate method of 
improvement. 
86. In supporting the Agency's technical co-operation activities his country 
duly contributed its share to the target for the voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund and, in addition to the supply of 
equipment and materials, was providing training for scientists from developing 
countries. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 30 


87. In conclusion, he wished to deal briefly with a matter that the Secretariat 
considered worthy of incorporating into the Nuclear Safety Review. Referring 
to the new regulatory bodies, it stated that, increasingly, regulatory functions 
would be separated from promotional functions. In the interest of further 
developing and expanding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the benefit 
of mankind that trend was very welcome. Recognizing the importance of regulatory 
functions for the protection of man, his Government had introduced a clearcut 
division between promotion and control at the very beginning of its nuclear 
development. Whereas governmental bodies in the areas of industry, science, 
health and education were vested with the responsibility for promotion, an 
independent governmental authority had been established to control nuclear 
energy and the use of ionizing radiation. The objectives of that authority 
were to control safety and protect man and his environment from detrimental 
effects. In addition, they included nuclear safeguards and physical protection. 
The corresponding functions covered legislation, licensing, and monitoring of 
man, the environment and nuclear facilities, together with education and 
information. In his country, all those activities fell under the National 
Board for Atomic Safety and Radiation Protection. 


88. Internationally, such a division between regulatory and control functions, 
on the one hand, and promotional functions and the use of nuclear energy on the 
other, seemed to be neither adequate nor necessary. That was made clear by 
the highly commendable achievements of the Agency, which formed an effective 
link between nuclear activities throughout the world for the benefit of the 
nuclear community. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.259 
page 31 


89. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) said that nuclear power was not merely 
an alternative but an absolute necessity in his country. At present, nine 
nuclear power plants were either in operation or under construction, and 
according to a recent long-term energy planning study, nuclear power would 
account for about 50% of the nation's total installed electrical power 
capacity by the turn of the century. 
90. The current year was the twenty-fifth anniversary of his country's 
nuclear activities, which had begun with basic nuclear research using a small 
research reactor. Nuclear power in the form of electricity was now supplied 
to industry and to homes. Radiation and radioisotopes were also widely used 
in every aspect of daily life, in agriculture, medicine and industry. 
91. Reporting on the major achievements made since the preceding General 
Conference, he said that the initial fuel loading of the fourth nuclear power 
unit of the first 900 MW(e)-class reactor was about to start. That reactor 
was to become critical and produce electricity by the year end. 
92. In the area of nuclear safety, every effort was being made to improve 
the efficiency and performance of power reactors and to prevent possible 
radiation incidents; preparations were in progress for the handling of 
emergencies. 
93. Inspection and enforcement activities were being continuously emphasized 
in order to improve the availability and reliability of operating reactors. 
The Agency had provided significant assistance in enhancing his country's 
ability to assure operational nuclear safety and regulatory management. The 
visit of the Operational Safety Review Team was worth mentioning. 
94. Welcoming the Director General's suggestion about the establishment of an 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group, he pointed out that such a 
mechanism was timely and necessary for dealing with broad safety issues 
including dissemination of specific safety information for the benefit of the 
Member States concerned. 
95. The IAEA Incident Reporting System was one practical means of learning 
more about nuclear plant operational experience, especially about significant 
abnormal events. His delegation hoped that the system would be further 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 


page 32 


developed with the active participation of all Member States having nuclear 
power programmes. By assessing incident information the latter would be able 
more effectively to prepare for any possible abnormal incidents. 


96. In that connection, his Government supported the Agency's idea about 
facilitating mutual assistance among Member States with operating nuclear 
plants in the event of a nuclear accident with radiological consequences. 
Co-operation between neighbouring countries was particularly desirable. 
97. Safety research programmes in his country were being encouraged further. 
His Government had participated in the recent multilateral safety research 
programme, including the Severe Accident Research Programme initiated by the 
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 
98. Another step towards the safety discipline in the Republic of Korea was 
the localization of nuclear power plant pre-service and in-service inspection 
capability, which was essential for the improvement of reactor efficiency and 
performance. He was pleased to note that the local personnel were now able 
to carry out those activities independently. 
99. As for the Agency's annual report on the major safety issues of the 
Member States, he suggested that the need for appropriate background information 
should be underlined so that the general public could thoroughly understand the 
issues involved and could correctly assess the facts. 
100. His country was trying to formulate policies and plans based on reasonably 
acceptable methods of radioactive waste disposal. 
101. In view of uncertainty in international nuclear policies relating to the 
management of radioactive waste and spent fuel, it was desirable that an 
internationally acceptable solution be found without delay. That was an area 
where the Agency could play a key role so that the nuclear power programmes in 
developing countries would not be jeopardized. 
102. 
His country was making steady progress in the use of radiation and radioisotopes, 
especially in medicine. The third Asia and Oceania Congress of 
Nuclear Medicine held in Seoul in August had provided a valuable opportunity 
for exchange of information and experience and for the discussion of the 
necessary ideas of co-operation. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 33 


103. xhe new cancer research hospital to be opened in October would be concerned 
with the medical applications of radiation and radioisotopes. It would 
be equipped with the latest medical instruments such as a medical cyclotron, 
medical microtrons and so on. He hoped that it would promote medical applications 
at the regional level, particularly the activities carried out within 
the RCA framework. 
104. xhe Republic of Korea firmly believed that the RCA provided an important 
means of intra-regional co-operation under the umbrella of the Agency in 
further promoting the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. His country was 
willing to make available the necessary assistance for the successful implementation 
of the various RCA programmes. 
105. The food irradiation project was a tangible example of close collaboration 
between the RCA members and the Agency. For many years, his Government 
had been engaged in efforts to promote irradiation for various local food 
products, in which it had received support from FAO and the IAEA. In his 
country a commercial irradiator was soon to go into operation and irradiated 
food would be more readily available. 
106. He wished to congratulate FAO on the twentieth anniversary of the Joint 
FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic Energy for 
Food and Agricultural Development and also to express his sincere appreciation 
to the Agency and the Federal Republic of Germany for their help in establishing 
the Radioisotope Laboratory in Cheju University. 
107. He hoped that the laboratory would be able to contribute substantially 
to RCA programmes as a centre of radioisotope applications in agriculture. 
108. As regards the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat, he noted the 
Director General's efforts to recruit more staff from developing Member States. 
Considering that some Member States including the Republic of Korea were underrepresented 
on the staff, he hoped that the Director General would take further 
steps to increase the number of staff from developing regions at all levels, 
and particularly at the senior grade. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.259 
page 34 


109. The Treaty on the Non-Proliteration of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was an 
extremely important international legal framework for promoting the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, while preventing destructive proliferation. His 
delegation hoped that an international consensus on the major issues concerning 
the peaceful uses and non-proliferation would be reached at the Third NPT 
Review Conference to be held in 1985. 
110. In conclusion, he extended an invitation to all members of the nuclear 
family to participate in the Fifth Pacific Basin Nuclear Conference to be 
held in Seoul in May 1985 with the co-operation of the Korean Nuclear Society 
and the Korea Atomic Industrial Forum. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
International Atomic Energy Agency March 1985* 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 26 September 1984, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda ** 


7 General debate and annual report 
for 1983 (continued) 1 - 122 


Statements by the delegates of the 
following States and organizations: 


Islamic Republic of Iran 1 - 18 
Italy 19 - 40 
Pakistan 41 - 59 
Malaysia 60 - 72 
Brazil 73 - 84 
Czechoslovakia 85 - 99 
Commission of the European 


Communities 100 - 113 


Reply by the delegate of Iraq 114 - 116 


Reply by the delegate of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran 117 - 122 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 5 November 1984. 


**/ GC(XXVIII)/730. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-574 
0199e 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/713, Add.1 and Add.2) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that before the 
Islamic revolution which had taken place in Iran, the world haa resembled a 
highway stretching from West to East along which Third World countries had 
sought the protection of one or other of the two superpowers. Today the 
attitude of those developing countries had completely altered and they had now 
realized that, supported by God's infinite power and that of their own 
population, a country could not only be independent but could also represent 
the interests of oppressed peoples; the Islamic Republic of Iran was now in 
that position. The oppressed peoples of the world had finally realized that 
such a position could be reached only with the support of God the Almighty and 
that it was founded on the morality and principles of Islam. 
2. During the past five years, his country had managed to remedy, to a large 
extent, the disorders inherited from the previous decadent regime. Since the 
triumph of the revolution, in other words, since the Iranian people had gained 
the power to decide their own future, the expansionist powers had steadily 
been increasing their coercion and oppression. 
3. One day it was the United States oppressor planning to overthrow the 
Islamic Republic of Iran, the next day it was spies affiliated to the East 
embarking upon some other kind of plot and, finally, it was the East and West 
joining forces to help the Iraqi regime triumph over Iran. Despite all those 
conspiracies, however, his country had been able to prove to all peoples that 
it fervently defended the desire for freedom from the captivity of the 
superpowers. That was why it had always enjoyed the recognition and support 
of free peoples. 
4. The superpowers, particularly the United States of America, had 
repeatedly stressed that the Agency was purely a scientific institution and 
not a political one. That claim raised two questions. Was not the 
non-peaceful use of nuclear technology by the superpowers, particularly by the 
United States of America, and the manufacture of nuclear weapons a political 
issue? Should the scientific nature of an international organization be 
respected by all Member States or only by the Third World? Were not double 
standards being applied? 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 3 


5. His delegation hoped that logical and convincing answers would be given 
to those two questions by governments which put forward the above argument. 
As long as Israel remained a Member of the Agency and the superpowers sought 
to misuse the Agency in their own interests, disregarding the principle of 
equal rights of Member States, it was impossible to claim that the Agency was 
an apolitical organization. 
6. The Islamic Republic of Iran, which attached great importance to 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, remained 
convinced that all countries had the right to plan, implement and develop 
peaceful nuclear programmes, having regard to their own resources, needs and 
priorities, and that they had likewise an absolute and unlimited right of 
access to supplies, services and know-how in the domain of nuclear science and 
technology. 
7. All States should respect the rights and decisions of others relating to 
fuel cycle programmes as well as the policies adopted by others for the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy; the conditions for the transfer of technology 
for the peaceful use of nuclear energy should not be incompatible with the 
independence and sovereignty of countries wishing to benefit from that 
technology. As Third World countries were the main source of supply of raw 
materials for industrialized countries, they should not be subject to any 
condition or restriction concerning the utilization of technology from 
industrialized countries. 
8. In Islamic culture, science was of particular importance, but knowledge 
and science which ignored morality was considered worthless and the use of 
science against mankind was condemned. That was why the Islamic Republic of 
Iran, founded on the principles and doctrines of Islam, condemned the 
anti-humanitarian use of nuclear technology. 
9. One of the main problems of international organizations was a lack of 
effort to establish a climate of confidence in international relations. 
Members of the Agency, more especially those which represented the Third 
World, had ever in their minds the question why, in the Agency, the great 
powers always sought to oppose the opinions and suggestions of Third World 
countries. In view of that fact and in consideration of the importance of 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 4 


assurances of supply, the Islamic Republic of Iran had actively participated 


in the meetings of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS); but it had to 
be pointed out that in fact the industrialized countries had not been in a 
position to give such assurances to the developing countries. Despite the 
fuel contract for Iran's 5 MW nuclear research reactor, the United States had 
refused to supply the fuel to the Iranian Atomic Energy Organization. And 
that was just one example. That illogical sanction imposed by the United 
States had seriously disrupted the work of Iranian scientists on the use of 
radioisotopes in medicine and agriculture. 


10. International nuclear trade should, in the long term, be organized in 
such a way as to be acceptable to the majority of those interested, as well as 
non-discriminatory, predictable and stable. Moreover, any change in the 
obligations under a contract should be made only by recourse to the review 
mechanisms approved by both contracting parties. The transfer of nuclear 
materials should be uninterrupted and carried out in accordance with the terms 
stipulated, subject to amendments mutually agreed on. Disagreement on any 
modification should not in itself, nor insofar as it concerned the existing 
agreements, be a reason for the establishment of any new rights or obligations. 
11. There were at present more than 18 000 strategic thermonuclear weapons 
and an equivalent number of nuclear triggers, with a total capacity of about 
10 000 Megatons, in the American and Soviet strategic arsenals. The total 
number of nuclear weapons (strategic, theatre and tactical weapons) in those 
two countries was about 50 000, with an overall capacity of about 
15 000 Megatons. The nuclear arsenal in the rest of the world - mainly in 
England, France and China - amounted to several hundred nuclear war heads, 
which constituted an additional capacity of a few hundred Megatons. According 
to the latest estimates, the shock wave from nuclear explosions, initial 
radiation exposure and fires caused by a nuclear exchange directed at major 
cities, would result in instantaneous death for between several hundred 
million and 1.1 thousand million people. It was therefore likely that as a 
result of the direct consequences of a nuclear conflict, roughly half the 
earth's population would perish or would suffer serious injury. In short, if 
only a small part of the total nuclear arsenal were to be used during a 
strategic war, the consequences would be the destruction ot all forms of life 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 5 


on earth. Given the present stock of weapons, a catastrophe of that kind was 
not ruled out, and all that came at a time when the annual budget of the 
United States Department of Defence was 10 000 times higher than that of the 
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. That fact pre-empted all questions 
related to the effectiveness of that Agency. 


12. The threats and force exerted by the superpowers had not only slowed down 
the rapid progress of the Islamic Republic of Iran in various fields - they 
also had helped to strengthen its conviction that the only way to survive was 
to make a substantial effort to avoid all dependence on either the East or the 
West. During the year that had passed, despite all the hardships of the war 
that had been imposed on the country by the vassals of the imperialists in the 
East and the West, the Iranian Atomic Energy Organization (IAEO) had continued 
its activities in the area of nuclear power plants as well as in research and 
related services. 
13. As far as the nuclear power plants were concerned, a major part of the 
civil construction work and the installation of mechanical and electrical 
systems at the Bushehr power plant had been completed. In view of all the 
technical, social and economic factors involved, the IAEO believed it 
essential to complete that power plant and to put it into operation, in order 
to ensure Iran's self-sufficiency in that area and in other related industries. 
14. In the field of research, emphasis had been placed on the nuclear 
sciences and their applications in medicine, agriculture and industry. In 
view of the increasing use of radioactive materials and radiation equipment in 
medicine, science and industry, the IAEA had been given responsibility for 
environmental safety and protection of the population against radiation; it 
was also in charge of establishing programmes on the application of 
radioisotopes and other related activities. A gamma irradiation centre was 
being established. At the same time a polymer chemistry laboratory, and 
laboratories for food irradiation, microbiological control and dosimetry would 
become operational by the end of the year. 
15. His delegation was convinced that the protection of nuclear facilities 
was of particular importance. It was to be recalled that the usurper regime 
of Jerusalem (otherwise called Israel) had carried out a military attack on 
the Iraqi nuclear reactor at Tamuz and that the Islamic Republic of Iran had 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 6 


proposed the expulsion of that regime from the Agency at the twenty-sixth and 
twenty-seventh regular sessions of the General Conference; that request had 
regrettably led only to the rejection of credentials and the curtailment of 
technical assistance. 


16. Since severe measures had not been adopted against the manifest 
aggression of Israel, the despicable nature of such military attacks on 
nuclear facilities had been neutralized; so much so in fact that, in complete 
violation of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407 adopted by a majority to protect 
peaceful nuclear facilities against military attack, the aggressive Iraqi 
regime had on 24 March 1984 attacked the Bushehr nuclear power plant with an 
Exocet missile. His Government had made a request, supported by photographic 
evidence, to the Director General to send a team of experts to the site of the 
attack. However, no such action had been taken by the Agency. In view of the 
importance of that incident, his country had requested the inclusion of that 
issue on the agenda for the meetings of the Board of Governors in June 1984. 
Since that request had unfortunately not been considered by the Board of 
Governors, the Islamic Republic of Iran held the Board responsible for all the 
consequences resulting from that indifference. 
17. He was convinced that until such time as international organizations, and 
in particular the Agency, adopted appropriate sanctions in face of such 
atrocities, which threatened the peaceful use of nuclear energy, there would 
be no guarantee that such events would not be repeated in the future, thereby 
threatening both world peace and the Agency's credibility. The Iranian 
delegation requested the Director General to inform the General Conference of 
the progress made towards the implementation of resolutions GC(XXVII)/RES/407 
and GC(XXVII)/RES/409, and urged Member States to do their utmost, either 
individually or through the appropriate international organizations, to ensure 
the adoption of international regulations prohibiting military attacks on 
nuclear facilities intended for peaceful purposes. 
18. He hoped the Agency would have greater success in the implementation of 
that resolution, and, in conclusion, quoted the words of Imam Khomeini, who 
had declared that if the superpowers continued to manufacture nuclear weapons 
the world was doomed to destruction. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 7 


19. Mr. NISIO (Italy) noted that the twenty-eighth session of the 
General Conference of the Agency was taking place at a time when international 
relations were characterized by tensions and misgivings and by the unilateral 
interruption of the most important negotiations on the reduction of nuclear 
weapons. The Italian Government was convinced it was just because of that 
unfavourable situation that there was need to step up efforts to check nuclear 
proliferation both vertically and horizontally and to broaden the scope of the 
safeguards system established under the Non-Proliferation Treaty and 
implemented by the Agency. It was hoped that those efforts would help to 
create a more favourable climate, gradually reduce tensions and encourage the 
resumption of a dialogue on the main problems of arms control, particularly in 
the nuclear field. The Italian Government had always worked towards that aim 
and would continue to do so. 
20. The Agency should be given as much support as possible to enable it to 
promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to ensure compliance with the 
non-proliferation commitments. His delegation deplored the fact that a 
certain politicization of the Agency in recent years had caused a great waste 
of time and resources and prevented it from concentrating entirely on the 
fulfilment of its mission. Italy was aware of the relevance of the major 
political problems and was ever ready to assume its responsibilities in 
safeguarding peace, but believed that the Agency did not have the same role to 
play as the General Assembly or the United Nations Security Council; its 
priorities should rather be such tasks as the promotion of peaceful 
co-operation in the nuclear field, implementation of safeguards and provision 
of technical assistance. For the sake of fairness and effectiveness there 
should be an improvement of the policy-making structure of the Agency so as to 
have a better representation on the basis of geographical balance, 
technological advancement and financial support. The Agency should likewise 
persevere in its dedication to universality. The absence or exclusion of 
States was a negative element for all, since membership of the Agency entailed 
rights and duties, with the latter often prevailing. 
21. Hence his delegation wished to record again its satisfaction at the 
accession of the People's Republic of China and its participation in the work 
of the Agency, particularly since admission of that great country to the Board 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 8 


of Governors had taken place in such a smooth and practical manner. That was 
a good omen in the matter of arriving at a more equitable representation of 
Member States in the Board of Governors. 


22. The Italian delegation believed that the time had come to review 
Article VI of the Statute; a re-examination of the present situation should 
not upset the balance between the various parts of the Article nor create 
tensions between the various delegations or groups. He was not therefore in 
favour of any amendment limited to a single part of that Article, since the 
aim should be not to improve the representative nature of the Board purely in 
geographical terms, but to take account of the experience of different States 
in the nuclear field and the technological and financial support which they 
gave to the Agency. A country which regularly contributed significant 
resources should be entitled to have a say in the choices made by the Agency's 
policy-making organs. Italy would certainly continue in the future to make a 
major contribution to the Agency, chiefly in the form of funds, but it did not 
feel it could remain indifferent to the decision-making process. 
23. The Agency safeguards system was an example of some of the most effective 
and broad-ranging forms of control that the international community could hope 
to establish in order to verify compliance with an agreement. It might well 
be taken as a model for future agreements on disarmament and it proved that 
the concepts of verification, transparency and on-site inspection, to which 
part of the international community were opposed, were already an established 
reality in a sector as crucial as that of nuclear non-proliferation. For that 
reason Italy was in favour of streamlining the Agency's control system and of 
making its safeguards as transparent as possible. 
24. The safeguards system benefited equally all the members of the 
international community and aimed at strengthening security throughout the 
world. All States should therefore contribute, according to their 
capabilities, to that essential part of the Agency's budget. Obviously, a 
growth in the number and quality of nuclear facilities required an expansion 
of control activities, but there were objective budgetary limits which could 
not be overstepped. Therefore it appeared necessary to rationalize safeguards 
activities as much as possible by refining the control systems rather than 
making them stricter, and by selecting the facilities and sectors which 
required greater surveillance. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 9 


25. His country had always maintained that universal accession to the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty was a prerequisite for checking proliferation. At 
the same time, however, Italy advocated a realistic approach and was convinced 
that non-signatory States should be encouraged to reconsider their position in 
a responsible manner. Moreover, the unjustified discriminatory measures 
regarding the import of nuclear materials and technology or the measures 
creating unnecessary obstacles to international nuclear trade might be 
detrimental to the cause of non-proliferation. It was in the common interest 
to avoid the proliferation of nuclear weapons just as it was in the common 
interest to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, especially in less 
advanced areas. 
26. Towards that end, new mechanisms might be devised within the framework of 
existing non-proliferation commitments to facilitate the flow of necessary 
supplies to importing countries, while bearing in mind the nature and state of 
development of their peaceful nuclear programmes. 
27. Italy was convinced that the development of international nuclear 
co-operation was a vital element in the Agency's activities. In the area of 
technical assistance, one should not let the spirit of co-operation be 
afflicted by economic difficulties. The economic interdependence of different 
countries was such that only a world-wide network of co-operation in all 
sectors would make it possible to overcome crises in individual areas. 
28. The procedures for the provision of technical assistance should aim to 
satisfy the essential needs of developing countries, taking two fundamental 
points into account. First, technical assistance should involve consultations 
with the recipient countries and their participation in it, together with the 
training of technical staff and experts who were to be responsible for the 
management of projects initiated with the help of industrialized countries and 
the Agency. Second, one and the same problem might require different 
technical solutions in developing countries, as opposed to developed 
countries, hence in many cases there was need to envisage a number of possible 
approaches, in a spirit of flexibility and in consideration of the social and 
cultural characteristics of the countries concerned. 
29. In that respect his delegation took a favourable view of the Agency's 
activities in the area of technical assistance and supported the new policy 
recently approved by the Board of Governors. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 10 


30. Italy was one of the main suppliers of technical assistance and had made 
more than $18 million available to the Agency for that purpose during the 
period 1982-86. Furthermore, his country made an annual contribution 
of $3 million to the International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. 
Its contributions to technical assistance in 1983 ($10.7 million out of a 
total budget of $219 million) placed Italy fourth after the United States 
($31.3 million), the Soviet Union ($12.1 million), and Japan ($10.9 million). 
The International Centre for Theoretical Physics was a good example of 
co-operation between Member States of the Agency. 


31. He also wished to recall that, as in previous years, Italy would be 
offering, through the Agency, a programme of scholarships and training for 
developing countries. 
32. With regard to the Agency's activities in the matter of assurances of 
supply, he wished to underscore his Government's interest in and support for 
the work of CAS. It was hoped that further progress would be achieved in the 
agreement of a new set of principles governing international co-operation in 
the nuclear field and aimed at assuring supplies, while at the same time 
guaranteeing non-proliferation. 
33. Safety was another field in which the Agency's work was of great 
importance. Everything should be done to encourage co-operation in that 
sector, including the Incident Reporting System, risk evaluation and the 
application of NUSS codes and standards. 
34. The Agency's activities had developed and intensified considerably during 
the past few years, and its contribution to the establishment of nuclear 
programmes in various countries had also increased. As a result there had 
been a growing commitment by a number of Member States to meeting the Agency's 
technical and financial needs. That fact confirmed his Government's 
conviction that the representation of Member States in certain bodies could 
not be based on the same criteria today as when those bodies had been first 
set up. At the present juncture, the fundamental principle of correlation 
between financial contributions and representation in the policy-making organs 
could no longer be disregarded. 
35. As for recent developments in nuclear energy in Italy, nuclear power 
production had been approximately 5800 million kWh in 1983. The Trino 
Vercellese power plant, with a 270 MW(e) pressurized water reactor, had been 

GC(XXVIII)/OR. 260 
page 11 


put back into operation at the beginning of April 1984. From 1964 to 1979 it 
had generated a total of 20 000 million kWh. Construction work on the 
Montalto di Castro power plant (with two 1000 MW(e) BWR reactors) was 
proceeding according to schedule. The first unit was due to start up in 1987, 
and the second in 1988. At the beginning of May 1984, earlier than expected, 


the Ministry of Industry, ENEA (which acted as Nuclear Regulatory Commission) 
and the Piedmont region had received the technical reports on two districts 
singled out by the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Economic Planning as 
suitable for the Piedmont power station, which was to consist of two 
1000-MW(e) pressurized water reactors and the construction of which would 
probably be initiated before the end of the year. The survey of the two sites 
selected by the Government for the Lombardi power plant (which was to consist 
of two 1000-MW(e) PWR reactors was also proceeding and construction work was 
expected to begin in the second half of 1985. 


36. In nuclear research, the National Commission for Nuclear and Alternative 
Energies, had multiple tasks, since it both dealt with thermal and 
fast-breeder reactors as well as with their fuel cycles. As far as thermal 
reactors were concerned, ENEA had continued its activities under programmes 
studied and financed jointly with national industry. In 1983 it had 
concentrated its efforts on the construction of the PEC plant, which was at 
present half-finished, on research and development aimed at meeting the needs 
of the breeder line (in particular Superphenix 1 and Superphenix 2), and on 
making the best possible use of the PEC for activities in that field at 
European level. 
37. Towards the end of 1983, ENEA and the CEA had extended their 
collaboration on fast breeder reactors to the fabrication of fuel. Other 
important activities in the fuel cycle had included the development of 
improved techniques for uranium prospecting, the continuation of experimental 
research on advanced methods of uranium enrichment, the completion of 
implementation of a programme for reprocessing CANDU fuel for the Pickering 
power plant carried out at the Eurex plant, and continuation of research and 
development in the field of fuel reprocessing. The purpose was to ensure that 
Italian technological research would help, either independently or as part of 
international collaboration, to meet the foreseeable demand for processing 
services in Italy. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 12 


38. In the field of radioactive waste, ENEA had directed its activities to 
developing advanced processes more economical and more reliable than those 
currently employed in industry, both for low-level and high-level waste. With 
regard to final waste disposal, it had concentrated on the geological disposal 
of wastes with a long half-life and had continued its thermal, geothermal and 
geochemical studies as well as surveys aimed at selecting better storage sites. 
39. With regard to controlled nuclear fusion, it had continued its activities' 
under its contract of association with EURATOM. The aim was to complete, 
within the next few years, the construction of two high-priority facilities: 
the FTU (Frascati Tokamak Upgrade), a type of tokamak, and the RFX (Reversed 
Field Pinch), which was an alternative to the tokamak. Participation by ENEA, 
since June 1983, in the completion of the JET had also been of great interest, 
and was an opportunity to make good use of the know-how acquired during the 
construction of the Frascati tokamak. 
40. In conclusion, he pointed out the increasing importance which Italy 
attached to research activities in the nuclear field in view of the 
diversification of energy sources and the rising level of industrialization of 
the country. 
41. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) welcomed the admission of China as a designated 
Member of the Board of Governors. The full participation of that country in 
the work of the policy-making organs would strengthen the Agency and serve the 
cause of world peace and security as well as promoting the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. 
42. The Agency's future was inescapably interlinked with the future of 
nuclear energy itself. If peaceful applications did not expand, the 
promotional activities of the Agency and its influence would diminish, for it 
would be unable to survive if restricted merely to regulating and controlling 
the shrinking or stagnating nuclear programmes of Member States. 
43. Nuclear energy now faced a very difficult future, mainly because of a 
dichotomy in the policy pursued for its development. On the one hand, the 
arms race was continuing at an alarming pace and the horrifying build-up of 
arsenals had deepened mutual distrust to such an extent that it would be sheer 
idealism to believe one could refrain from using such weapons indefinitely. 
For the survival of mankind, it was vital for an end to be put to the arms 
race and for the two superpowers to resume a serious dialogue. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 13 


Only then would the problem of nuclear proliferation be resolved. The example 
of unrestrained vertical proliferation set by the superpowers was dangerous 
because, in addition to heightening the risk of mutual destruction, it 
detracted from their moral capacity to dissuade others from following the same 
dangerous course. He fully agreed with the statement made by the Director 
General that tangible progress towards nuclear disarmament would increase the 
support and understanding among non-nuclear-weapon States for conditions and 
restrictions designed to prevent horizontal proliferation. 


44. While so much was being spent on using nuclear energy for meticulously 
planned self-destruction, expenditure on peaceful nuclear programmes was being 
steadily cut back. Nuclear power was experiencing a significant slow-down 
and, unless support for optimal utilization of that energy source was renewed, 
the rate of depletion of fossil fuel resources could not help but increase. 
That could lead to another upsurge in the price of oil which would further 
burden the debt-ridden economies of Third World countries. In view of the 
precarious nature of future energy resources, nuclear energy should therefore 
be developed in a timely and orderly manner. Existing limited supplies of 
liquid fuels should be conserved and atmospheric pollution caused by burning 
coal should be avoided. The attitude of the advanced countries in denying 
developing countries the opportunity to expand their peaceful nuclear 
technology was self-defeating, both politically and industrially. Such an 
attitude would not only cost money and adversely affect the economic viability 
of nuclear energy, but would also make the management of nuclear technology 
and independent nuclear fuel cycles more complex. 
45. The Agency was undoubtedly affected by those developments. It still had 
no direct role to play in nuclear disarmament and it was not receiving the 
full backing that it ought to for its promotional activities, which were part 
of its statutory responsibilities. Its role was consequently limited. 
Furthermore, the Agency was being pushed towards an ill-advised and 
restrictive policy of denying Third World countries access to peaceful nuclear 
technology. Its role was both promotional and regulatory and a balance should 
be maintained between those two aspects. He could understand how tempting it 
was for the advanced countries to seek to attain their national political 
goals through the Agency, but it should resist those attempts and maintain its 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 14 


credibility, universality and effectiveness by remaining a neutral body and 
strictly abiding by its Statute. Any measures aimed at changing the 
fundamental nature of the Agency were therefore to be deplored. 


46. His Government was firmly committed to the principle of using nuclear 
energy solely for peaceful purposes. It had always opposed vertical 
proliferation and had spoken out against any horizontal proliferation beyond 
the existing five nuclear Powers. It had repeatedly advocated the 
establishment of a nuclear-free zone in its region in order to prevent the 
introduction and production of nuclear weapons. He welcomed the moves which 
the ASEAN countries were reportedly making to set up a nuclear-free zone in 
the region, and called upon all States in South Asia to act positively by 
declaring their region a nuclear-free zone. That would go a long way towards 
building confidence at a regional and international level. 
47. His delegation reiterated its full support for the safeguards system 
which had demonstrated its usefulness and effectiveness over the last two 
decades. The Director General's statement that the Agency's safeguards system 
was based directly on the Statute was welcomed. That system, which was based 
on a consensus, had a central role to play in the Agency's efforts to 
discharge its statutory obligations. Any unilateral attempt to alter the 
system without following the procedure which had led to its adoption would be 
viewed with deep concern. 
48. The admission of China to the Board would no doubt enhance its 
effectiveness, but there was room to improve further the composition of the 
Board, since regions such as Africa and the Middle East and South Asia were 
still clearly under-represented. The last amendment to the provisions of the 
Statute which determined the number of elective seats allocated to the various 
geographical regions had been made more than a decade before. Important 
developments had occurred since that time and the nuclear programmes of many 
countries in those regions had advanced considerably. Furthermore, many of 
those countries were among the principal producers of energy sources such as 
oil and uranium and had accordingly acquired special importance in the world 
as far as energy matters were concerned. He therefore urged the General 
Conference to take the appropriate steps to remedy that situation by amending 
Article VI.A.2 in line with the principles approved by a majority of Member 
States at the twenty-second session of the General Conference. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 15 


49. His delegation approved the Agency's programme and budget and, in 
particular, its technical activities in the nuclear power, nuclear satety and 
life sciences areas. It noted with satisfaction the recent increase in 
resources made available for the technical co-operation programme and, in that 
connection, thanked all the donor countries for their generous contributions. 
Nonetheless, a substantial number of technically sound projects had not been 
financed because of a lack of resources. Those projects should be financed on 
a non-discriminatory basis in line with the Agency's Statute. 
50. As he had stated earlier, the Agency must preserve a balance between its 
promotional and regulatory functions. He acknowledged the importance of, and 
fully supported, the Agency's safeguards activities, but they should not 
expand at the expense of promotional programmes. Since 1970, the safeguards 
budget had increased by a factor of more than 27 (from US $1.23 million to 
US $33.7 million), while in the same period technical assistance funds had 
risen by a factor of less than 9 (from US $2.7 million to US $23.5 million). 
The Agency's resources would be more equitably distributed between those two 
functions if the technical assistance programme were financed from the Regular 
Budget or through other comparably predictable and assured resources. 
51. The slow rate of progress in the work of the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS) on a set of principles for international co-operation was a 
source of concern, since the Committee's work was vital for the growth of 
nuclear trade. CAS did not have an unlimited amount, of time at its disposal 
for, with every passing year, the risk increased that its deliberations would 
be overtaken by events, with new suppliers undoubtedly appearing on the 
nuclear market. It was certain that, given a constructive attitude and the 
political will, the problems facing CAS could soon be overcome. 
52. His delegation had strongly condemned the Israeli attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear research centre both during the General Conference and in the Board. 
That irresponsible and unwarranted act of aggression had done irreparable 
damage to the cause of the peaceful exploitation of nuclear energy and urgent 
action was required at international level to ensure that such acts could not 
be repeated in the future. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR. 260 
page 16 


53. The Director General's efforts to improve the level of representation of 
developing countries on the Agency's staff was sincerely welcomed. But 
although positive steps had been taken, much remained to be done. The overall 
representation was still below 20%, a figure which was clearly inadequate 
since developing countries accounted for two thirds of the Agency's 
membership. It was essential to keep in mind the goal set in resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/386, namely that the number of staff drawn from developing 
countries should be substantially increased. The availability of qualified 
nationals from those countries for both the Agency's administrative and 
technical tasks was no longer an obstacle as had been demonstrated by the 
quality of the candidates put forward. 
54. It was gratifying to note the twentieth anniversary of the close and 
fruitful association of the Agency and FAO through the Joint FAO/IAEA Division 
of Isotopes and Radiation Applications of Atomic Energy for Food and 
Agricultural Development. It was to be hoped that the activities of that 
Division would continue to expand and that, through it, the Agency would step 
up its role in the new and fast-emerging techniques of genetic engineering and 
biotechnology. 
55. He was particularly pleased to see that 1984 marked the twentieth 
anniversary of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste. 
Under the capable leadership of Professor Abdus Salam, the Centre had become 
in the words of the Director General, a remarkable instrument for the exchange 
of knowledge and experience in the physical sciences. 
56. It was a matter of regret that the United Nations Conference on the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
had been deferred to 1986. In a spirit of mutual accommodation, some progress 
had recently been made at the fifth session of the Preparatory Committee for 
that Conference. If that spirit were maintained, it would augur well for the 
success of the Conference. 
57. Turning to Pakistan's national nuclear programme, he noted that peaceful 
nuclear activities had been expanded in several domains. Despite the 
unjustified embargo imposed on supplies for the KANUPP power plant, the latter 
had continued to operate satisfactorily and had achieved the maximum design 
burnup after several years of irradiation. His Government was fully convinced 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 17 


of the economic competitiveness of nuclear power within the context of 
Pakistan's energy resources since it was twice as cheap as imported oil. 
Everything was therefore being done to plan further nuclear power plants and 
his country would welcome any international co-operation in that respect. 


58. Pakistan had made significant progress in the use of nuclear energy for 
health, agriculture and industry. New nuclear medicine centres had been 
opened in 1983. In the agricultural sphere, new programmes had been launched 
with the emphasis on genetic engineering and biotechnology. Commercial-scale 
irradiation facilities for food preservation were being planned in order to 
reduce the excessive losses experienced with certain food crops. Pakistan was 
ready to share its experience in that area with other developing countries. 
59. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Agency for its assistance in 
implementing Pakistan's programme. He assured the Director General of his 
country's continued support and co-operation in ensuring that the Agency's 
activities benefited all Member States. 
60. Mr. ONGKILI (Malaysia) said he was aware of the efforts of the 
Director General and his staff to preserve the integrity of the Agency. Their 
dedication and invaluable services deserved the highest praise. His country 
was also grateful to the Agency and its Member States for having provided 
technical assistance when it was needed, either under the RCA or through the 
Agency itself. That assistance had been of considerable value in satisfying 
Malaysia's immediate and long-term needs. 
61. The Agency had faced many challenges in the past and, if it could survive 
the immediate dangers facing it, it would have every chance of contributing to 
the future of a world quite different from the one that existed at present. 
Given the potential of an age of abundance and progress, all that actually 
been achieved was a divided world, where poverty, ignorance and cruelty placed 
future generations in jeopardy. 
62. The Third NPT Review Conference to be held in 1985 would be an acid test 
for implementation of that Treaty. A number of events affecting NPT and the 
Agency had occurred which bore witness to the growing dissatisfaction of the 
Treaty signatories. It was a matter of increasing concern that the spirit of 
the Treaty was not being respected. Discrimination among the signatories had 
become a fact of life. Efforts were needed to break free from the old 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 


page 18 


tendency of placing one group above another in terms of rights and dignity. 
The actions of the signatory States must be based on the principle of 
equality. As had already been stated several times during the general debate, 


there was a trend towards the use of national legislation to amend 


international treaties. An extreme case was the unwarranted attack on the 


Iraqi nuclear research centre, a facility which was subject to Agency 


safeguards. There was no doubt that that act had harmed the Agency and many 
Member States. His country would like to see efforts towards devising a new 


international instrument which would protect all nuclear facilities devoted to 
peaceful purposes from armed attack. 


63. Obstacles to the transfer of technology, the different or discriminatory 
treatment of countries, stringent nuclear export regulations and an 
inconsistent nuclear policy were unacceptable since they could only harm 
international treaties and the Agency's integrity. Nuclear science was 
becoming a dominant factor in the world but, instead of giving a sense of 
power, the feeling aroused was one of weakness and futility. The developing 
countries, in particular, suffered from that dichotomy and from frustration. 
The forces of ignorance and greed were distorting nuclear science and 
diverting it towards war and destruction. 
64. It had to be emphasized, therefore, that the NPT must be based on a 
balance between certain obligations and privileges. According to Article VI 
of NPT the nuclear powers should undertake to pursue negotiations in good 
faith on effective measures relating to the cessation of the nuclear arms race 
at an early date and to nuclear disarmament. That was why Malaysia was 
against the testing of weapons, the dumping of waste and the permanent 
stationing of nucler weapons in the Pacific. 
65. With regard to the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, the work 
done recently at the fifth session of the preparatory committee in reaching a 
compromise offered some grounds for hope. The Chairman of the committee 
should be commended for his efforts. A light - albeit a flickering one could 
at last be seen at the end of a very long tunnel. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 19 


66. There was a pressing need to increase the representation of persons from 
the developing countries on the Agency staff. His delegation was convinced 
that the Director General was making every effort to implement resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/419, which called on him to continue to take further steps to 
increase the number of staff members drawn from developing areas. In order to 
help the Agency speed up implementation of that resolution, his country would 
accept only safeguards inspectors from developing countries. Such inspectors 
would have a better appreciation of the local problems which were common to 
all developing countries, where sensitivities and taboos still played an 
important role and whose system of values was too often ignored by developed 
countries. 
67. In the field of nuclear technology transfer, the international climate 
was extremely uncertain and a consensus was still being sought on assurance of 
supplies. It was in the interests of the international community to find a 
way out of that impasse. The Agency had a major part to play in protecting 
the interests of countries with small nuclear programmes which required 
guaranteed access to the whole of the fuel cycle. His country valued the 
ideals of CAS highly and praised the many advanced countries which had 
recognized the possible repercussions of a policy of denial and had therefore 
supported the establishment of CAS. 
68. It should also be remembered that, knowledge knowing no boundaries, basic 
nuclear technology had already spread to almost all countries. The time lag 
in applying the results of research had shortened considerably. It was 
unfortunate that, in the current age of scientific revolution, the results of 
nuclear research were applied most rapidly in the military sphere while 
obstacles were placed in the way of the transfer to the developing countries 
of peaceful nuclear technology. It was thus impossible, in a climate of 
megalomania and hegemony, to ignore the threat of total destruction which one 
side of that scientific revolution posed for mankind. 
69. His delegation supported the amendment to Article VI.A.1 of the Statute, 
the purpose of which was to increase the number of designated seats on the 
Board without requiring any sacrifice by the present incumbents. In the light 
of that amendment and with regard to amending Article VI.A.2, the Agency could 
not continue to apply a system of double standards when it came to allocating 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 20 


seats to other Member States. An equitable and reasonable solution to that 
problem must be found in the near future and the Agency would need the 
co-operation and understanding of all Member States for that purpose. 


70. He was pleased to announce that he had been authorized by his Government 
to pledge a voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund in line with his country's assessed share for 1985. 
71. In the field of safety and the management of nuclear wastes, a subject 
which the Director General had discussed at some length in his statement, the 
developing countries would have to face a growing problem as their nuclear 
expertise advanced. Their national legislation would probably prove to be 
inadequate. The Agency should therefore update its Basic Safety Standards for 
Radiation Protection and publicize them more widely by distribution in the 
form of a manual. In that way, they would ultimately constitute standards 
that were universally accepted by Member States. 
72. Finally, to fulfil his obligations, man was entitled to acquire as much 
fresh knowledge as possible but he must also strive to create a balanced 
community. To achieve that goal that community must have the highest moral 
standards and follow the principles of justice, tolerance and moderation in 
all circumstances. 
73. Mr. do NASCIMENTO e SILVA (Brazil) expressed his delegation's deep 
satisfaction at the admission of the People's Republic of China to the Board 
of Governors. That was an event which had been eagerly awaited by one and 
all. In August 1984, during a visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of 
China to Brazil, the two countries had concluded an agreement on co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
74. His delegation welcomed the pragmatic approach to world problems and to 
the Agency's own problems that the Director General had manifested in his 
address. The Director General had broached a subject of vital importance to 
the public throughout the world, namely the arms race. His delegation fully 
agreed that there was a need for increased awareness of the fact that, while 
the current failure in the field of disarmament might be frustrating and 
alarming, that was no reason to relax efforts, in the interests of all, to 
prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. Although disarmament was not 
one of the Agency's direct objectives, its silence on that matter might be 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 21 


misinterpreted by the public at large. In his message, the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations had drawn attention to the terrible dangers inherent in 
the use of atomic energy for military purposes, dangers which must be 
controlled and eliminated. The Agency was in a position to implement 
Article III.B of its Statute, under which it was required to "Conduct its 
activities in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United 
Nations to promote peace and international co-operation, and in conformity 
with policies of the United Nations furthering the establishment of 
safeguarded worldwide disarmament ...". 


75. Since the previous session of the General Conference, his country had 
continued to devote considerable effort to implementing its ambitious 
programme for the peaceful uses of nucler energy, even though it had been 
compelled to slow down somewhat on account of general economic difficulties 
and their adverse effects on the balance of payments. 
76. Despite those difficulties, his country was determined to continue to 
strengthen its support for the Agncy's activities. As far as technical 
co-operation was concerned, Brazil had managed to increase the number of 
fellowships awarded for traning courses or scientific visits. At the Agency's 
request, it was co-operating with other developing countries in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
77. His country had also appointed experts - lecturers for training courses 
and representatives in various working groups - to take part in the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme. The Agency's laudable intention to make 
greater use of the technical expertise available in developing countries was 
to be encouraged. 
78. His delegation declared again its willingness to participate in and 
co-operate with regional co-ordinated programmes in Latin America which were 
currently undergoing an in-depth review. With regard to Agency training 
courses, Brazil was looking forward to hosting the interregional course on 
dosimetry to be held before the end of 1984, as well as the course on 
exploration drilling and ore reserve estimation for uranium deposits scheduled 
for April or May 1985. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 22 


79. Further, the implementation of Braziian projects under the regular 
technical assistance programme had been fairly satisfactory. Some aspects of 
technical co-operation, however, needed to be improved or corrected. For 
example, the Agency had purchased more than 90% of its equipment in 
industrialized countries. A thorough study should be made of the current 
capability of developing Member States to supply the Agency with equipment and 
materials. 
80. His country reaffirmed its support for the initiatives taken by the 
Agency in the nuclear safety area, particularly the development of the 
Incident Reporting System, the dissemination of probabilistic methods for 
reactor safety assessment, and the series of codes and guides published under 
the NUSS programme. 
81. The technical and social importance of the network of secondary standard 
dosimetry laboratories (SSDL) should again be stressed, though the future of 
the network gave cause for alarm in that the funds available for it were being 
reduced. 
82. It was well known that the Brazilian Government had always given its full 
support to the Agency's safeguards system. The most recent demonstration of 
that support had been the establishment of a safeguards laboratory to measure 
nuclear materials which, when completed, would be a useful addition to the 
network of analytical laboratories used for Agency safeguards. The design and 
mode of operation of the laboratory were modelled on those of the Agency's 
Safeguards Analytical Laboratory, and thanks were due to the Department of 
Safeguards for the assistance it had provided on several occasions for that 
purpose. 
83. He wished in that context to refer again to the Director General's 
statement, in which he had pointed out that there was sometimes a tendency to 
view Agency safeguards as a kind of appendage to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and that the importance attached to 
NPT should not blur awareness of the fact that Agency safeguards were based 
directly on the Agency's Statute. He had gone on to say that NPT made use of 
the Agency's safeguards as did the Tlatelolco Treaty, and that most safeguards 
agreements with the Agency were concluded pursuant to obligations entered into 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 2 3 


by States parties to those two Treaties. That statement was a very timely 
one, since on more than one occasion delegations seemed to have failed to 
understand that in nuclear matters the Agency's Statute was second only to the 
United Nations Charter. 


84. Brazil was convinced that the Agency's credibility must be enhanced if a 
universal and non-discriminatory dissemination of the benefits of the uses of 
nuclear energy was to be achieved. The attainment of that goal would reaffirm 
the inalienable right of all countries to develop nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. 
85. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia) reiterated his delegation's view that the 
Agency was undoubtedly the most important specialized body within the United 
Nations system. The current difficulties of the international situation, 
which had increased tension in both the military and the political sphere, 
were adversely affecting the Agency's work. In that connection, he drew 
attention to the peace initiatives which the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and 
other countries belonging to the socialist community had recently taken, 
particularly those formulated by the CMEA Council at its meeting in June 1984. 
86. His country continued to support the policy of non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. If the number of nuclear-weapon countries grew, so would the 
danger of those weapons being used. It was for that reason that 
Czechoslovakia and the other socialist countries were doing everything in 
their power to avoid the unleashing of a nuclear conflict, to end the arms 
race and to strengthen peace, security and co-operation throughout the world. 
It was essential in that context to reinforce and improve not just the 
safeguards system and the exchange of information on safeguards, but also the 
inspection system now that some States were seeking to limit the Agency's 
verification activities at nuclear facilities. The offer made by the Soviet 
Union to submit some of its peaceful nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards 
and its willingness to conduct the necessary negotiations on that question 
with the Agency in the near future were greatly welcomed. 
87. His country was particularly interested in the export of nuclear 
materials provided they were not used for spreading nuclear weapons and 
supported any move that would encourage such exports. It was satisfied with 
the results obtained so far by CAS and commended the work done by the Expert 
Group on International Plutonium Storage. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 24 


88. It was essential to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. The Agency 
was one of theroost important bodies for multilateral negotiations on 
questions of disarmament and nuclear disarmament in particular. The Third NPT 
Review Conference to be held in Geneva in 1985 would be a very important event 
in that sense. Among other things, that Conference would be examining an 
important document on international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
89. All Member States which had not yet done so were urged to sign the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials so that it could 
enter into force as soon as possible. 
90. His delegation approved the Agency's accounts for 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/714) 
and the Agency's Programme for 1985-86 and the budget for 1985 
(GC(XXVIII)/715). 


91. Czechoslovakia had decided to participate in the nuclear power plant 
Incident Reporting System. 
92. His country attached great importance to the Agency's programme of 
techical assistance and co-operation and participated actively in its 
execution. In 1985, his country would make a voluntary contribution totalling 
2.8 million Czechoslovak crowns. 
93. The aspects of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in which his country 
was principally interested were those enabling it to meet its growing basic 
energy requirements. Czechoslovakia's nuclear power plants were equipped with 
WWER-440 reactors currently producing 440 MW. During the 1990s, reactors with 
a rated capacity of 1000 MW would be commissioned with the result that, by the 
year 2000, Czechoslovakia would have twelve 400 MW units and at least six 
1000 MW units, representing a total capacity of 12 700 MW. All those power 
plants would supply not only electricity but also heat for towns located 
within a radius of 50 kilometres. 
94. In conjunction with the Soviet Union, his country had constructed 
WWER-440 reactors, steam generators, compensators, shut-off valves, special 
pumps and auxiliary systems for the primary circuit. Czech industry supplied 
WWER-440 nuclear power plants with more than 80% of all their technological 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 25 


equipment and was beginning to produce the components required for WWER-1000 
reactors. It had also exported equipment for the first two units of the PAKS 
power plant in Hungary and for one unit of the same type in the German 
Democratic Republic. 


95. That proved, therefore, that a small country like Czechoslovakia could 
play an important economic and technical role in the development of nuclear 
energy, while honouring the principles which underlay the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy. 
96. A new nuclear safety supervisory body had been set up in accordance with 
a law passed during the current year. 
97. His country also attached considerable importance to the use of nuclear 
techniques to promote economic and social development within the country. The 
most important areas in that respect were food and agriculture, and in 
particular induced mutations, radiopharmaceuticals and radioimmunoassay. More 
than 50% of the radioisotopes produced in Czechoslovakia were used in 
medicine, the remainder being employed in industry and in mineral resource 
exploration. Good economic results had been obtained and his country was 
therefore planning to broaden the range of isotope applications. 
98. As concerned the Agency's activities, his country, and probably other 
Member States too, would be interested to see the revival of a review journal 
similar to the Agency's former "Atomic Energy Review", which could publish 
articles by leading experts on individual topics and would thus promote an 
exchange of information both within the Secretariat and between institutions 
and laboratories in Member States. The Agency should give greater attention 
to problems relating to the construction and operation of nuclear power 
plants. In that connection, exchanges of information and meetings by 
specialists would be extremely useful to Member States in which nuclear power 
plants were being constructed or planned. 
99. In conclusion, he drew attention to the agreement concluded between 
Czechoslovakia and Austria on relations between the two countries in the 
development of nuclear energy, which should enable a number of problems common 
to the two countries to be resolved. The agreement was an excellent example 
of co-operation in nuclear energy matters. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 26 


100. Mr. AUDLAND (Commission of the European Communities) said that he 
would like to mention the industrial and economic aspects of nuclear energy in 
the European Atomic Energy Community up to the year 2000. 
101. The development of the nuclear industry did not take place in a vacuum. 
Nuclear power plants were intended to help meet energy needs. Where it 
existed and where it had been adopted, the nuclear option was an integral part 
of overall energy policy. The basic objective of the Community energy policy 
for more than ten years, had been to reduce dependence on oil. It had been 
decided that by the year 1990 oil should account for only 40% of total energy 
supplies. In other words, between 70 and 75% of the electricity should then 
be produced from nuclear energy and solid fuels in order to diversify energy 
sources by the year 2000. 
102. The Community was aware of the role of nuclear energy and had drawn up a 
development policy for it, although not all of its member States had national 
nuclear energy programmes. It had also adopted certain basic strategies; for 
example, it was in favour of fast reactors and spent fuel reprocessing. A 
12-year plan of action (1980-1992) had been agreed upon in the key field of 
waste management and disposal. 
103. The European Economic Community had been developing nuclear energy for 
25 years. Despite certain setbacks, nuclear energy had become an industrial 
and economic reality. 
104. At present, some 25% of the net electricty production in the Community 
was of nuclear origin, and in some Member States that percentage was as high 
as 50%. That was a major achievement, particularly when the situation in 
other large industrialized regions was considered. The decision taken, 
especially after the first oil crisis, to increase nuclear power production 
had proved its worth. If the Community had continued to be as dependent on 
oil to generate electricty, all the oil produced by Member States in the North 
Sea would have been needed to meet the requirements of the electricity sector. 
105. The Community owed that progress to a strong nuclear industry which had 
enabled nuclear energy to become a reliable and economically viable substitute 
for oil, gas and coal for generating electricity. The Community's nuclear 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 27 


industry was unique. In addition to plant construction, it included all the 
associated fuel cycle services (conversion, enrichment, fuel fabrication 
reprocessing and treatment of radioactive waste). In the key sector of 
enrichment, industrial capacities had been created through international 
co-operation both for ultracentrifugation and for gas diffusion. 


106. Whereas the Governments of Member States and economic operators were 
taking decisions along those lines, EURATOM, for its part, had been taking 
initiatives in various fields of competence, including research and 
development, health and safety, safeguards, co-operation agreements with major 
supplier countries, and loans for investments in the nuclear sector. 
107. At a meeting of its Council of Ministers in May 1984, the Community had 
decided to continue restructuring its energy pattern and reducing dependence 
on oil. Since most of the objectives for 1990 would be met, Member States had 
agreed that the time had come to set new and longer-term objectives. The 
Commission was at present preparing the ground work. 
108. In the case of nuclear energy, the Commission was to propose an 
illustrative nuclear programme, the third of its kind, which would set out the 
main guidelines for development and the Community's future nuclear energy 
needs. That programme, which would be in no way binding and which was still 
the subject of consultations with Member States and industry, should assist 
public authorities, economic operators and experts who helped form public 
opinion in Member States, and should facilitate decisions at all levels. It 
would demonstrate that the share of nuclear energy in electricity production 
would continue to increase, the installed nuclear capacity would reach 
100 GW(e) by the year 1990. By that time, about 35% of electricity production 
would be nuclear which would mean a reduction in the use of oil. That trend 
would continue after 1990 and it would be economically justified since total 
production costs would be so much lower than in the case of oil-, gas- or 
coal-fired plants. 


109. But challenges would have to be met in order to make the most of nuclear 
energy. The first challenge lay in the potential for developing exports and 
imports of nuclear power. There was already substantial trade across some ot 
the Community's internal frontiers, and since not all Member States had 
adopted the nuclear option, the development of such trade could offer economic 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 28 


advantages both to recipient and supplier countries. The former would be able 
to reduce expenditure on oil and gas by importing cheap nuclear power, and the 
latter would be guaranteed improved and more economical operation of their own 
nuclear power plants. 


110. The second challenge concerned the choice of strategy for the use of 
Plutonium. Plutonium could be used as a fuel in reactors currently in 
operation, but its most effective use was in fast breeders. The Commission 
had always supported the development of fast breeder reactors, on the grounds 
that the Community, which imported 75% of the uranium it needed, should in due 
course, under healthy economic conditions, use that technology to reduce its 
heavy external dependence. With the multinational Superphenix project in 
France, the technology of fast breeders was at the industrial prototype 
stage. Therefore, it was worthwhile continuing research along those lines in 
order to make fast breeders economically competitive with LWRs in the medium 
term. It seemed likely that fast breeder reactors would soon be competitive 
with coal-fired electricity power plants. 
111. The third challenge was that facing the nuclear power plant construction 
industry. It was a double challenge. On the one hand, that industry had to 
develop new capacities to cope with the needs arising from the installation ot 
fast breeders. In that context the Commission welcomed the decision taken a 
few months previously by several Member States of the Community to establish 
closer co-operation on the construction of new fast breeders. That was a 
useful step towards establishing a rational industrial basis. On the other 
hand, more traditional nuclear industry had to adapt to a slower pace in the 
placing of orders. In the search for more rational structures that sector 
could benefit from increased co-operation at Community level. 
112. In the longer term, consideration would have to be given to thermonuclear 
fusion. The Joint European Torus (JET), the first European fusion reactor and 
the largest tokamak in the world, had become operational a year before. JET 
had been entirely designed and constructed under a Community research 
programme. Eighty per cent of its construction had been financed by EURATOM 
and the rest by Member States, together with Sweden and Switzerland. Fourteen 
months after its startup, the results had been better than expected, both from 
a technical and scientific point of view, with, for example, a world record 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 29 


confinement of the plasma for 0.7 seconds. The Community therefore had a good 
basis for developing the new generation of fusion reactors. A group had been 
set up more than a year previously to do the preparatory work for the next 
device (the Next European Torus - NET). 


113. Since the last session of the General Conference, co-operation between 
EURATOM and the Agency in the field of safeguards and of research and 
development had increased and he was confident that trend would continue. 
114. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), exercising his right of reply, pointed out that 
during the debate mention had been made of an attack that Iraq was alleged to 
have made with a single missile on the Bushehr nuclear power plant in Iran. 
115. He wished to make three points. First, no military activity had been 
recorded on the date of the alleged attack, 24 March 1984, as could be easily 
verified from the military communiques issued by Iran and Iraq. Second, the 
Director General had not accepted Iran's request to hold an extraordinary 
meeting of the Board of Governors to review that question. Third, the Board 
of Governors, having heard the representative of Iran speak on the matter 
in June, had decided, again owing to lack of evidence, not to include the item 
on the agenda. 
116. The Iranian charge was nothing more than propaganda. What was more, no 
one would believe that a nuclear power plant could be attacked with just one 
missile. 
117. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), exercising his right of 
reply, said that his Government had always given great consideration to the 
protection of peaceful nuclear facilities against armed attacks, and had 
unreservedly supported resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407 adopted by the General 
Conference at its previous session. Since then, that resolution had been 
violated. 
118. He referred to document INFCIRC/318 relating to the military attack on 
the Bushehr nuclear power plant in the Islamic Republic of Iran and to the 
Iranian request to include an item in the agenda for the session of the Board 
of Governors in June 1984. He regretted that its request had not been granted. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.260 
page 30 


119. His Government had provided a detailed account of the attack and had 
furnished all the proof at his disposal, which he had believed to be 
sufficient at that time. His Government had invited the Director General to 
set up a group of experts to conduct an on-the-spot investigation of the 
attack. That invitation, which had never been taken up, was still open. 
120. However, in reply to the arguments of the Iraqi regime that there was 
insufficient evidence and that the claim by the Islamic Republic of Iran was 
totally unfounded, he drew the attention of the General Conference to two 
documents: a letter dated 24 March 1984 from Mr. Norbert Schmidt, Kraftwerk 
Union AG (KWU), site manager and the official in charge of the team working at 
the site of the Bushehr nuclear power plant at the time of the incident, which 
described the military attack} and a letter of 27 March 1984 from the Head 
Office of KWU at Erlangen (Federal Republic of Germany), addressed to the 
Atomic Energy Organization of Iran and confirming the attack. 
121. His delegation hoped that those documents would dispel once and for all 
any lingering doubts about the attack having taken place and would demonstrate 
that it was unjust and totally against the spirit of resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/407 that the matter had not been included in the agenda for the 
June session of the Board of Governors. The persistence of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran with regard to that matter was justified and, in the long 
term, was in the interest of all Third World countries. His delegation 
believed that the Iraqi regime had been led to behave in such an irresponsible 
manner and to attack the Bushehr nuclear power plant, in violation of Agency 
resolutions, as a direct result of the leniency shown by the Agency with 
regard to the Israeli military attack on Iraqi nuclear facilities. That 
leniency had naturally fostered aggression and, if the Agency decided not to 
investigate the act perpetrated by the aggressive Iraqi regime, it would only 
encourage other aggressive regimes, elsewhere in the world, to engage in 
similar irresponsible attacks against other States, with disastrous 
consequences. 
122. Since he did not have time to read out the letters he had mentioned, the 
President of the General Conference was requested to have the texts of them 
distributed to all Member States of the Agency. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
April 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIRST 
PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 26 September 1984, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda"" 


7 General debate and annual report for 1983 1 -141 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Netherlands 1 -11 
Egypt 12 -21 
Mexico 22 -34 
Indonesia 35 -48 
Norway 49 -64 
United Arab Emirates 65 -71 
Canada 72 -85 
Yugoslavia 86 -95 
Venezuela 96 -119 
Nigeria 120 -129 
Thailand 130 -135 
Bangladesh 136 -141 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 16 October 1984. 

**/ GC(XXVIII)/730. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 

85-983 


GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 198.3 (GC(XXVIII)/713 and Add.1 and 2) 


1. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands), after welcoming the delegation of the 
People's Republic of China to the General Conference, said that, in his 
impressive and forward-looking statement, the Director General had described 
the main achievements and some of the more important future tasks of the IAEA. 
The results obtained so far compared favourably with those of many other 
international organizations. However, it was necessary not to be blind to 
certain negative tendencies which might affect the effectiveness of the Agency, 
tendencies which could be found in many international organizations at present 
and which had been mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations to the General Assembly. 
2. In that report, the Secretary-General had commented on what had been 
called "the crisis of multilateralism". One of his main observations had been 
that the many accomplishments of the United Nations had required a multilateral 
structure of co-operation. The same applied to the accomplishments of 
the IAEA. Whether the basic safety standards for radiation protection, the 
code of practice on the management of radioactive wastes or the safeguards 
system were concerned, well-structured international co-operation was needed 
for the Agency's work to lead to such accomplishments. Another observation in 
the Secretary-General's report, which also applied to the Agency, had been 
that a truly international organization should offer a platform to all nations 
alike. In fact, universality of membership constituted both an essential precondition 
and the source of the organization's strength. A third observation 
of the Secretary-General had been that the main organs of the United Nations 
and its specialized agencies should not be treated as interchangeable 
platforms for pursuing the same political aims. The Secretary-General had 
stated that issues must be dealt with on their own merits and in their own 
context; otherwise one or two issues could pervade the entire United Nations 
system. In the case of the Agency that meant that efforts should be concentrated 
on questions which were of immediate relevance to the promotion of 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy and to the prevention of proliferation. 
In maintaining and increasing the relevance of the Agency, the General 
Conference would contribute to the strengthening of the United Nations system 
as a whole. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.261 
page 3 


3. For more than 25 years, the Agency had been of great importance to all 
its Member States, regardless of their economic systems or levels of development. 
The review of the Agency's activities - in addition to being concise 
and to giving an impressive picture of the Agency's performance - had shown 
that the Agency satisfactorily performed its tasks where the developing 
countries were concerned and that many of the Agency's activities were indeed 
strongly oriented towards the requirements of developing countries, which was 
entirely appropriate. The Agency served not only as a platform for the 
exchange of information and experience in all applications of nuclear energy, 
but also as an instrument for assisting Member States, notably those with 
limited means. That assistance was not such that the Agency could or should 
provide it all by itself. The Agency should continue to co-operate closely 
with other organizations in the United Nations system which assisted 
developing countries in different fields of development. The elaboration of 
an energy strategy adapted to the specific needs of a particular country was 
a case in which several international bodies, including the IAEA, could play 
a role. Obviously, much would depend on efficient co-operation between them. 
In that connection, his Government intended to made a positive contribution 
to the forthcoming United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). 


4. International co-operation through the Agency related not only to assistance 
with and information on nuclear energy but also to regulatory 
activities. Since the Agency was the only world organization concerned with 
nuclear energy, it represented the logical framework for developing guides 
and codes in the fields of nuclear safety, safe transport of radioactive 
materials and waste management. Another example of activities with relevance 
worldwide was the IAEA's Incident Reporting System. In the development and 
application of such international regulatory instruments, consideration must 
be given to the experience of existing regional institutions in the same field, 
such as the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) of the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD). The Director General's initiative to set 
up an international nuclear safety advisory group was to be welcomed; the 
group should also draw on the experience of existing regional bodies such as 
the NEA . 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 4 


5. His Government greatly appreciated the Agency's activities with regard 
to waste management and was convinced that its participation in 
activities such as the Technical Review Committee on Underground Disposal 
was useful. Research carried out by the Agency and elsewhere had resulted 
in the general conclusion that the storage of radioactive wastes in certain 
geological formations was a solution to the waste management problem which 
met environmental concerns, in particular. A consensus had been reached 
by the experts in Seattle in the previous year that there were no technical 
barriers to appropriate and safe management of nuclear wastes. Some countries 
had only small nuclear programmes or did not have geological formations 
suitable for the storage of wastes. It was precisely for those situations 
that international co-operation was needed. The Netherlands supported the 
Agency's efforts to intensify international co-operation on waste management, 
with regard not only to advice in bilateral matters, but also to the Agency's 
input to multilateral fora such as NEA. 


6. The Netherlands attached great importance to the efforts of the Agency, 
in collaboration with FAO and WHO, in the field of food irradiation and 
hoped that the new joint IAEA/FAO/WHO advisory board on food irradiation 
would have its first sesssion in the near future. The issue was of great 
importance to both developing and industralized countries: to the latter 
because food irradiation offered an alternative to chemical additives and 
a means of eliminating pathogenic micro-organisms, especially salmonella; 
and to the former because it made it possible to increase the quantities 
of food available for consumption by considerably reducing the tremendous 
food losses caused by insufficient storage and transport facilities. In 
the Netherlands, the food irradiation programme had always held an important 
place. In 1984, nineteen fellowships had already been awarded to students 
from developing countries to study at the Dutch pilot plant for food 
irradiation at Wageningen. In addition, fifteen fellows would be following 
the general course at the International Facility for Food Irradiation 
Technology (IFFIT). The current year was also seeing the twentieth 
anniversary of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division, which demonstrated the ability 
of the Agency and FAO to collaborate effectively. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 5 


7. Of all the IAEA's activities, the safeguards system was certainly the most 
remarkable. The voluntary submission by so many States of their nuclear 
activities to inspection by international civil servants should be considered 
one of the finest examples of international co-operation and confidencebuilding 
measures. The safeguards system could also be seen as a promising 
manifestation of human rationality, and as the expression of self-interest 
rationally applied. Over the years, the system had grown and matured, and 
the experience gained had provided a model which might serve as a basis for 
future international arms control agreements. When discussing the problems 
still to be overome, that wider perspective should thus never be forgotten. 
However, it was necessary to continue to be objective and to search for 
improvements in that valuable instrument. The worst possible attitude would 
be indifference to safeguards. Safeguards strengthened confidence between 
States and at the same time provided a basis for international nuclear 
transactions; they should not create additional barriers in the way of such 
transactions. It was in that light that the Netherlands had always seen 
the possibility of the establishment of an international plutonium storage 
(IPS) scheme. The existence of plutonium in separated form required additional 
confidence-building measures in order to facilitate rational use of that 
valuable material as well as to make certain bilateral restrictions superfluous. 
The existence, use, transfer and storage of increasing quantities of plutonium 
in years to come would clearly place a responsibility on the world community 
and on the IAEA in particular. A forward-looking approach was required 
in that respect, and continuation of the IPS discussions was therefore fully 
justified. The discussion on the matter in the Board of Governors in 
February 1984 had been encouraging in that it had demonstrated broad support 
for a follow-up to the work of the IPS expert group. 
8. Following the successful conclusion of discussions on the safeguards 
approach to be adopted for gas centrifuge enrichment plants, a facility 
attachment for the enrichment plants in the Netherlands would be finalized 
within the next few months. Another very important development in safeguards 
had been the voluntary offers concerning IAEA safeguards at a number of 
civil nuclear installations in four nuclear-weapon States, and he welcomed 
the agreement reached between the Soviet Union and the Agency. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.261 
page 6 


9. In the next year the Third NPT Review Cdnference would be held. In 
that context it should be borne in mind that international co-operation 
in nuclear trade and a commitment to non-proliferation were not and could 
not be incompatible; indeed they went hand in hand. That certainly presented 
challenges both for the exporting countries, which had to consider ways 
of dispelling fears that non-proliferation might only be a device designed 
to prevent real nuclear co-operation which it certainly was not, and for 
the consumer countries, which needed to offer adequate assurances about 
the peaceful nature of their nuclear programmes. The IAEA played an 
essential role in that area, by promoting international dialogue in the 
Committee|on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and elsewhere. 


10. In the Netherlands, much nuclear research was being done. Nuclear 
power was being used and there were further applications of nuclear energy 
in medicine, agriculture and industry. Other Dutch nuclear activities included 
uranium enrichment by means of the gas centrifuge enrichment process. In 
the decision-making process for the overall energy supply for the next decades, 
much consideration had been given in the Netherlands to the potential of 
nuclear power in the light of all relevant factors. In early November, 
his Government would submit its views and intentions to Parliament. 


11. In conclusion, he reaffirmed the confidence of his Government in the 
IAEA as one of the strongest constituent parts of the United Nations system 
and pledged its full support for the strengthening of the Agency for the 
benefit of all its Member countries and of mankind as a whole. 
12. Mr. SHASH (Egypt), welcoming the People's Republic of China as 
a Member of the Agency and of its Board of Governors, expressed his confidence 
that China's participation would help the Agency in fulfilling its objectives. 
He also wished to commend the Director General for his valuable report on 
the Agency's activities over the preceding 25 years. 
13. Egypt attached great importance to the technical assistance provided by 
the Agency, and supported the implementation of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388 
which stressed the need for financing technical assistance from assured and 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 7 


predictable resources in order to meet the increasing requirements of developing 
countries. His country was also in agreement with the Director General that 
greater emphasis should be placed on multi-year, regional and interregional 
projects and on co-operation among developing countries. His delegation intended 
to submit to the Conference a draft resolution on the report of the Joint 
Inspection Unit dealing with the Agency's technical co-operation programme. In 
that connection, he expressed his gratitude to all States which had contributed 
to the Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund and to those which 
had made extrabudgetary contributions to finance a number of projects. 


14. Egypt considered the Agency's activities in the field of nuclear safety 
to be important and welcomed the Director General's efforts to promote the 
Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection and proposal to send advisory 
teams on request to Member States to help them in implementing those Standards. 
An Agency expert on the subject had visited Egypt, and his Government was 
pleased to establish collaboration with the Agency, especially in the training 
of personnel in the conditions of safety and the drafting of the necessary 
documents. In that connection, he appreciated the Secretariat's collaboration 
in the training of a radiation safety group in Egypt. 
15. His delegation approved the steps taken by the Director General to give 
effect to resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 on the staffing policy. It urged the 
Director General to continue his efforts with a view to fully implementing 
that resolution so as to do justice to developing countries, which constituted 
more than 70% of the Agency's membership, especially since such countries were 
capable of offering highly competent candidates in various areas for appointment 
in the Secretariat. 
16. His country firmly believed that the Agency's safeguards system was one 
of the main pillars supporting its activities and its statutory functions. 
That was why Egypt had forthwith condemned the Israeli attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear reactor in 1981, and had drawn attention to the threat which that 
attack posed to the Agency's Statute. Referring to operative paragraphs 2 and 9 
of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, he noted that the Director General's report 
pointed out the dangerous consequences of such an armed attack and the damage 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 8 


which it could do to the Agency's safeguards system and to its credibility. 
He urged the Conference to consider the statements of Israel and Iraq in that 
connection, together with the Director General's report, during discussion of 
agenda item 10. Egypt had made a number of comments at the Board and would 
express its opinion on the subject again at the Conference during discussion 
of the item. 


17. He regretted that South Africa had deliberately ignored the request contained 
in resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408 and had clearly expressed its intention 
not to place all its nuclear activities under Agency safeguards, thus defying 
the General Conference resolution, as was evident from the Director General's 
statement. That situation was not altered by its willingness to enter into 
negotiations with the Agency on the submission of a semi-commercial enrichment 
plant to Agency safeguards. A draft resolution had therefore been prepared by 
the African Group, and he hoped that it would be fully supported by all 
delegations. 
18. One of the important questions before the Conference was amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute so as to rectify the existing imbalance in the 
geographical representation on the Board of the areas of Africa and the Middle 
East and South Asia. The matter had been on the agenda of the Board and of 
the General Conference for seven years and it was high time that justice be 
done to those areas. 
19. The present session of the General Conference was being held at a crucial 
time for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy: the Third NPT Review Conference 
was to meet in September 1985 and the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Used of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE) was scheduled for 1986. The Agency would no doubt make a major 
contribution to the success of those conferences in view of its experience in 
the areas of technical assistance and safeguards. Egypt had been, and would 
continue to be, associated with the preparation of those events. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 9 


20. His country had taken an important part in the work of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS), which had made considerable progress, and hoped that 
an early agreement would be reached on principles of international co-operation 
in the field of nuclear energy. 
21. Egypt was going ahead with its ambitious nuclear power programme with a 
view to meeting 40% of its electricity needs by the end of the century from 
that source. The actual work on the first nuclear power plant at Dabba, near 
Alexandria, had already started, and his Government was looking forward to 
greater co-operation with the Agency and its Member States in the realization 
of that programme so that considerable oil resources could be saved and made 
available for industrial and other vital development projects. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 10 


22. Mr. ROSENZWEIG DIAZ (Mexico).said that his delegation wished 
to comment in general terms on the utilization of nuclear energy, which from 
the start had had two main areas of application - one peaceful and the other 
destructive. On the peaceful side, the IAEA had consistently supported 
important activities in fields such as technical co-operation, safeguards 
and nuclear safety. The annual report reproduced in document GC(XXVIII)/713 
bore eloquent testimony to the Agency's achievements, even at a time when 
its programmes were subject to strict budgetary limitations. 
23. At the same time, it seemed incredible that, twenty-eight years after 
the establishment of the Agency and fourteen years after the entry into 
force of NPT, no effort had yet proven adequate to restrain the armaments 
race or to halt the use of nuclear energy for military purposes by certain 
States. On the eve of the Third NPT Review Conference it was time to appeal 
for full implementation of each and every provision of that Treaty. 
24. Mexico, the first country to submit all its nuclear installations 
to IAEA safeguards, the prime mover of the Tlatelolco Treaty, was also the 
first to express sincere regret that the Agency's General Conference should 
have to consider for the third time a sordid dispute unleashed by the 
military attack of one Member State (whose nuclear installations were not 
under IAEA safeguards, and which was not a signatory of NPT) on the research 
centre of another Member State (whose installations always had been 
satisfactorily subject to safeguards, and which was, like Mexico, a signatory 
of NPT). 
25. The main issue was not the identity of the disputants, but - as had 
been stressed from the beginning - the fact that the attack cast doubt on 
the safeguards regime. It was an instance of aggression against the 
inalienable right of all the Agency's Member States, enshrined in Article II 
of the Statute and Article IV of NPT, to pursue the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy as a means of promoting their scientific, economic and 
technological development. His delegation trusted that the dispute would 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 11 


be satisfactorily settled as soon as possible. At the same time, Mexico 
wanted to stress the importance of adopting, in an appropriate forum, an 


international legal instrument specifically guaranteeing protection against 
military attacks on any and all nuclear installations subject to Agency 


safeguards. 


26. In keeping with its traditional policy of defending the principle 
of nuclear non-proliferation and promoting international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, Mexico had taken an active part in 
the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the Third NPT Review 
Conference, held in April 1984. The Committee had decided by consensus 
to hold the Third NPT Review Conference for four weeks from 2 September 1985, 
taking account of information received from the Agency's Secretariat regarding 
a possible schedule for the twenty-ninth regular session of the General 
Conference. It had emerged only later, unfortunately, that the Secretariat 
had not given the Preparatory Committee adequate information. The Mexican 
Government much regretted that lack of co-operation, which confounded the 
efforts of Member States such as Mexico that were signatories of NPT and 
had an interest in the success of the Third NPT Review Conference. The 
decision of the Conference at its present session to hold its twenty-ninth 
session at the same time as the Third NPT Review Conference threatened to 
impede the participation of developing countries in one or other of the 
conferences, because by and large they did not have enough personnel. Mexico 
thus felt bound to enter a reservation regarding the Conference's decision 
under item 5(b) of the agenda, concerning the opening date of the twentyninth 
regular session. 
27. Mexico considered that the United Nations Conference for the Promotion 
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE)a 
conference in which it took great interest - should be held in 1986. There 
were a number of reasons for that. First, it was important that efforts 
should be concentrated in 1985 on the Third NPT Review Conference, and that 
participation in that conference should be as large as possible. Secondly, 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 12 


the IAEA should be given time to conclude its work - mainly within CAS aimed 
at defining the principles which should govern international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Thirdly, enough time should be 
allowed to prepare the documents needed for a successful outcome of the 
Conference. 


28. The Government of Mexico condemned the racist re'gime of South Africa 
and wished to commend to the Conference's attention General Assembly 
resolution 38/181/A/B, relating to implementation of the declaration on 
the denuclearization of Africa and to the nuclear capability of South Africa, 
and resolution 38/39/A, relating to the apartheid policy of the South African 
Government. 


29. Turning to Mexico's own nuclear programme and the salient aspects 
of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy under 
the auspices of the Agency, he said that the national power programme of 
Mexico was designed to incorporate nuclear power as one element in the overall 
energy supply plan - subject, of course, to the limitations inherent in 
the country's present economic situation. By the end of 1984 aggregate 
installed capacity in Mexico would reach 20 202 MW, and electricity detiand 
was expected to grow at an average rate of 77D per annum over the coming 
few years. As far as nuclear power was concerned, work on the two units 
of the Laguna Verde power plant was proceeding at an accelerated pace: the 
first unit was expected to go into operation in 1986 and the second two 
years later. 
30. In view of the economic situation, a thorough study was being made 
of the capacity of domestic industry and of the need for diversification, 
with the aim of establishing a nuclear power programme; the expectation 
was that, from the second plant onward, nuclear power would play a 
significant role in satisfying the country's electricity demand. 
31. The problem of finding an adequate solution to the financing of technical 
assistance persisted; in contrast to the situation of safeguards, the principal 
characteristic of the present system for financing technical assistance was 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 13 


uncertainty, because voluntary contributions always depended on the economic 
situation and were moreover subject to the vagaries of the political climate 
in donor countries. Yet technical assistance constituted the principal means 
available to the Agency for disseminating the benefits of nuclear energy 
throughout the world and reducing the vast technology gap which acted as 
a source of conflict and misunderstanding between the developing and the 
industrialized countries. Thus, the promotion of technical assistance should 
take precedence over all other considerations. 


32. When the indicative planning figures were established for 1987, 1988 
and 1989, the Board should bear certain things in mind. First, assistance 
in kind was not showing any tendency towards growth; secondly, less money 
was available from UNDP; thirdly, there were less funds available under 
the Regular Budget for promotional activities; and, fourthly, the size of 
technical assistance projects was growing in proportion to the economies 
of the recipient countries. 
33. It was a welcome fact that more nationals of developing countries 
had been recruited for Secretariat posts, but those countries were still 
not adequately represented. Nor was it just a question of percentages: 
the most important thing was to recruit nationals of developing countries 
for senior Professional posts; only then could the Agency hope to improve 
its understanding of the needs and views of the Third World. Geographical 
distribution, admittedly, should not supplant all other criteria applied 
in the hiring of staff, such as efficiency, national quotas and so on, but 
Mexico felt that it had only recently been given due weight at all. 
34. Some modest progress could be noted in the deliberations of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply (CAS). The most important subject before that 
committee, in Mexico's opinion, was the definition of principles to govern 
international co-operation. The Committee should continue its work in a 
positive spirit: if all participants demonstrated sufficient political will, 
the principles could be dealt with before the Third NPT Review Conference. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 14 


35. Ms. SUDIRDJO (Indonesia) noted that international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had continued to develop in an 
encouraging manner in the past year. The Preparatory Committee of the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) held earlier that year had, 
for example, reached a consensus on a number of important issues relating 
to the conference which was to be held in 1986. 
36. With regard to the Third NPT Review Conference, it was to be hoped 
that the second meeting of the Preparatory Committee would be able to start 
its substantive work by considering the conference documents, including 
those submitted by the Agency. 
37. The Agency had a valuable role to play in assisting developing countries 
to acquire not only the equipment and materials, but also the scientific 
and technical know-how needed to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
To ensure the continuity of national programmes in that field, it was essential 
for the Agency's technical assistance programme to be funded through 
predictable and assured resources and on a long-term basis. She regretted 
that the discussions in the June meeting of the Board on the implementation 
of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388 did not indicate any possible solution to 
that question. 
38. In the context of international technical assistance and co-operation, 
mention should be made of the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS). 
Although the rate of progress had been rather slow, encouraging results 
had been achieved on mechanisms for revising international nuclear co-operation 
agreements and on emergency back-up mechanisms. The most difficult issue 
before CAS was the formulation of draft principles for international cooperation 
activities within the framework of the Agency. Her delegation 
hoped that CAS could make some real progress on that question since UNCPICPUNE 
would undoubtedly find such principles extremely useful. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 15 


39. Indonesia, which was a party to NPT, considered the Agency's safeguards 
activities to be very important since they constituted one of the most effective 
means of preventing the horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons. It 
was with disappointment, therefore, that her delegation had noted the negative 
reaction of South Africa to resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408 requesting it to 
submit all its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. 
40. The increase in safeguards costs resulting from the rise in the number 
of nuclear facilities - particularly in the developed countries - had been 
the subject of wide discussion among Member States. The central issue was 
how to share the costs fairly. Various formulas had been suggested and 
an interim solution had been agreed upon by the Board at its most recent 
meeting. She hoped that, through intensive consultations, a long-term 
solution could eventually be found. 
41. Indonesia was very interested in the small and medium power reactor (SMPR) 
study and was pleased that the Agency had been able to launch the study 
thanks to contributions from a number of Member States. Her country would 
naturally co-operate to the fullest extent in that exercise. 
42. Her delegation recognized the importance of the question of the protection 
of peaceful nuclear installations against armed attack and had noted the 
work of the Geneva-based conference on disarmament on that subject. 
43. Turning to her country's activities in the nuclear field she wished 
to outline a number of the most important features. A new study to update 
the one concluded in 1979 on the use of nuclear power was to be carried 
out in early 1985. A 30 MW multipurpose reactor with supporting laboratories 
was currently being constructed which would become one of the country's most 
important research and development centres and would help to enhance national 
capability in the nuclear field. Radioactive waste management programmes 
would have high priority. National regulations for the safe handling of 
radionuclides would be formulated on the basis of international codes, guides 
and recommendations. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 16 


44. A detailed study of uranium deposits and exploration had been carried 
out with the result that uranium mineralizations and some radiometric and 
geochemical anomalies had been discovered. Work on the evaluation of uranium 
ore resources would continue. 
45. As a result of the application of radiation and radioisotopes in her 
country, two new rice varieties had recently been made available to farmers. 
The first variety, Atomita-1, had a better performance in the growing period, 
the harvest time being advanced by two weeks. In addition, cooking quality 
was better than that of the mother variety and the new variety was resistant 
to biotypes 1 and 2 of plant-hoppers. The second variety) Atomita-2, had 
an additional improvement in its specific characteristics, namely its tolerance 
to salinity. 


46. Positive results had been achieved in respect of food preservation 
and some progress had been made on packaging aspects and shipment studies 
relating to certain irradiaced foodstuffs. 
47. Indonesia had taken part in all research activities conducted under 
the RCA programme. An RCA programme on the industrial application of isotopes 
and radiation technology for radiation vulcanization of natural latex had 
recently been set up at the iMational Atomic Energy Agency's Centre for the Application 
of Isotopes and Radiation in Jakarta. Extensive work was being carried out 
on the use of radiation and radioisotopes to study the efficiency of 
fertilizer utilization, the improvement of animal production, pest management 
and immunology of domestic animals. Isotopes were also being used in 
hydrology and sedimentology, with groundwater studies being undertaken in 
Jakarta. 


48. In the field of nuclear medicine, emphasis would continue to be placed 
on the co-ordination of radioimmunoassay work in several hospitals. It was 
planned to establish a nuclear emergency hospital in the near future and 
to expand the use of nuclear techniques in medicine. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 17 


49. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) said that, subject to parliamentary approval, 
his delegation could accept the budget proposed for 1985. He was pleased 
to note that there were increases, albeit modest ones, in the safeguards 
and nuclear applications areas within a budget which deviated only slightly 
from the generally accepted target of zero real growth. The target of US $26 million 
proposed for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1985 was also acceptable. His delegation attached 
great importance to the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme. While he regretted that some technically sound projects could 
still not be immediately implemented for lack of finance, he welcomed the 
substantial increase in the target for voluntary contributions and the doubling 
of the amount of extrabudgetary resources made available. The resultant 
programme increase of 257c from 1982 to 1983 was extremely satisfactory. That 
rapid increase in resources made it all the more imperative for funds to be 
used as efficiently as possible. The introduction of dynamic programming 
and the establishment of the Technical Co-operation Evaluation Unit were 
important developments in that connection. His delegation was pleased to 
see that the proportion of technical assistance funds to be spent on multiyear 
projects and regional and interregional projects in 1985 was to increase 
in comparison with 1984. The idea of using indicative planning figures for 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund had proved successful and 
his delegation saw no pressing need to change to any other method of financing. 
50. He also welcomed the trend in technical assistance requests away from 
radiation applications and towards nuclear power although the former would 
certainly remain an important part of the technical assistance provided by 
the Agency. In that context, his delegation attached great importance to 
the implementation of the Mediterranean fruit fly eradication project initiated 
in 1983. The success of an important project of that kind could have a 
considerable impact on the resources made available for technical assistance 
in the future. He commended the success of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division 
of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic Energy for Food and Agricultural 
Development which should serve as an inspiration to international organizations 
to undertake joint efforts of a similar nature. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 18 


51. His delegation attached considerable importance to the Agency's coordinating 
role in the fields of nuclear power and the nuclear fuel cycle. 
The exchange and dissemination of experience and knowledge between Member 
States through publications, symposia, panels and so on were of the greatest 
benefit to all Member States. 
52. His country considered the progress made in the past year in further developing 
the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) to be most encouraging. 
53. The Agency's work in the nuclear safety area was one of its most 
essential and valuable tasks. The publication in 1983 of a further six 
safety series guides under the NUSS programme was especially noteworthy. 
Norway supported the trend towards more direct Agency participation in safety 
work through advisory missions and the provision of assistance to national 
regulatory bodies, and commended the Director General on his intention to 
set up an International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group. The establishment 
of the Incident Reporting System was another logical step in the Agency's safety 
work. For the system to be successful, the full co-operation of all countries 
operating nuclear power plants would be required. Close co-operation with 
the OECD's Nuclear Energy Agency would have to be maintained in order to 
avoid duplication of effort. 


54. He wished to inform the General Conference that his Government intended 
to ratify the International Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material before the end of 1984. 
55. Like many other countries, Norway was concerned about the dumping of 
radioactive waste at sea. The importance of the Agency's role with respect 
to the handling and disposal of radioactive waste under the London 
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and 
Other Matter should be emphasized. The efforts of the Agency in reviewing 
the scientific and technical problems relating to the proposal for the 
amendment of the Annexes 1 and 2 to the Convention were especially commendable. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 19 


56. A fair balance must be maintained between the promotional and regulatory 
roles of the Agency. Despite the budgetary problems faced by Member States, 
the Agency must be given adequate resources for safeguards to ensure that 
the safeguards system kept pace with technological developments and that 
verification operations could be performed with a high degree of assurance 
in spite of the increase in the number of facilities to be inspected. Furthermore, 
in view of the problems of public acceptance, it would hardly be possible 
to support the provision of technical assistance for nuclear power programmes 
without a reliable safeguards system. His delegation felt it would be necessary, 
when designing cost-effective safeguards approaches, to pay more attention 
to the characteristics of the fuel cycle of each State. However, the system 
could best be improved by extending full-scope safeguards to all non-nuclearweapon 
States. Norway was pleased to note that the Ivory Coast and Papua 
New Guinea had concluded safeguards agreements pursuant to NPT during 1983. 
However, at the end of that year there were still 41 non-nuclear-weapon States 
parties to NPT without a safeguards agreement. States which had not yet 
concluded such agreements should do so as soon as possible. 
57. It was reasonable for all Member States to participate in the financing 
of safeguards since safeguards was a collective responsibility and of benefit 
to all countries. His delegation would have preferred safeguards to be funded 
from the Regular Budget without any special financing formula. At all events, 
at least some fraction covering the administrative and general part of 
safeguards costs should be borne by all Member States. The remaining costs 
ought to be shared by Member States on the basis of the maximum routine 
inspection effort expressed in man-days, that would be necessary if all known 
peaceful nuclear installations in Member States were subject to safeguards. 
58. Safeguards inspectors should, in principle, be recruited from as many 
Member States as possible. Much more important than the inspector's nationality, 
however, was his technical competence. It would nonetheless be perfectly 
possible to recruit inspectors from a larger number of countries than was 
the case at present without compromising the requirement for a high level 
of technical competence. In that connection, the Agency's programme of internal 
training for graduates and junior professionals from developing countries 
was fully endorsed by his delegation. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 20 


59. Norway attached considerable importance to the question of International 
Plutonium Storage. A plutonium storage system should be non-discriminatory. 
It would be a valuable addition to the Agency's safeguards system but should 
not interfere with national energy programmes. It was to be hoped that the 
Board would continue to study that question and bring it to a. successful 
conclusion. 
60. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had a number of thorny problems 
to solve and progress had consequently been slow. CAS was the most appropriate 
international forum for seeking a consensus on mechanisms for the international 
transfer of nuclear materials and equipment. It was in the interests of 
all to maintain a proper balance between assurances of supply and an effective 
non-proliferation regime. The work should continue with patience and without 
undue pessimism. 
61. The Agency should play a major role in the United Nations Conference 
for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy (UNCPICPUNE) and his delegation was pleased that the Agency had already 
provided considerable assistance in the preparations for that Conference. 
62. His Government was actively participating in the preparations for the 
Third NPT Review Conference tobe held in 1985. He expected that the Agency 
would make a substantial contribution to that conference in view of its 
responsibility to provide safeguards for parties to NPT. 
63. Armed attacks on nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes 
could not be accepted, especially when the installation in question was 
subject to Agency inspection and control. The objective of the safeguards 
system was to ensure through verification procedures, that nuclear material 
was not diverted from its Droper use. Attacks on installations under safeguards 
might well endanger the control system which had been so painstakingly established. 


64. The principle of universality of participation in international organizations 
was considered to be of vital importance by his Government. The right of 
every sovereign State, irrespective of its political or social system, to 
take part in multilateral organizations was the basis for co-operation among 
States. Attempts to exclude, directly or indirectly, States from such 
participation would inevitably have severe repercussions for the organization 
concerned and multilateral co-operation in general. 

GG(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 21 


65. Mr. AL-OWAIS (United Arab Emirates) said that his country followed 
with great interest the various activities of the Agency on promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the benefit of mankind as a whole. It, 
too, had benefited from the Agency's technical assistance programme in areas 
such as geological exploration, nuclear medicine and other applications of 
nuclear energy. The University of the United Arab Emirates had introduced 
nuclear physics into its curricula, and groups were being sent abroad for 
training in nuclear energy-related sciences. 
66. However, his Government was increasingly concerned at the nuclear arms 
race and at the dangers posed to mankind by such a race. It hoped that supporters 
of peace all over the world would work in earnest to halt that terrible 
race and to impose some sort of international control over those countries 
which were developing nuclear military capabilities for aggressive purposes, 
thus endangering world peace and security. 
67. As for the use of nuclear energy for electricity generation, the United 
Arab Emirates was handicapped by a shortage of qualified technical personnel. 
It was facing many of the problems encountered by a number of similar developing 
countries which had embarked on that experiment. Those included the 
high cost of building nuclear plants, the difficulties in the way of transfer 
of nuclear technology from the industrialized to the developing countries, 
the problem of assurances of fuel supply, those of nuclear safety and waste 
disposal and so on. In spite of its keen interest in nuclear power, his 
country had decided to wait and see how those problems were resolved. 
68. Another problem which was of concern to his country was military attacks 
on civilian nuclear installations of developing countries such as the wanton 
Israeli aggression against the Iraqi research reactor; it was common knowledge 
that the facility in question was for purely scientific and peaceful purposes 
and was fully covered by Agency safeguards. 
69. He regretted that the Agency had acted against the spirit of operative 
paragraphs 3 and 4 of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 by granting three research 
contracts for US $24 700 to an Israeli scientific institution. He called upon 
the Secretariat to abide by the spirit of that resolution especially as Israel 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 22 


had thus far not satisfied the requirements contained therein. The Israeli 
Prime Minister's statement circulated in document GC(XXVIII)/720 was nothing 
but an attempt to deceive and to create the erroneous impression that Israel 
had withdrawn its previous threat to repeat its attack against nuclear facilities 
in Iraq or in any other Arab country. 


70. As for the so-called Israeli response contained in document GC(XXVIII)/720 
and Israel's ambiguous statement concerning its policy of attack on peaceful 
nuclear reactors of other States and its desire to respect Agency safeguards, 
it was well worth recalling another statement of the Israeli Minister for 
Scientific Development. Without making any reference to the Agency's safeguards 
system or to international instruments or arrangements, the latter had 
in the preceding August reiterated that his country would at its discretion 
attack any Arab nuclear project if such a project, in its opinion, might in 
future be used to produce a nuclear bomb. 
71. In conclusion, he urged the Conference to adopt the relevant resolutions 
in the interest of world peace and welfare of mankind. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 23 


72. Mr. SULLIVAN (Canada) said that as a charter Member of the Agency, 
his country had long placed great importance on the Agency's role as a 
promoter of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and on its role in preventing 
the misuse of the atom. The Agency was a vital organization with an established 
record of competence in the development and maintenance of a credible nuclear 
safeguards system and as a means by which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
could be brought to an increasing number of countries. 
73. The most effective way in which Member States could assure themselves 
of the peaceful nature of their nuclear endeavours was a clear and binding 
commitment to the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) or an equivalent undertaking 
and a binding full-scope safeguards commitment under the Agency's auspices. 
In keeping with such a commitment, Canada had placed its entire nuclear 
programme under the Agency' s full-scope safeguards. It was for that reason 
others were urged to make the same commitment in the interests of world 
peace and security. Once those elementary, essential undertakings were 
given, Canada stood prepared to share the benefits of its reliable, safe 
and effective nuclear technology. 
74. His country was a strong supporter of the activities of the Agency 
and contributed to a very broad range of programmes. In addition to meeting 
Canada's share of the annual targets for voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, it had provided and would continue 
to provide assistance in nuclear training and nuclear safety regulations 
to developing Member States. Additional funds would be contributed to the 
Agency's footnote &J programme andin the area of safeguards, Canada contributed 
to the safeguards support programme as well as supporting the Agency's inspection 
field office in Toronto. 
75. Canada also gave active support to the Agency's small and medium power 
reactor studies. Developing countries, with limited financial resources, 
which were evolving nuclear infrastructures and limited electrical grids, 
should find small reactors an attractive alternative when embarking on a 
nuclear power programme. It was also pursuing the concept of even smallersized 
reactors (2-20 MW range) for space heating and electrical power 
generation applications in Canada's remoter areas. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.621 
page 24 


76. Gamma irradiation (using Co) was a process which would prove 
beneficial to countries at all stages of their industrial development. 
Cobalt-60 was now being used in such diverse applications as sterilization 
of medical supplies, food irradiation, decontamination of biological waste 
and industrial waste detoxification. As the world's largest supplier of Co 
Canada would continue to provide developing countries with the means to 
reap the benefits of that innovative and significant technology. 


77. The Director General's important comments on waste management and 
decontamination and decommissioning were in keeping with the priorities 
established within the Canadian nuclear programme. Extensive studies had 
been undertaken in both areas to ensure that the nuclear industry as a whole, 
including Canadian industry, had a credible and effective means of dealing 
with nuclear waste. 
78. His country was one of the world's largest producers of uranium, with 
the potential, experience and commitment to remain a reliable long-term 
source for our nuclear partners. The recent discovery of several significant 
high-grade deposits in Canada had added as much as 407 to its currently 
known uranium reserves. The exploration activity would be continued. The 
increased uranium production in Canada was matched by improvement in the 
conditions in which production was achieved. The health and safety of the 
uranium industry worker had always been a priority concern and the increased 
production would not be allowed to alter that fundamental principle. 
79. Canada had, furthermore, increased its capacity to refine uranium. 
Two recently completed facilities for conversion of the Eldorado resources 
were in production and demonstrated that the country had the capability 
to refine and convert the uranium which it marketed on a competitive basis. 
The expanded refining programme also incorporated major improvements in 
pollution control and recycling of valuable former wastes. 
80. With respect to electricity generation, his country remained committed 
to nuclear power. In 1983, nuclear generation in Canada had exceeded 46 TW an 
increase of 287o - and nuclear power generated entirely by the CANDU reactor 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 25 


design had accounted for 127 of total Canadian electricity generation. In 
Ontario nuclear power had provided 3470 of the total electricity production, 
and when the present Ontario Hydro construction schedule was completed in 1992, 
the figure would increase to over 407o. 


81. CANDU technology had passed the test of confidence during the past 
year and its reputation for outstanding service and reliability was high. 
The pressure-tube rupture at the Pickering Station had demonstrated the 
inherent safety of the pressure-tube concept and the soundness of the CANDU 
reactor design. That incident had not slowed down Canada's domestic reactor 
programme. Ontario Hydro's Pickering Unit 6 had been declared in service 
in February 1984, while Unit 6 at the Bruce Station had produced electricity 
in June. In the province of New Brunswick environmental studies were underway 
with a view to a second reactor at Point Lepreau, which would produce 
electricity for the export market on a commercial basis. 
82. A total of four CANDU 600-MW reactors had attained full power in 1983. 
Those reactors in the Republic of Korea, Republic of Argentina and the 
Canadian provinces of Quebec and New Brunswick were all in service and 
performing reliably. Romania had recently opted for a third CANDU, and 
was now making plans for five units at its Cernovoda site and had plans 
for four more units at another location. 
83. The performance of CANDU reactors continued to be impressive. At 
the end of 1983 Ontario Hydro's reactors had had an average lifetime capacity 
of 807o as against 577,, the world average for other types of reactors. 
CANDU reactors continued to dominate the listings for lifetime performance 
of world reactors of 500 MW and above. 
84. In conclusion, he wished to point out that Canada currently ranked 
as one of the world's largest producers of uranium, the world's largest 
exporter of uranium, the world's largest producer and exporter of bulk radioisotopes, 
the world's fifth largest exporter of nucler power reactors (in 
terms of generating capacity), and the operator of the world's sixth or 
seventh largest national nuclear power generation programme (depending upon 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 


page 26 


the criterion employed). It was also a matter of deep satisfaction to 
Canadians that the Canadian programme was entirely peaceful in nature and 
completely unrelated to any nuclear weapons programme. In short, the nuclear 
industry had come of age in Canada. 


85. But having said that, it had to be added that many of the Canadian 
achievements in the peaceful uses of the atom could not have come about 
without the extensive network of bilateral and multilateral co-operation 
which Canada enjoyed with others. In that network of ties, the Agency 
had long played a central role and key part in fostering the consistent 
expansion of peaceful nuclear activities; he hoped that Canada had had some 
hand in making the Agency the effective organization that it was. 
86. Mr. PESIC (Yugoslavia) said that the present juncture at which 
the General Conference of the IAEA was being held was marked by a complex 
political and economic situation. The chief concern was the arms race, 
which continued to develop at an ever-greater rate and encompassed more 
and more efficient means of destruction. It was also having an adverse 
effect on international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. 
Conditions for such co-operation were tending to deteriorate and prevented 
the developing countries from having free access to nuclear technology 
required to meet the needs of their economic and social programmes. An 
ever-greater number of countries were faced with the enormous cost of 
constructing and operating nuclear facilities, which created almost insuperable 
difficulties in implementing their national programmes. The decline in 
the international market and slow-down in programme implementation had brought 
about a state of imbalance in the development of certain countries with 
advanced technologies and in others had led to a crisis in the nuclear industry. 


87. Despite all those unfavourable developments it was encouraging to 
see the international co-operation, in all its forms, aimed at improving the 
quality of life. A good example of that type of co-operation was the 
relationship between the IAEA and FAO, which had been successfully pursued 
for 20 years. It was hoped that their collaboration in the application 
of nuclear energy in food and agriculture would continue fruitfully. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 27 


88. Yugoslavia attached great importance to the efficient functioning 
of the Agency, with which it had been co-operating successfully for 25 years. 
His delegation had had frequent occasion to express its gratitude to the 
Agency for the extensive assistance it had received in connection with the 
construction of the first Yugoslav power station at Krsko. He was happy 
to note that the co-operation was continuing just as fruitfully since the 
commissioning of that power station. The co-operation was particularly 
welcome in the area of nuclear safety, to which his country attached vital 
importance. In that connection he was highly satisfied by the results of 
the Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) mission, during which it had 
been possible to make a general inspection of the safety arrangements for 
the nuclear facility itself as well as verifying the efficiency and competence 
of the safety services. 
89. He wished to take the opportunity of expressing his thanks to the 
United States and other countries which had provided additional funds for 
financing footnote a_/ projects. Appreciation was also due to the Federal 
Republic of Germany for aid in the form of fuel elements for the Ljubljana 
Research Institute. 
90. At the present time Yugoslavia was preparing for the construction 
of a second nuclear power plant, which was to be the first of a series 
of the same type to be constructed later. The Yugoslav development programme 
provided for a nuclear plant with a capacity of 6000 MW(e). His country 
was therefore facing a difficult problem in selecting the most appropriate 
technology and the most favourable conditions for putting the programme 
into effect. That called for great sacrifices and at national level there 
would have to be considerable effort as well as understanding and respect 
for Yugoslav interests on the part of foreign partners. It was hoped that 
within that context the Agency would continue its technical assistance and 
support, which were so important for the implementation of such an ambitious 
programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in Yugoslavia. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 28 


91. The agenda for the General Conference contained a number of important 
items on which his delegation had already expressed its views in the Board 
of Governors, but some of them could be further commented on. Among them 
were the positive increase in overall funds intended for technical assistance. 
Promotional activites were a very important task for the Agency and it was 
with satisfaction that he noted a gradual increase in appropriations for 
that purpose. At the same time it had to be pointed out that the funds 
available still fell short of the real needs of the developing countries. 
It was essential to speed up the increase in technical assistance funds 
in order to meeting the justified requirements of the developing countries 
as well as to restore the balance necessary between the Agency's various 
activities. Above all, footnote a/ projects which were sound should be 
assigned the necessary funds; furthermore, Agency technical assistance should 
be financed from its Regular Budget. 


92. The question of protection of nuclear facilities intended for the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy against military attack, which had been 
raised by the Group of 77 at the previous year's General Conference, was 
an extremely important one. His delegation fully supported the examination 
of that issue not only in order to strengthen the safety of peaceful nuclear 
facilities in all countries, but likewise to encourage international confidence 
and understanding. 
93. On a number of previous occasions the General Conference had considered 
the matterof amending Article VI of the Agency's Statute with the aim of 
making the composition of the Board of Governors more representative. The 
agreement reached in the Board enabling the People's Republic of China to 
take part in the Board's deliberations on a permanent basis was to be 
welcomed. China's active participation would certainly have a favourable 
influence on its work. Nevertheless, the problem of bringing Article VI.A.2 
into line following the changes made in the membership of the Agency was 
still of topical relevance. His delegation would do everything it could 
to help find a balanced solution by which a consensus could be reached on 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 29 


that major issue. On a similar theme, the question of the staffing of the 
Agency had, in his delegation's view, been dealt with more fairly from the 
standpoint of regional and national representation. 


94. Since the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had first been set 
up, Yugoslavia had taken an active part in the search for agreement on the 
principles and arrangements for long-term supplies of equipment, technology 
and nuclear material could be assured on terms accepted and verified at 
international level. Despite certain headway, the results achieved so far 
by CAS had not borne out the hopes of the developing countries taking part 
in it. All concerned would have to make a more determined effort, keeping 
the original objectives and tasks of that Committee firmly in mind. 
95. A subject which was not on the agenda for the General Conference but 
which was closely linked with the Agency's functions and should be mentioned 
was that of the preparations for the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE). Those preparations had shown encouraging progress at the Preparatory 
Committee's fifth session in June and opened up prospects for a conference 
in 1986. The fruitful outcome of the work of that Committee, which had 
agreed on procedural arrangements as well as decisions regarding publication 
of the final documents, provided a basis for continuing the preparations 
for that conference, which would act as an important stimulus for the overall 
promotion of its objectives. It should be stressed that the success of that 
conference would also give impetus to the activities of the IAEA, which 
remained an irreplaceable instrument for international co-operation in the 
field of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
96. Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) said that nuclear energy was one of 
the most paradoxical forces of nature, because it could serve as a source 
of prosperity and progress, but could also be turned to the destruction 
of mankind. The immense benefits which nuclear energy could bring in many 
spheres were truly astonishing; but the threat under which the world's population 
lived as a consequence of the discoveries made in relation to the destructive 
applications of nuclear energy was terrifying, as was the accumulation of 
arms utilizing the potential of nuclear energy for annihilation. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 30 


97. However, the international community had had the wisdom to find ways 
of channelling the forces of nuclear energy and to ensure that the associated 
technology was used solely for the benefit of humankind. Prominant among 
the instruments established for that purpose was the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, and Venezuela wished to use the occasion to express its 
gratitude for the Agency's noble services to mankind and to reiterate its 
support for the Agency and for the ideals and objectives enshrined in the 
Statute. 
98. Unfortunately, man's longing to be liberated from the constant threat 
of annihilation through nuclear technology had not yet been satisfied; indeed, 
the day when it could be satisfied, and when the world could be confident 
that the atom would be used exclusively for peaceful purposes, seemed to 
be receding rather than approaching. 
99. In the coming two years, two international meetings closely associated 
with the two faces of nuclear technology were to be held: the Third NPT 
Review Conference and the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE), 
both of which should lead to decisions in harmony with the objectives of the 
Agericy, marking definite and positive steps towards freeing the world from 
the nuclear threat and limiting the utilization of nuclear energy to 
peaceful and beneficial purposes. The NPT Review Conference would, it was 
hoped, give rise to new ideas and initiatives designed to ensure that all 
parties to the Treaty fulfilled the obligations they had assumed in signing 
it. In particular, it was essential that the nuclear-weapon States should 
live up to the undertakings they had given, notably those set forth in 
Article VI. 
100. As time went on, the faith of the non-nuclear-weapon States in NPT 
was being progressively undermined as they realized that their own 
renunciation of sovereignty - in avoiding all actions which could result 
in a further horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons - was not being 
matched by the nuclear-weapon States, which had done nothing about their 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 31 


obligation to enter into negotiations in bona fide with the purpose of ending 
vertical proliferation. The future of NPT seemed all the more uncertain 
at a time when disarmament negotiations had been stopped almost altogether 
and there seemed to be no intention of resuming them in the foreseeable 
future. 


101. The NPT Review Conference would have to take steps to ensure the survival 
of the Treaty. If that endeavour was to succeed, the nuclear-weapon States 
would have to give evidence of their resolve to fulfil the obligations they 
had assumed under Article VI, thereby establishing a balance between the 
reciprocal obligations of the two categories of States parties to the Treaty. 
102. The Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) had a very close relationship with 
the work of the Agency. It should also give rise to new undertakings on the part 
of the nuclear powers, not only those possessing nuclear weapons but also 
those which had reached an advanced stage of development in peaceful nuclear 
technology, aimed at transferring nuclear technology and facilitating its 
use by the developing countries. An important place on the Conference's 
agenda was given to "principles of international co-operation in the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy", a question to which the Committee on Assurances 
of Supply (CAS) had given a great deal of attention. Another task of the 
Conference would be to establish as a universal principle the right of all 
mankind and all States to have access, without discrimination of any kind, 
to the benefits of the peaceful applications of nuclear technology. The 
results of the Conference should give fresh momentum to the activities of 
the IAEA. 
103. Turning to some of the questions on the agenda for the present session 
of the General Conference, he thanked the Director General for his important 
opening statement and said that Venezuela shared his concern with regard 
to the main problems confronting the Agency. Both the Director General of 
the IAEA and the Director-General of FAO had laid stress on the prospects 
offered by biotechnology and genetic engineering. Reference had been made 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 32 


to the Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology which a group of 
countries belonging to UNIDO were endeavouring to establish. In his capacity 
as Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for the new Centre, he (Mr. Taylhardat) 
wished to announce that the undertaking had received strong new momentum 
and support at the most recent meeting of the Committee the previous week; 
he was confident that good opportunities for fruitful co-operation between 
the Joint FAO/IAEA Division and the new Centre would emerge. 


104. For Venezuela, as for all developing countries, the most important 
part of the Agency's work was technical assistance and co-operation. Other 
countries, he knew, gave higher priority to safeguards. For that reason 
Venezuela had always insisted, in the Board, on the importance of maintaining 
an appropriate balance between the promotional and regulatory activities 
of the Agency. His delegation was pleased to note the expansion of technical 
co-operation, especially during the last three years, and could only praise 
the efficiency with which technical assistance was delivered. The new policies 
approved by the Board had contributed significantly to the good results, 
and his delegation wanted to reiterate its support of these policies, notably 
dynamic programming, multi-year programming and project evaluation. 


105. Venezuela was continuing to promote peaceful nuclear activities at 
home, laying particular stress on agricultural applications. A new Centre 
for Nuclear Research in Agriculture (CINAGRI) was to be set up with a view 
to finding solutions to a number of technical problems in agriculture; among 
other things, food irradiation and animal reproduction were areas of interest. 
106. in the area of public health, including human and environmental protection, 
Venezuela was establishing an appropriate code of regulations and standards 
which would facilitate control and supervision of the utilization of ionizing 
radiations. A national radiological emergency network and a dosimetry quality 
control laboratory were among other projects, and the country hoped soon 
to have facilities for the disposal of low- and medium-level waste. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 33 


107. Efforts were being made to optimize the use of the research reactor, 
and to that end a Centre for Nuclear Research and Development was being 
set up. Initially the Centre would be involved in neutron activation analysis, 
irradiation technology, radioisotope production and nuclear instrumentation. 
108. With regard to nuclear power, Venezuela was continuing site studies, 
examining different fuel cycle options and trying to determine the optimum 
expansion of the national grid in order to decide in good time whether it 
would be rational to introduce nuclear power as a complement to the many 
other sources of power available in the country. Work was also being continued 
on a national uranium prospecting plan. 
109. Venezuela was taking an active part, as one of the five countries 
of the Andean sub-region, in creating the "Andean Sub-Regional Committee 
for the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy", the purpose of which was to identify 
and execute scientific and technological projects of regional interest, 
especially in radiological protection, nuclear instrumentation, agricultural 
applications and irradiation technology. The programme in question was 
being extended by the Agency to the other countries of Latin America under 
what were called "Regional Co-operation Arrangements for the Promotion of 
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America" (ARCAL), the main objective 
of which was to optimize human and material resources in such a way as to 
enhance the nuclear development of each country of the region in its own 
sphere of interest, as a complement to the technical assistance received 
bilaterally by each participating State. 
110. The meeting of ARCAL countries held the previous week had produced 
highly satisfactory results. Specifically, the participants had ratified 
the contents of a document entitled "Regional Project in Latin America", 
notably the chapter on "Arrangements for a Regional Programme" according 
to which efforts would be concentrated on projects originating as part of 
the co-ordinating work of the Andean countries that had launched the programme. 
It was important to emphasize that some countries of the region were not 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 34 


just recipients but also donors of technical assistance, so that the 
programme offered a particularly fine opportunity for South-South co-operation. 
Generous contributions would be needed to ensure the programme's success. 


111. His delegation welcomed the fact that the target established for 
contributions to technical co-operation for 1984 had virtually been reached. 
However, the sums available were still not enough to satisfy all the needs 
of the developing countries. A comparison with the safeguards budget, which, 
notwithstanding a fundamental policy of zero real growth, had risen out of all 
proportion, was dispiriting, and Venezuela believed that it was essential 
to bring about a better balance between the Agency's two main fields of 
activity. 
112. Despite the serious financial difficulties it was experiencing, the 
Venezuelan Government was prepared to offer contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for both the current year and for 1985. 
113. At its twenty-seventh regular session, the General Conference had 
asked the Board to review the arrangements for the financing of safeguards 
and to conduct consultations on that subject among Member States. The Board 
had considered the matter at its meetings in February, June and September 1984, 
and the Chairman had held consultations with a view to finding a generally 
acceptable formula for the financing of safeguards. 
114. Venezuela had, during all that time, consistently reiterated its support 
for, and its belief in the value of, the safeguards system, which had helped 
to create a climate of confidence among nations in respect of the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy and would no doubt continue to do so. 
115. While it was clear that all States benefited from the safeguards system 
and were accordingly under an obligation to support it both morally and 
financially, the fact that the financial burden involved must be distributed 
unequally was also obvious: the greater part of the costs had to be borne 
by the developed countries which had reached an advanced stage in the 
utilization of nuclear energy. Any revision of the arrangements for financing 
safeguards had to take that fact into account. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 35 


116. Venezuela had submitted a draft resolution on the subject of the Board. 
In the opinion of the Group of 77, that draft resolution offered a formula 
which reflected in the best possible way the principles he had mentioned 
and protected the interests of the developing countries. He hoped, therefore, 
that in the course of the consultations to be held during the ensuing twoyear 
freeze period it would prove possible to arrive at a definitive solution 
based on the elements contained in the draft resolution submitted by Venezuela. 
117. Following the approval of the People's Republic of China for membership 
of the Agency at the previous session of the General Conference, he had 
stressed how important it would be to find an appropriate solution to the 
problem of assigning that country its just place on the Board of Governors. 
The requisite formula had, happily, been found, and the Chairman of the 
Board deserved congratulations for the ingenious way in which he had devised 
it, and for the patience and wisdom with which he had secured its acceptance 
by all. 
118. However, as the Venezuelan delegation had said, the accession of China 
to membership of the Agency highlighted the need to revise the provisions 
of Article VI as a whole. The time had now come for such a comprehensive 
revision. Perhaps the Conference could, at its present session, request 
the Board to carry out such a study. The mechanism for it might be a working 
group entrusted with the task of analysing the whole Article with a view 
to identifying the changes that had to be made and then making specific 
proposals to the Board. 
119. His delegation welcomed the fact that the Soviet Union and the Agency 
had completed negotiations on the text of an agreement ad referendum for 
implementation of the Soviet voluntary offer to place some of its peaceful 
nuclear installations under safeguards. One could only agree with the 
Director General about the importance of such agreements with the nuclearweapon 
States, which demonstrated the possibility of in situ verification 
within the territories of the nuclear powers. Such a demonstration of 
confidence in the Agency's inspection system gave hope that a similar system 
could eventually play a role in the verification of nuclear disarmament. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 36 


120. Mr. APEBARI (Nigeria) cormended the Secretariat for producing 
a very readable annual report for 1983, and a very informative report on 
the Agency's technical co-operation activities in 1983. His delegation 
had carefully examined those reports and was glad to note the expansion 
in the area of technical co-operation with developing countries. That was 
a positive step, for it was only by increasing the number of technically 
sound projects that nuclear technology could be effectively acquired within 
those countries. Of particular interest was the application of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, medicine and industry. The extrabudgetary 
"Bicot" programme in Nigeria, in which the sterile insect technique was 
used to control the tsetse fly, had made impressive progress. His Government 
also intended to embark upon a programme of food preservation under the 
Agency's technical co-operation programme. 


121. At the same time, he was worried by the fact that the financing of 
technical assistance and co-operation programmes was neither assured nor 
predictable. Although at its twenty-fifth regular session the General 
Conference had adopted resolution 388, by which it recognized the need for 
technical assistance to be funded through the Regular Budget or through 
other comparably predictable and assured resources, it was disappointing 
that little progress had been made. He believed that in the same way as 
the regulatory functions of the Agency were funded assuredly and prectictably, 
the promotional responsibilities, particularly as concerned the developing 
countries, should similarly be financed on an assured and predictable basis. 


122. Welcoming the People's Republic of China to its first regular session 
of the General Conference, he recalled that at the June session of the Board 
the Nigerian delegation had co-sponsored the amendment of Article VI.A.1 
in order to facilitate China's admission to membership of the Board of Governors 
and in so doing had been motivated by a sense of fair play. Unfortunately, 
however, that sense of fair play had not been shared by some Member States 
in the matter of the eight-year-old proposal to amend Article VI.A.2. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 37 


Predictably, that question was now on the agenda for the present Conference. 
Seven resolutions on the same issue had already been adopted, repeatedly 
expressing the desire for fairer representation on the Board of Governors 
for the geographic regions of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia. The 
arguments in favour were sound and did not contradict any precedents. Contrary 
to the views of those who opposed the amendment of the Article, he was 
convinced that the adoption of the proposal could only enhance the Board's 
efficiency. It would be a perpetuation of injustice if, after eight years, 
the resolution on Article VI.A.2 was now replaced by another on the whole 
of Article VI, as was now proposed by some Member States. 


123. in accordance with the request by the last year's General Conference, 
in operative paragraph 5 of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408, the Board of 
Governors had submitted a comprehensive report on the implementation of 
that resolution. He welcomed that factual and useful document, and 
appreciated the efforts being made by the Agency to implement the resolution 
in question. , 
124. In operative paragraph 2, the General Conference demanded that South 
Africa should submit all its nuclear installations and facilities to 
inspection by the Agency. As was clear from the report, however, South 
Africa had refused to agree to full-scope safeguards in flagrant disregard 
of the resolution. The representatives of the racist regime had made no 
secret of their unwillingness to discuss it and only desired to resume 
discussion of the application of safeguards to their semi-commercial 
enrichment plant. The actions of the racist regime of South Africa had 
to be seen within the context of the solemn declaration by the Organization 
of African Unity in 1963, supported by the United Nations, that the African 
continent should remain a denuclearized zone. That declaration had been 
undermined by the development of South Africa's nuclear weapons capability. 
In a desperate and futile effort to suppress popular liberation forces and to 
maintain its racist domination in South Africa, the racist regime holding power 
in that country had in fact begun developing a nuclear-weapons capability. That 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 


page 38 


fact posed great danger for Africa and the world at large. It was essential to 
give the matter serious consideration especially for the General Conference in 
the light of the Security Council's resolution 554 of 17 August 1984, which 
declared null and void the new racist constitution of South Africa and elections 
held under it. 


125. The success of any organization was measured by the extent to which 
it attained its goals and objectives. The Agency's objectives, as clearly 
set forth in Article II of the Statute, were to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world. If the racist regime of South Africa intended to deny those 
high ideals and seek to promote its non-peaceful nuclear activities, it 
had to be condemned. He therefore opposed participation by South Africa 
in the technical working groups of the Agency. His delegation rejected 
the argument that excluding South Africa from the technical working groups 
constituted a denial of the rights and privileges of universal membership. 
Inasmuch as a Member State defied world opinion, it deserved to be divested 
of such rights and privileges. 


126. There had been a serious omission in the report on South Africa's 
nuclear capabilities submitted to the General Conference. According to 
the records of the South African Hansard, the Prime Minister, P.W. Botha, 
was quoted as having said that enquiries had been received from a number of 
European countries regarding the possibility of establishing a depository 
in South West Africa for radioactive waste. Such requests had been received 


since 1979 and the Prime Minister had informed Parliament on 4 July 1984, 


that those offers had been declined. 


127. It would appear, however, that South Africa was going to exploit its 
illegal occupation of Namibia to dump radioactive waste in an international 
territory for which the United Nations Council for Namibia, a Member State 
of the IAEA, was responsible. That development was regrettable coming at 
a time when the Agency was processing the Namibian application for membership; 
it had taken place without consulting the United Nations Council for Namibia, 
or the African Member States of the IAEA. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 39 


128. His delegation expressed its appreciation of the work of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply (CAS), and looked forward to the time when the 
principles of international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy 
would become a reality. In that regard, he noted the work of the Preparatory 
Committee of the Third NPT Review Conference. A major concern was Article III 
of that Treaty, which specifically enjoined States party to NPT not to 
provide nuclear material or equipment to any non-nuclear-weapon State unless 
subject to the safeguards required by that Article. That provision seemed to 
be applied only selectively, depending on the type of non-nuclear-weapon State 
involved in the transfer. For a genuinely fair Treaty, both vertical and 
horizontal proliferation had to be prevented. 
129. Finally, the progress made at the fifth session of the Preparatory 
Committee for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) was encouraging. 
With enough political will, the progress would be sustained, leading 
ultimately to a time when nuclear energy would be used for exclusively peaceful 
purposes. 
130. Mr. CHUTHASMIT (Thailand) said that his delegation welcomed the 
statement by Dr. Edouard Saouma, Director-General of FAO and was glad to 
see the close collaboration between the IAEA and FAO. As an agricultural 
country, Thailand noted with satisfaction that the IAEA gave high priority 
to agricultural development. As he had himself seen during a recent visit 
to the Agency's laboratory as Seibersdorf, the application of nuclear 
techniques in food and agriculture had created extensive opportunities for 
crop plant improvement and food preservation by irradiation. 
131. Thailand had long been a member of the Regional Co-operative Agreement 
for Asia and the Pacific (RCA). It was gratifying to note that in recent 
years the activities of RCA had been increasing and that fifteen projects 
were now being conducted within the framework of it. His country was 
particularly pleased with the Agreement of 1980 establishing the Asian 
Regional Co-operative Project on Food Irradiation, and had agreed to its 
extension for three years from 1984-87. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 40 


132. Referring to the Agency's programme for technical co-operation with 
developing countries, he noted with satisfaction that in recent years technical 
co-operation activities had expanded considerably. The number of projects 
had risen from about 500 in 1982, to about 800 projects in 1984. The amount 
of technical assistance had increased from US $18.5 million in 1983 
to US $22.5 million in the present year. This was a healthy increase and 
beneficial to all recipient countries, including his own. 
133. His delegation was highly appreciative of the technical assistance 
which the Agency had provided to date for Thailand, particularly in the 
years 1983 and 1984. Relations between the Agency and the relevant Thai 
authorities regarding various technical assistance projects had always been 
smooth and useful. He also wished to express his gratitude to the Government 
of the United States of America for having agreed to finance two footnote a/ 
projects in Thailand on food irradiation and on nuclear physics equipment. 
In that connection he had pleasure in announcing that his country's voluntary 
contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1985 
would be US $20 800. 
134. Turning to the financing of safeguards, which was again on the agenda 
for the General Conference, there had long been discussions on who should 
bear the burden of the cost of safeguards. To some, mostly developing countries, 
safeguards operations seemed too costly absorbing funds that could have 
been used for other Agency programmes, while to others, mostly developed 
countries, safeguards were not sufficiently extensive. Several formulas 
had been submitted for the consideration of the Board of Governors but, since 
no formula had received full approval, the Board had postponed a decision. 
Thailand would be willing to accept any formula agreeable to all other Member 
States, but in the absence of full agreement, it shared the stand taken 
by several other countries and by the Board that the existing arrangements 
for financing of safeguards should continue temporarily. The safeguards 
system, however, had to function properly, since it was essential for the 
creation of a climate of international confidence. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.261 
page 41 


135. Both the Agency and the whole world could feel more confident now 
that China had been admitted to the Agency and had accepted the safeguards 
system. Being one of the most advanced in the technology of atomic energy, 
China should also be given a seat on the Board of Governors. It was with 
this aim in mind that Thailand had co-sponsored a draft resolution, together 
with twenty other countries, for the amendment of Article VI.A.1 of the 
Statute, the purpose of which was to increase the number of countries most 
advanced in nuclear technology on the Board from nine to ten. That draft 
resolution had been unanimously adopted by the Board and it was hoped that the 
General Conference would also give it full approval. 
136. Mr. MORSHED (Bangladesh) said that the 1984 General Conference 
would be memorable because the People's Republic of China was participating 
as a full Member for the first time. That had been easily the most momentus 
event for the IAEA during the previous few years. For the developing countries 
it added a new dimension to the character and functioning of the organization 
and especially for least developed countries (LDCs) such as Bangladesh, 
which believed that the People's Republic of China would make outstanding 
permanent contributions in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and hoped 
that China would soon participate in the Regional Co-operative Agreement 
for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology (RCA). 


137. The 1984 General Conference also had a special significance for Bangladesh 
in that it was taking place in the midst of preparations for the Third NPT 
Review Conference and that it appeared an appropriate moment to reflect 
on the results of his country's accession to the Treaty. Emphasis needed 
to be placed in that context not so much on the issue of security but on the 
scope of the technological and economic benefits derived from the Treaty 
by the non-nuclear-weapon States, which had by no means fulfilled the desires 
of those States in their entirety. 
138. Document GC(XXVIII)/718 showed that in 1981-82 7% of the total funds 
for technical co-operation had been allocated to LDCs, 317 to developing 
countries with nuclear power programmes and 62% to developing countries 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.261 
page 42 


in the intermediate category. Those figures were depressing in the light 
of the present situation in most LDCs. The total oil imports of Bangladesh, 
for example, came to roughly 1.3 million tonnes, representing about 40% 
of commercial energy consumption for a population of 93 million. Those 
imports accounted for an outflow of scarce foreign exchange second only 
to food imports. By way of comparison a country such as Austria with its 
own energy resources and a population of seven million, imported roughly 
nine million tonnes of oil, nearly eight times as much as Bangladesh. 


139. Policy-makers in Bangladesh had been convinced that without a 
major change in the energy situation in countries such as theirs, no real 
progress could be made in development. It was in that context that it had 
acceded to NPT in the belief that it could bring about a substantial change 
in the power energy situation in countries such as Bangladesh. In the seven 
years since accession, that promise had come to naught with collapsing 
commodity prices, progressive decreases in governmental aid, escalating 
capital costs of projects and basic uncertainties about the transfer of 
technology in addition to unproductive controversies over nuclear safety 
and waste management. 
140. He therefore hoped that the Third NPT Review Conference would show 
that the present situation was not necessarily preordained; the delegations 
of Bangladesh and Mexico had in fact taken an initiative in that sense in 
the meetings of the Preparatory Committee. 
141. Congratulating the Director General on his balanced and objective 
statement that offered some ray of hope for the developing countries, he 
particularly welcomed the upward trend in the technical co-operation programme. 
His delegation reiterated its fervent hope and justified expectation that 
that programme would increasingly be financed from the Regular Budget. 
The Bangladesh delegation also wished to convey its sincere appreciation 
to the Director General and to Member States contributing to the study on 
small and medium power reactors, in which his Government intended to participate 
fully. 
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
April 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Wednesday, 26 September 1984, at 8.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. DI BIASE (Uruguay) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


7 
General debate and annual report 
for 1983 (continued) 125 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 1 - 19 
Romania 20 - 28 
Sudan 29 - 37 
Hungary 38 - 52 
Philippines 53 - 62 
Poland 63 - 74 
Algeria 75 - 92 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 93 - 102 
Bulgaria 103 - 118 
Peru 119 - 125 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 16 October 1984. 


**/ GC(XXVIII)/730. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-977 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/713 and Add.1 and 2) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. KOLYKHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
Conference was holding its twenty-eighth session in an increasingly complex 
international situation, brought about by the efforts of the imperialist forces 
to attain military superiority by amassing gigantic weapons arsenals, turning 
outer space into a new arena for the arms race and installing new first-strike 
nuclear rockets in Western Europe. 
2. The dangerous evolution of the world situation was giving rise to legitimate 
alarm and concern among the peoples of the world. The quickening pace of 
the arms race and the real danger of its being extended to new spheres and 
escaping from control was bound to enhance the risk of nuclear war. People 
everywhere were grasping the fact that urgent measures were needed to halt the 
drift towards disaster. A whole set of specific measures to deal with that 
vitally important problem, aimed at limiting nuclear armaments and ultimately 
eliminating them altogether, had been put forward by the Warsaw Pact countries. 
3. The measures being proposed by the Soviet Union and other countries of the 
socialist community were aimed at resolving the most important question of the 
nuclear age: whether the energy of the atom would serve to satisfy the everincreasing 
needs of mankind's social and economic development or whether it 
would transform the planet into a barren desert. 
4. Obviously, international co-operation in the use of atomic energy on a 
genuinely wide scale could develop successfully only in conditions of peace, 
confidence between States and limitation of the arms race, especially nuclear 
arms. The Agency should make its contribution to the solution of that problem. 
5. The Byelorussian SSR had always supported international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and would continue to do so on the assumption 
that such co-operation could not and should not be a channel for proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. It therefore attached particular importance to 
the Agency's regulatory functions, which were its most important activities in 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 3 


the field of non-proliferation. His delegation greatly welcomed the increased 
responsiveness and reliability of the Agency safeguards system as a result of 
the continual development of technical resources including data processing and 
the improvement in the qualifications of Professional safeguards staff. 


6. At present, the Agency safeguards system was widely recognized as being 
the only system of its type. His delegation was convinced that, with its 
extensive experience in the field, the Agency would make a valuable contribution 
to the preparations for and holding of the Third NPT Review Conference. 
Attaching as it did considerable importance to the Agency's participation in 
preparations for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE), the 
Byelorussian SSR was in favour of linking co-operation with the nuclear nonproliferation 
regime. 
7. His delegation welcomed the Agency's efforts in connection with the 
drafting of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
It also approved of the work of the Committee on the Assurances of Supply 
(CAS), although the Committee still had to find solutions to many important 
and complex questions. Its work would be considered successful if it were to 
result in the further development of reliable international co-operation in 
atomic energy on the basis of equality, with the strengthening of the nonproliferation 
regime as an essential condition. 
8. The Annual Report for 1983 showed that the Agency had made a substantial 
contribution to the further development of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, and his delegation generally welcomed the 
Agency's work over the last year and approved the Annual Report. 
9. In view of the importance of technical assistance, the Byelorussian 
Government had decided to increase its voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1985 to 75 000 roubles in national 
currency. It believed that the success of technical co-operation depended to 
a large extent on its provision in the form of large-scale, long-term projects, 
which represented an effective means of assisting developing countries to use 
nuclear energy for economic and social progress. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 4 


10. The programme for 1985 and 1986 and budget for 1985 were on the whole 
consistent with the Agency's objectives and tasks, with the capacity of the 
organization to fulfil those tasks and with the wishes of Member States. The 
programme and budget document showed that one of the main scientific and technical 
activities of the Agency was the development of a set of measures relating 
to nuclear power. The importance of that activity was continually increasing 
as a result of the further expansion in the role played by a nuclear power in 
the contemporary world. The Byelorussian SSR supported the Agency's work in 
that sphere. It also supported the work of the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) and co-operation on nuclear data. 


11. One of the Agency's most important scientific and technical programmes 
relating to nuclear power was that on nuclear safety, and his delegation had 
a high opinion of the Agency's work on nuclear and radiation safety. 
12. The Agency was engaged in the extensive task of collection, evaluation 
and annual publication of operating experience with proven types of nuclear 
power station. At the same time it was doing very useful work on design 
criteria, operating experience, safety requirements and reliability of liquidmetal-
cooled and gas-cooled fast breeder reactors, high-temperature gas-cooled 
reactors and also nuclear heating plants and dual-purpose nuclear plants. 
13. In world nuclear power station design and operating practice, use was 
increasingly being made of computers for monitoring and control not only of 
individual systems and devices but of whole stations, which made it possible 
to optimize operating parameters and, in particulcr, to increase operating 
safety. The Agency was doing some work on that topic. However, the time had 
come to expand such work by the collection, compilation and systematic presentation 
of data and experience accumulated in Member States on the development 
of computer algorithms, programs and systems for nuclear power station monitoring 
and control with a view to ensuring the required degree of reliability, 
responsiveness and safety. 
14. Byelorussia now had considerable scientific and technical potential. At 
scientific research and teaching institutes and universities in the republic, 
fundamental and applied research was being done on practically all aspects of 
science and technology, which was contributing to the high growth rates in 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 5 


industrial and agricultural production. Considerable successes had been 
achieved in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The development of such work 
had taken various forms. In order to supply the city of Minsk with electrical 
power and heat, a dual-purpose nuclear plant consisting of two WWER-1000 
pressurized-water reactor units - a type which had proved its economic 
viability - was being constructed. There were plans to construct nuclear 
heating plants and dual-purpose nuclear plants near other large towns in the 
republic. 


15. In view of the special significance of fast breeder reac'tor design and 
development for the prospects of nuclear power expansion, experimental, 
research and design work with a view to constructing a demonstration 300 MW(e) 
power station with a gas-cooled fast breeder reactor was continuing in 
Byelorussia. A single-circuit layout with a gas-liquid cycle would use a 
coolant and operating medium new to power engineering, namely nitrogen 
tetroxide. The work was being performed jointly with the Ukrainian SSR and 
other Soviet republics and also with Poland, Hungary and Bulgaria. 
16. The further development of nuclear power in Byelorussia would be assisted 
by the recent directive from the Soviet Government with a view to ensuring a 
further expansion in nuclear electricity production and improvements in the 
structure of the fuel and energy balance in accordance with the country's 
Energy Programme. 
17. At the same time as work on nuclear power, intensive research was being 
done in the republic on the use of radiation in various branches of industry 
and medicine. In particular, the industrial technology for producing new 
construction materials, radiocatalytic and radiochemical processes for hydrocarbon 
compounds had been developed. The industrial-scale production of 
bacterial fertilizers using radiation sterilization had been mastered. Radiation 
techniques were being widely used in fundamental research on genetics and 
cytology, radiobiology and also on solid-state physics, electronics and both 
organic and inorganic chemistry, for which a research reactor, gamma devices, 
accelerators and other irradiators were being used. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page & 


18. In Byelorussia considerable attention was being paid to the development 
and widespread introduction into medical practice of effective techniques of 
radiotherapy and combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy using the newest 
irradiation and computer technology and also to the study of the effects of 
ionizing radiation on the animal and human organisms and of methods of protecting 
the genetic apparatus of cells. 
19. In conclusion, he expressed his conviction that the Agency would continue 
to receive wide recognition as an international organization which pooled the 
efforts of States in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
20. Mr. GROZA (Romania) said that the present session of the General 
Conference was being held at a time when mankind was passing through another 
period of severe tension which threatened the peace of the whole world. In a 
recent speech, the President of his country, Mr. Ceausescu, had stated that 
the existence of military blocs and the arms race - in particular that for 
nuclear weapons, which had assumed alarming proportions - were the causes of 
the steadily increasing danger of a new world war, which in the present circumstances 
would inevitably escalate into a nuclear war. The peoples of the world 
must be told openly that such a war would be a threat to the very existence of 
their civilizations and to life on Earth itself. The fundamental problem of 
the present time, therefore, was to halt the arms race and start disarming for 
the sake of the supreme right of people and nations to life, liberty, independence 
and peace. 
21. Romania regarded the deployment of missiles and other nuclear weapons on 
the territory of other States as a de facto proliferation of nuclear weapons 
and a violation of non-proliferation agreements and hence as an increase in 
the number of States possessing nuclear weapons. In view of the seriousness 
of the nuclear threat, every effort should be made to withdraw nuclear 
weapons from the territory of other States and to reduce their number in the 
nuclear-weapon States, and it was to be hoped that the forthcoming Third NPT 
Review Conference would analyse the existing situation and take steps in the 
right direction. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 7 


22. As everyone knew, the inequalities of economic and social life had 
divided the world into rich and poor countries. The present world economic 
crisis and the policy of extremely high interest rates had aggravated the 
situation and widened the gap between the industrialized and the developing 
countries, inter alia, in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
A new approach to the problem of underdevelopment was needed and a new international 
economic order must be established on the basis of justice and 
equality between States. The rich countries must recognize that it would not 
be possible to resolve the economic crisis and attain world stability unless 
underdevelopment was abolished and all the world's peoples were given access 
to the achievements of science and technology. 
23. The United Nations system had an important role to play in enabling all 
peoples to participate on an equal footing in solving the great and complex 
problems of the modern world for the sake of detente, independence and peace. 
The organizations of the United Nations system, including the IAEA, should be 
further strengthened so that they could help in abolishing underdevelopment, 
creating a new economic order and increasing the contribution of science and 
technology to the economic and social development of nations, in particular 
by the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
24. The Agency's activities during the past year had been successful as 
always. The technical assistance and co-operation programme had contributed, 
with its limited resources, to the transfer of technology, to the training 
of national staff, and to the expansion of research and the application of its 
results in the economies of the recipient countries. The nuclear power programme 
was proving ever more effective in satisfying the growing needs of the 
developing countries, and other programmes too had produced valuable results, 
for instance those relating to the applications of nuclear techniques, nuclear 
safety, and scientific and technical information and documentation. 
25. His delegation had carefully examined the programme for 1985-86 and considered 
that it took due account of the most important trends in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and of both developing and developed Member States' 
priorities with regard to nuclear power, to the applications of isotopes and 
radiation in industry, agriculture, medicine, biology, hydrology, etc. and to 
technical assistance and staff training. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 8 


26. However, the interests of the developing countries would be better served 
if the Agency could utilize its resources more effectively and achieve significant 
economies in its administrative expenditures and in the cost of safeguards. 
His delegation would like the budget for 1985 to remain at the same 
level as the one for 1984. 
27. His country was striving to continue its economic and social development, 
and its plans for the period 1986-90 placed emphasis on broadening the energy 
base by drawing on all available primary resources and by accelerating the 
nuclear power plant construction programme. Of the total electricity output 
of 95-97 million MW.h planned for 1986-90, 21-22 million MW-h, or 20%, were to 
be generated by nuclear plants. Work on achieving the technological conditions 
for the optimal functioning of the nuclear power plants still under construction 
would be conducted concurrently with research on new generations of reactors, 
including fast breeders, and on controlled thermonuclear fusion. 
28. The Agency's co-operation with his country during the past year under 
technical assistance projects relating to nuclear power, isotope and radiation 
applications and advanced nuclear physics research had been valuable and 
fruitful, and he wished to thank the Agency for its support and to stress once 
again the particular importance which his country attached to the Agency as an 
aid to the developing countries in the field of nuclear science and technical 
co-operation. 
29. Mr. EL AGIB (Sudan) commended the Director General's statement 
clearly describing the various activities of the Agency, which had acted as 
catalysts for closer co-operation between Member States. He urged the Agency 
to expand and intensify the assistance provided by States which were able to 
do so in the nuclear and technical fields and to meet the needs of countries 
requiring such assistance in order to deal with urgent problems in agriculture, 
medicine and industry. 
30. Welcoming the statement of the Director General of FAO, which was based 
on realities such as those faced by a country like Sudan, he expressed his 
confidence that co-operation between the IAEA and FAO would positively benefit 
the agricultural development plans and projects of Sudan by offering modern 
scientific methods for the solution of its problems. 

GG(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 9 


31. Congratulating the two organizations on the anniversary of the Joint 
FAO/IAEA Division, he pointed out that 20 years of fruitful activity of that 
Division demonstrated what the peaceful uses of atomic energy could do in the 
service of mankind to solve problems of hunger, thirst and poverty. Sudan 
had benefited greatly from the establishment of that Division, and had carried 
out a number of research and other projects on agriculture and animal husbandry. 
Such projects covered the breeding of pest- and disease-resistant high-yield 
crops, the study of fertilizer uptake and utilization by plants and periods of 
application of fertilizers, analyses of pesticide and herbicide residues in 
food crops to remove their harmful effects and the study of water regimes of 
various crops with a view to the optimum utilization of irrigation water. It 
had also undertaken projects on livestock breeding, improvement in animal production 
and nutrition and control of harmful diseases. His country would 
always be willing to host regional training courses on those topics, and was 
to hold a course in animal science. 


32. Sudan was endowed with vast arable lands and different climates suitable 
for growing a variety of crops using irrigation and rain-water. Its scientists, 
in collaboration with Agency experts, had prepared a comprehensive programme 
on the use of nuclear technology in food and agriculture. Local facilities had 
been provided, and it was hoped that friendly countries would make available 
the foreign exchange component of funds needed for the vital project of direct 
benefit to the country's development plans. 
33. Over the preceding years Sudan had gained much from the Agency's technical 
co-operation and assistance programme not only in agriculture but also 
for projects on applied sciences, groundwater, health, instrument maintenance 
and radiological protection. He wished to express his gratitude to the 
United States for agreeing to finance the gamma camera project, which would 
be helpful in diagnostics and treatment, and to the United Kingdom, which had 
provided maintenance services for electronic instrumentation and had set up 
an electronics workshop. His Government was looking forward to continued cooperation 
with those and other friendly countries in the transfer of that 
important technology. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 10 


34. The State of Israel was a permanent source of grave danger to the Middle 
East, thus threatening world peace and security. Apart from continuing to 
carry out its aggressive and barbarous plans against the Palestinian people, 
occupying southern Lebanon and constantly threatening the other States in the 
region, it persisted in its arrogance by refusing to sign the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty and to place its nuclear facilities under the Agency's international 
safeguards. 
35. The Big Powers attached great importance to strengthening the Agency so 
that it would fulfil the objectives for which it had been set up, especially 
the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and had made various 
efforts to convince States which were not party to NPT to become so. He hoped 
that those Powers, which were concerned about the Agency and hence for world 
peace and security, should also restrain that tiny State and make it abide by 
the ideals of the international community. They should do likewise in respect 
of the repressive and racist State in southern Africa. The international 
community should be aware of the extent of the threat posed by the noncompliance 
with those ideals and international instruments on the part of 
Israel and South Africa. 
36. As the Chairman of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), he was conscious of acute regional problems in an area 
extending from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean, especially those of drought 
and desertification. Those problems could only be solved by the application 
of modern techniques to explore and exploit underground water resources, 
including probable subterranean rivers in the Nile Valley and elsewhere in the 
region. In that connection, UNEP was carrying out studies by remote sensing 
techniques and the IAEA, too, had various projects on groundwater hydrology. 
37. In conclusion, he appealed to the Agency and other organizations and 
friendly countries to prepare a comprehensive scientific plan for water 
resources survey and manpower training. While the ancient peoples in the 
Nile Valley and North Africa knew about surface storage of water, modern 
science and technology had the challenging task of building underground 
reservoirs and artificial oases to bring water to the thirsty and food to the 
hungry. Nuclear science and space technology should combine their efforts for 
the welfare of mankind instead of threatening ruin and destruction. 

GG(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 11 


38. Mr. OSZTROVSZKY (Hungary) welcomed the delegation of the People's 
Republic of China which was participating for the first time in the General 
Conference and expressed his conviction that it would make a valuable contribution 
to the Conference's work. 
39. He recalled that in his speech in the General Debate at the twenty-seventh 
regular session of the General Conference he had expressed his concern at the 
aggravation of the international situation and the hope that it would improve. 
It had, however, worsened and the arms race had intensified. The forces which 
wanted to upset the balance that had been established in the .world were trying 
to place nuclear energy in the service of destruction rather than of wellbeing 
and social progress and were thereby increasing the danger of nuclear 
war. The Agency's activities designed to prevent the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons by creating the prerequisites for improving the international climate 
and strengthening confidence between States were therefore extremely important. 
The Agency's safeguards system played a major role in achieving those objectives 
and the Department of Safeguards should be congratulated on its work. 
40. The first unit of Hungary's first power plant had been functioning stably 
and reliably during its first year of operation. It had produced about 
2500 million kWh of electricity although its planned production had been only 
1600 million kWh. The availability had been 95.6%. 
41. 
Erection of the second unit of the nuclear power plant at Paks had been 
completed and the reactor had gone critical on 26 August. It was planned that 
in 1984 the nuclear power plant should produce 3000 million kWh of electricity. 
42. Routine radiation monitoring of the plant's environment was carried out 
and no noticeable deviations from the background level had been detected. 
Monitoring of radioactive waste from the Paks power plant and of the levels 
of radioactivity was the responsibility not only of the plant authorities but 
also of various other competent authorities which formed a co-ordinated system 
and used a computer to collect, process and evaluate the data. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 12 


43. Hungary thought very highly of the Agency's work on establishing basic 
principles for radiation protection and improving operational safety of nuclear 
power plants. The Agency's "Basic Safety Standards" were due to be published 
in Hungarian and were being taken into account in the decrees issued by 
ministries and departments, particularly those issued by the Ministry of Health 
with regard to radiation protection of personnel and the population. The 
Agency's Safety Standards Series were of great help in planning national safety 
regulations and in the work of Hungary's regulatory bodies. 
44. The Incident Reporting System (IRS) could be a useful means of improving 
operational safety of nuclear power plants. Technical meetings had been held 
in Hungary at which the links between national information systems and the 
Agency's IRS had been discussed. As in previous years, co-operation had continued 
between Hungary and the Agency in the matter of safeguards. He was 
pleased to note that the Agency's inspectorate had endeavoured Co reduce the 
inconveniences of the safeguards system to a minimum. 
45. Hungary was continuing to transfer its national system of nuclear materials 
accounting under Agency safeguards on to a computer. There was reason to 
believe that the use of a computer speeded up the process and made it much 
cheaper than in many other countries. Hungary was ready to share its 
experience in that field with any countries which were interested. 
46. The Institute of Isotopes of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences and the 
Central Institute of Physics Research had jointly developed a telescope equipped 
with a photographic camera and television camera for examining the surface of 
fuel elements in the fuel decontamination vessel and the structural components 
of the reactor core during operation. 
47. The National Scientific Research Institute of Radiobiology and Radioecology 
had participated in the Agency's co-ordinated research programme to study the 
radioecology of the Danube. In the course of the research, the Institute, with 
the collaboration of the Agency's laboratory at Seibersdorf, had organized 
intercalibration of methods for processing samples and measurements taken by 
national laboratories participating in the programme. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 13 


48. The Institute of Isotopes had developed a technetium 99 isotope generator 
using a target obtained in a reactor with low neutron flux. The problem of 
supplying technetium to medical institutes in Hungary which had only research 
reactors had thereby been solved. The generator had been developed under a 
special Agency programme based on a research agreement and he believed it could 
be used to improve the level of health care in developing countries. 
49. Construction of a cyclotron and cyclotron laboratory for the purposes of 
studying the structure of the atomic nucleus and the production of short-lived 
radioisotopes had just been completed, with the Agency's collaboration, at the 
Institute of Nuclear Research in Debrecen. Under the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, a number of laboratory instruments such as manipulators, 
scintillation detectors and a spectrometer had been provided in addition to 
part of the basic equipment. 
50. Hungary greatly valued the Agency's co-ordination activities in matters 
relating to radioactive waste management and in particular the development of 
the IAEA Code of Practice on the Management of Radioactive Waste from Nuclear 
Power Plants. 
51. Hungary had always supported and would continue to support the Agency's 
activities in the field of technical assistance and co-operation and had consistently 
provided financial support for the programme insofar as its relatively 
modest means permitted. Hungary would make a voluntary contribution of 
2.9 million forints to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1985. 
52. The Hungarian delegation approved the Agency's Annual Report for 1983. 
53. 
Mr. SIA20N (Philippines) noted with satisfaction that 1984 was the 
twentieth anniversary of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation 
Applications of Atomic Energy for Food and Agricultural Development and 
expressed his strong support for the continuation of its work. The Joint 
Division had contributed to increased agricultural production, the reduction 
of post-harvest losses and the minimization of food and environmental pollution 
by fostering applications of isotopes and radiation relating to food and 
agriculture through a joint FAO/IAEA effort aimed at improving the ability of 
Member States, and particularly developing countries, to apply effective 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 


page 14 


nuclear techniques in research and development. Within the RCA framework, his 
country had been closely associated with the joint programme and in particular 
with the sub-programmes on food preservation and plant breeding and genetics. 


54. The past year had seen a considerable amount of co-operation between his 
country and the Agency. In addition to traditional activities involving technical 
assistance, research contracts and safeguards inspections, the Agency 
had been extensively involved in the safety aspects of the first Philippine 
nuclear power plant which was now in the final phases of construction. Also, 
the Agency had sent an OSART mission to his country in response to a req-uest 
from his Government. The mission had been extremely useful for the Philippine 
Atomic Energy Commission and he expected that another such mission would be 
requested before the entry into operation of his country's first nuclear power 
plant. OSART missions helped not only to ensure the safe operation of nuclear 
power plants but also to allay public fears with regard to nuclear power. 
That was particularly true in developing countries where the Agency was seen 
as an impartial and competent body. The OSART mission to his country was 
significant because for the first time a large number of the members of the 
team came from developing countries. The presence of nuclear experts from 
developing countries in such missions demonstrated to other developing 
countries the possibility of sharing the benefits of nuclear power. His delegation 
welcomed the positive outcome of the recent nuclear referendum in 
Switzerland and the decision of many developed countries to continue expanding 
their nuclear power programmes. Those developments should serve to convince 
many developing countries that nuclear power was not what anti-nuclear groups 
had pictured it to be. 
55. As a developing country currently constructing its first nuclear power 
plant, the Philippines attached great importance to the Agency's activities in 
nuclear safety and radiation. The NUSS programme and the Agency's work on the 
operational safety of nuclear installations were especially worthy of mention 
in that context. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 15 


56. His delegation was happy to note that the resources available to the 
Agency's technical co-operation programme had reached almost US $35 million by 
the end of 1983, representing a 25% increase over the 1982 level. His delegation 
was also pleased to observe that delivery of technical assistance had 
improved significantly in 1983, increasing by 15.77c compared with 1982. Those 
two factors together with the increased support given by developing countries 
to the technical co-operation programme had made 1983 a successful year for 
technical co-operation. It was a matter of regret, however, that in 1983 the 
share of footnote a/ projects made operational decreased to 65.4% compared with 
71.8% in 1982 and 80.5% in 1981. It was disturbing that in 1983 only five 
Member States had provided extrabudgetary funds for footnote a_/ projects. In 
1982, ten countries had contributed. It should be recalled in that connection 
that the First NPT Review Conference in 1975 had specifically recommended that 
footnote a_/ projects requested by developing countries party to NPT be made 
operational. He hoped that a larger share of footnote a_/ projects would be 
made operational in 1984. 
57. While the Agency's technical co-operation programme had progressed over 
the years, the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on that subject contained 
important recommendations for further improvements. His delegation strongly 
supported, in particular, the recommendations that the three-year cycle for 
establishing targets for voluntary contributions should be extended and that 
the Agency should shift from the concept of "multi-year projects" to that of 
"multi-year programming". The Board of Governors might wish to consider a 
five-year cycle for establishing targets for voluntary contributions. 
58. He regretted that the Board of Governors had been unable to agree on a 
financing arrangement for safeguards for a period beyond two years. As long 
as there were no satisfactory financial arrangements for safeguards, the 
Board's annual consideration of the safeguards programme would be controversial. 
It was likely that the degree of controversy would increase with the voluntary 
submission of the additional facilities of nuclear-weapon States to Agency 
safeguards. So far, the practice of extending the safeguards financing 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 16 


arrangements at the last minute had worked. However, the Agency might one day 
face a situation where the Board was unable to reach a last-minute agreement 
because of extraneous political issues. It was time for the nuclear-weapon 
States to decide whether the political, military and commercial value of the 
international safeguards system was not worth more than the few million dollars 
they contributed to the annual safeguards budget. 


59. The General Conference might once again be called upon to take a stand on 
the principle of universality of membership, which his delegation felt sure 
the Conference would reaffirm. That principle must, however, be reflected in 
the equitable representation of Member States on the Board and in the 
equitable representation of nationals of Member States in the Secretariat. 
It was somewhat disturbing to note that those who strongly advocated universality 
of membership seemed much less interested in the other two questions. 
Member States belonging to the African region and to the Middle East and 
South Asian (MESA) region had since 1977 been asking for additional seats on 
the Board to improve their present share, namely 20.57 and 22.9%, respectively. 
Those figures compared with an average of 31.27=. Eight years later, no solution 
was in sight. Today, even the proposal calling for one extra seat for 
Africa and one additional seat for MESA no longer seemed to command sufficient 
support. 


60. The number of nationals from developing countries in the Agency's 
Professional staff had increased from 74, or 15.47, in 1981 to 109, or 19.967,, 
in September 1984. That increase certainly represented an improvement, for 
which his delegation was grateful to the Director General who had acted in 
compliance with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386. However, the developing countries, 
which accounted for more than two thirds of the Agency's membership, could not 
be satisfied with a 207. share of the Agency's Professional staff and a 17% share 
of the six top positions in the Agency. Two thirds of the Agency's membership 
should have at least 307. of the Agency's Professional staff. He supported the 
Director General in his continuing efforts to implement fully resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/386. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 17 


61. His delegation wished to welcome China to the Agency and looked forward 
to co-operating with that country within both the Agency and the RCA framework. 
The RCA now had 13 member countries and two observers and work was under way 
on 16 different projects. He was confident that China would soon increase the 
number of members to 14. 
62. Finally, he thanked the Government of the United States for making operational 
two Philippine footnote a_/ projects in 1984 and for agreeing to meet 
the cost of the remaining equipment necessary for the conversion of his 
country's research reactor to low-enriched uranium. 
63. Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland) said that the Agency's fruitful work over a 
period of many years deserved international recognition. The Agency had 
become the chief centre for the co-ordination of international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the admission of the People's Republic 
of China as a Member State was convincing proof of its increasing authority and 
prestige. 
64. The strengthening of the non-proliferation regime was undoubtedly an 
essential part of efforts aimed at ensuring peace and trust throughout the 
world and the implementation by the Agency of an effective international 
surveillance system was in the interests of all countries. 
65. With regard to the forthcoming Third NPT Review Conference, his delegation 
considered that the universality of NPT was a prerequisite for wide international 
co-operation in the use of nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful 
purposes. At the same time, it considered that the entire Treaty, including 
Article VI, should be observed. A significant move in this direction would 
be the conclusion of the Comprehensive Nuclear Weapons Test Ban Treaty, a 
move long awaited by the international community. 
66. His delegation was pleased with the progress made by the Agency in its 
safeguards programme, one of the most important areas of activity. It 
welcomed the conclusion of a draft agreement under which the Soviet Union was 
to place part of its peaceful nuclear installations under Agency safeguards. 
It hoped that gradually all countries would join NPT and conclude corresponding 
safeguards agreements with the Agency. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 18 


67. The substantial progress made at the fifth session of the Preparatory 
Committee of the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) in drawing up 
a draft agenda for the Conference and establishing the order of its work was 
also very encouraging. 
68. On the subject of nuclear power, 1984 marked the thirtieth year since the 
successful commissioning by the Soviet Union of the world's first nuclear 
power plant in Obninsk. Poland was at present building its first nuclear 
power plant and, in the belief that nuclear energy provided the sole means of 
ensuring the growth of electricity generation necessary for national development, 
it was also working on a programme for the construction of further plants. 
The industrial production of various types of nuclear power plant equipment had 
started, and some of the output was also being delivered to other socialist 
countries under CMEA co-operation and assistance agreements. In implementing 
its nuclear power programme, Poland was also using the Agency's safety 
standards and recommendations. 
69. Detailed regulations for practical implementation of the provisions 
of the International Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Materials had been prepared following ratification of the Convention by the 
Council of State of the Polish People's Republic. His delegation hoped 
that the number of countries ratifying the Convention would grow steadily. 
70. The success of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division in promoting the use of progressive 
methods for improving harvests and reducing food losses vindicated 
its approach to solving some of the most fundamental problems facing the 
modern world. 
71. His delegation wished to commend the Seibersdorf Laboratory for its work 
in relation to radiation applications in agriculture. The establishment of a 
biotechnology laboratory for the development of in vitro technology was of 
particular interest. The Agency's scientific research activities in agricultural 
matters were extremely useful to all its Members. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 19 


72. Poland had also been successful in the application of nuclear techniques, 
including radiation-induced mutagenesis, for agricultural purposes. Nuclear 
techniques were also widely used in Poland in industry and for public health 
care and scientific research. 
73. His Government approved the Agency's budget for 1985 and its programme 
for 1985 and 1986. It supported the present system of financing technical 
assistance through voluntary contributions based on indicative planning 
figures established for periods of three years at a time and pledged the payment 
of 23 million zloty - corresponding to its full assessed share - to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1985. In addition, Poland was 
once again ready to grant ten fellowships to applicants from developing 
countries to enable them to study at its research centres. 
74. Despite the difficult international situation in which the Agency was 
obliged to work, he was sure that the Agency would continue to make a substantial 
contribution to international co-operation and world peace. For its 
part, Poland was ready to assist the Agency in resolving the unusual problems 
facing the world today. 
75. Mr. SLIMANE (Algeria) noted that the 20 years of co-operation 
between the Agency and FAO had been very successful and was well worth 
developing further. 
76. Although in some industrialized countries nuclear energy already accounted 
for a large proportion of total electricity production, the prospects of its 
introduction in the energy balance of developing countries remained very 
uncertain. 
77. The present climate of concern arose from the growing restrictions and the 
arbitrary and discriminatory measures imposed on various countries importing 
nuclear technology and materials, excessive scientific and technical protectionism 
and the huge scale of investment required to initiate a nuclear programme. 
It was often claimed that such restrictions were imposed in order to 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 20 


prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Actually, however, there was 
reason to believe that the restrictions were designed to keep developing 
countries in a state of total technological dependence, thereby widening even 
further the gap between those countries and the industrialized world. 


78. The Algerian delegation believed that the best way of avoiding both 
vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons was to remove all 
obstacles to international co-operation in order to establish the climate of 
confidence, security and detente necessary to the development, of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
79. During the 27 years of its existence, the Agency had done much to promote 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in accordance with its statutory responsibility 
and, apart from stimulating an interest in nuclear power, it had also 
encouraged the initiation of nuclear power programmes and the development of 
nuclear applications in many countries. 
80. However, in order to strengthen the Agency's credibility and to enable it 
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy more effectively, there should 
be increased co-operation between Member States regarding the transfer of 
equipment, and nuclear material. 
81. The military attack against the Iraqi nuclear research reactor and the 
standing threat of a repetition of such an attack, in flagrant violation of 
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the Statute of the 
Agency, had serious consequences for the development of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes and for the Agency's safeguards system. The General 
Conference should take the necessary steps to ensure that such acts did not 
recur. 


82. Resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 calling for the conclusion of an international 
agreement to prevent military attacks on nuclear installations and resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/407 on the protection of nuclear installations devoted to 
peaceful purposes against armed attacks were an important step towards a total 
ban on such attacks. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 21 


83. His delegation remained very concerned that some Member States were continuing 
to co-operate with the racist regime of South Africa which continued 
to violate with impunity the resolutions of the United Nations and of the 
Agency and whose nuclear weapons capability was a source of grave concern for 
the international community as a whole and for Africa in particular. Paragraph 
4 of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408 should be implemented effectively and 
the necessary steps should be taken to put an end to the pilfering of uranium 
sources from Namibia. 
84. Of the Agency's activities, technical assistance contributed most to 
stimulating the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, particularly 
in developing countries. As such, it should be given priority. Despite 
its limited resources, the technical assistance programme had enabled a large 
number of countries to carry out very useful projects, particularly in the 
area of training, nuclear applications and planning. Those positive results 
were to the Agency's credit and deserved to be emphasized. 
85. The resources devoted to safeguards, which was another important activity, 
continued to increase to the detriment of technical assistance thereby creating 
an imbalance which adversely affected the Agency's promotional role. 
86. Despite resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388, which recommended that the necessary 
measures be taken to fund technical assistance through the Regular Budget of 
the Agency or through other comparably predictable and assured resources, 
technical assistance continued to depend on voluntary contributions. It was 
also a cause of concern that criteria of a political nature which were contrary 
to the spirit of the Agency's Statute governed the provision of technical 
assistance thereby creating a feeling of injustice and discrimination among 
some Member States. 
87. 
Although the conditions of project implementation had improved considerably, 
the period between the introduction of a project and its effective 
execution remained relatively long. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 22 


88. It was to be hoped that the General Conference would take the appropriate 
steps to find satisfactory solutions to those problems. 
89. His delegation deplored the fact that no progress had been made regarding 
the under-representation of the regions of Africa and the Middle East and 
South Asia and believed that the General Conference should delay no longer in 
adopting the resolution that had been proposed to rectify the injustice. 
90. The Algerian delegation also supported the draft amendment to Article VI.A.1 
which would enable the People's Republic of China to take its rightful place in 
the Board of Governors. 
91. His delegation appreciated the efforts made by the Director General to 
increase the number of staff members from developing countries but believed 
that those efforts still needed to be pursued in order to eliminate the 
existing imbalance by 1985. 
92. The Algerian delegation hoped that the time would come when nuclear energy 
served humanity rather than enslaved it and when all obstacles to genuine 
international co-operation and all discrimination would be abolished. 
93. Mr. VISHNEVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
present session of the General Conference was taking place at a time when the 
international situation was especially difficult because the imperialist 
powers of the West had adopted a course of confrontation and striving for 
military supremacy, thereby sharply increasing tension throughout the world 
and intensifying the threat of nuclear war. In view of the vast destructive 
powers of the existing nuclear arsenals all Governments must join in solving 
the key problem of the present age - how to preserve the world from nuclear 
catastrophe. 
94. The Soviet Union and other socialist States members of the Warsaw Pact 
and of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) had on numerous 
occasions declared their goodwill and their resolve to maintain a dialogue 
for the normalization of the international situation. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 23 


95. 
One of the most important precautions against nuclear war was to prevent 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The acquisition of such weapons by one 
or more States that had hitherto not possessed them would lead to a chain 
reaction which would multiply the danger of nuclear war and make it far more 
difficult to arrive at an agreement to halt the arms race and limit the number 
of nuclear weapons. Such a development would also adversely affect international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
96. His country regarded the Agency as an important international organization 
with a role to play in the maintenance and promotion of peace and co-operation 
between States. The further development of the Agency's safeguards and the 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime were essential preconditions for 
such co-operation. Other fields in which Agency activities were of great 
benefit included nuclear power and the fuel cycle, nuclear safety and environmental 
protection, the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) and 
nuclear fusion. The Agency had also continued to provide valuable technical 
assistance to developing Member States in 1983, although there was always room 
for further improvement. His delegation was authorized to announce that the 
Ukraine would be contributing its full share to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund, amounting to 280 000 roubles in national currency. 
97. His was a highly industrialized country which attached great importance 
to nuclear science and technology. Successful research efforts in the 
Ukraine had covered, inter alia, the effects of radiation on materials and 
biological specimens, reactor core physics, reactor equipment malfunction 
diagnostics and optimization of nuclear fuel utilization. Nuclear power was 
developing rapidly: the three operating nuclear power plants had generated 
over 25 million MW.h in 1983, representing over 107o of the total electricity 
production and a saving of 12 million tonnes of coal. A further three plants 
were under construction, and the Soviet Union's first nuclear heat supply 
plant was being built in the Ukraine: it would provide district heating for 
the city of Odessa, thereby saving some 4 million tonnes of coal equivalent 
annually and allowing several hundred small fossil-fuel-burning boilers to be 
closed down, which was expected to have a beneficial effect on the ecology of 
that Black Sea resort. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 24 


98. Particular attention was paid to nuclear safety, and all the existing 
reactors were equipped with automatic control and protection systems, emergency 
shutdown systems and, where necessary, earthquake protection. In addition, 
radiation monitoring was carried out over an area of 40-50 km around each 
nuclear power plant, and soil, water, vegetation and food samples were regularly 
inspected. A unique radioecological model of the Ukraine had been constructed 
to describe the migration of radionuclides in the environment and was 
being used as a basis for recommendations on nuclear power plant siting. 
99. Radioisotopes were widely used in the mining, metallurgical and chemical 
industries, and radiation was being used for a variety of medical applications 
and in agriculture for seed protein improvement and crop breeding purposes. 
100. Those achievements would not have been possible without highly qualified 
scientific and technical manpower, and his country was training specialists in 
numerous different subjects relating to nuclear energy. Many of those 
specialists would be eminently suited to fill posts in the Agency, where the 
proportion of staff from the Ukraine was still unsatisfactory. 
101. A commission had been established in his country to maintain liaison 
with the Agency; it dealt with all problems relating to co-operation with the 
Agency, made recommendations on the economic applications of nuclear energy 
in the light of experience gained in other Agency Member States, and organized 
the exchange of research results. Relations with the Agency on the scientific 
and technical plane continued to improve, and his country each year organized 
a number of study tours and training courses for nuclear energy specialists 
from developing countries. 
102. The Ukrainian people would soon be celebrating the fortieth anniversaries 
of their liberation and of the end of the Second World War; the memory of the 
immense sacrifices exacted of them in those times convinced them of the need 
to make every effort to prevent the danger of another war. His delegation 
trusted that the present session of the General Conference would contribute 
to the further development of international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, to the growth of confidence between countries, and to peace 
and progress throughout the world. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 25 


103. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) noted that the twenty-eighth session of the 
Agency's General Conference was being held in a particularly tense and complex 
situation. Despite the constructive proposals of the USSR and other socialist 
countries which were designed to reduce the nuclear threat, to normalize 
international relations and to improve the international climate, there had not 
yet been any positive changes in the situation. The Agency's role as an international 
forum to promote peace and international co-operation through the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy was continually growing. 
104. Bulgaria attached great importance to the Agency's work in strengthening 
the non-proliferation regime and in realizing effective international control 
of the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The Agency's safeguards 
system helped to strengthen international stability and to further international 
co-operation. Bulgaria also appreciated the valuable contribution which the 
Agency had made to the preparations for the Third NPT Review Conference. 
105. His delegation noted with satisfaction the Agency's fruitful work in 
such important areas of the peaceful uses of atomic energy as nuclear power 
and the fuel cycle, nuclear safety and environmental protection, technical 
co-operation and the industrial, agricultural and medical applications of 
nuclear techniques. 
106. The 257 increase in Agency resources for the technical assistance programme 
in 1983, as compared with 1982, demonstrated that the policy of 
financing technical assistance from voluntary contributions in accordance with 
indicative planning figures was correct. The Department of Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation was to be congratulated on the successful implementation of 
the technical assistance programme. 
107. Agency technical assistance projects had made it possible for Bulgaria 
to increase the quantity and variety of radioisotopes produced; to increase 
the level of nuclear physics research; to introduce radiation sterilization 
of medical products; and to use radiation technology in industry. Bulgaria 
was also grateful to the Agency for enabling its experts to use the Agency's 
computer centre and programs for performing calculations related to the safety 
of its nuclear power plants. The Agency's work in training local staff in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy was very important. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 26 


108. Bulgarian institutes and laboratories were taking part in Agency research 
programmes. A study tour on nuclear power development and interregional 
courses on induced mutations in plant breeding had been held in Bulgaria in 
1983 and in 1984, a seminar on methods for studying and evaluating sites for 
underground disposal of radioactive waste and an Agency technical committee 
on the use of computer programs for safety analysis. Bulgaria was also contributing 
to INIS. 
109. In order to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy it was essential 
that the Agency should control non-proliferation effectively.  The safeguards 
system should be expanded and improved. For its part, Bulgaria made its 
facilities available for testing new safeguards devices and equipment and provided 
the necessary conditions for the safeguardsinspectorate to carry out its 
work. 
110. The Bulgarian Council of State had ratified the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials on 3 February 1984 and it was to be 
hoped that other countries which had not yet ratified the Convention would do 
so in the near future. 
111. His delegation approved the Agency's programme for 1985 and 1986 and 
budget for 1985. 
112. The Bulgarian delegation believed that the system of voluntary contributions 
to the Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund should be 
retained and approved the increase to 26 million dollars for the target for 
voluntary contributions to the Fund in 1985. Bulgaria would make a voluntary 
contribution of 46 800 dollars in national currency in 1985. 
113. The year 1984 marked the fortieth anniversary of socialist Bulgaria and 
the tenth anniversary of the startup of the first unit of the Kozloduj nuclear 
power plant which had produced 73 300 million kWh of electricity during its 
first ten years. The Kozloduj power plant now had four units in operation 
with a total capacity of 1760 MW(e). In 1983 electricity production at 
Kozloduj had exceeded 12 000 million kWh, thereby accounting for more than 32% 
of the country's electricity production. Rapid progress was being made on the 
construction of the fifth and sixth WWER units, each with a capacity of 
1000 MW(e). 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 27 


114. A site was also being prepared in the Belene region on the banks of the 
Danube for the construction of four 1000 MW(e) WWER units of a second nuclear 
power plant. 
115. Preliminary technical and economic studies were being carried out on the 
use of nuclear power plants to provide urban heating and low-temperature heat 
and steam. 
116. Bulgaria attached great importance to staff training and safe operation 
of nuclear power plants and was grateful for the help received from the CMEA 
and the Agency. The Agency's documents on the organization and monitoring of 
nuclear and radiological safety and environmental protection were particularly 
useful. 
117. Application of nuclear techniques was increasing both in scientific 
research and in various sectors of the economy such as industry, agriculture 
and medicine. 
118. The success achieved by Bulgaria in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
was the result not only of mobilization of national resources but also of 
multilateral co-operation with CMEA Member States, bilateral co-operation, in 
particular with the Soviet Union, and co-operation with the Agency. 
119. Mr. V0T0-BERNALES (Peru) said that his country had for many years 
been making every effort to speed up the development of its programme for the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy and had received valuable support in that 
endeavour in the form of technical assistance from international organizations 
such as the Agency. Members of Peruvian institutions concerned with nuclear 
energy had made full use of the training programmes offered under the Agency's 
regular programme for technical assistance and under the joint UNDP/IAEA programme. 
In turn, the Peruvian Higher Centre of Nuclear Studies, much of the 
equipment of which had been obtained with the Agency's assistance, had been 
able during the past year to offer training in nuclear science to 15 graduate 
professionals and 24 intermediate-level technicians, and the Peruvian nuclear 
energy authorities were currently engaged in preparations for a radiochemistry 
programme in which students from many Latin American countries would be taking 
part. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.262 
page 28 


120. In spite of severe limitations imposed by the difficult economic situation, 
80/, of the construction work on the Peruvian Nuclear Research Centre had been 
completed, thanks in large measure to the support of the Argentine National 
Atomic Energy Commission. 
121. Geological studies carried out under the uranium resource evaluation and 
exploration programme had found assured resources of 500 tonnes and estimated 
additional resources of 50 000 tonnes of uranium oxide in the Department of 
Puno in southern Peru, and a further 3000-5000 tonnes at Chapi in the same area. 
122. With the Agency's help, Peru had conducted a pre-feasibility study which 
had offered a prospect of building a first nuclear power plant in the not too 
distant future. His Government had also devoted special attention to the 
medical and biological applications of nuclear energy, and pilot centres for 
nuclear biology and medicine had been set up in Lima, Arequipa and Trujillo. 
The staff of those centres had received training, both in Peru and abroad, and 
a second basic course in nuclear medicine was currently being given in Lima 
with UNDP support. 
123. Other projects in Peru had been financed by the Governments of Finland, 
the United States of America, Italy, the Federal Republic of Germany and the 
Soviet Union, to all of which his country was grateful for their assistance. 
124. His delegation continued to support the strengthening of the Agency's 
safeguards system, as it was a valuable instrument in fostering the climate of 
confidence which was a precondition for free nuclear trade and the transfer of 
technology. In that context, greater efforts would be needed to make progress 
in the important work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS). 
125. In conclusion, his delegation welcomed the progress achieved in the fifth 
meeting of the Preparatory Committee of the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE) and hoped that the spirit of consensus there would endure until 
the completion of the work so that a generally acceptable system of international 
co-operation and exchange in the nuclear field could at last be 
established. 
The meeting rose at 10.40 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
International Atomic Energy Agency March 1985* 
GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 27 September 1984, at 10.10 a.m. 
President: Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** Paragraphs 
Amendment of Article VI.A.1 of the 
Statute 1 2 
General debate and annual report for 
1983 (resumed) 3 119 
Statements by the delegates of the 
following States and organizations: 

Israel 3 -11 
Australia 12 -37 
Syrian Arab Republic 38 -52 
Chile 53 -68 
Tunisia 69 -76 
Cuba 77 -90 
Denmark 91 -99 
Viet Nam 100 -104 
Council for Mutual Economic 


Assistance 105 - 114 
Agency for the Prohibition 
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 115 - 119 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 7 November 1984. 
**/ GC(XXVIII)/730. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-908 
0201e 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 2 


AMENDMENT OF ARTICLE VI.A.1 OF THE STATUTE (GC(XXVIII)/712 and Add.1-4) 


1. The PRESIDENT announced that Jordan had just been added to the list 
of sponsors of the draft resolution in document GC(XXVIII)/712. Calling the 
attention of delegates to the operative part of that draft resolution, he 
pointed out that under Article XVIII.C of the Statute a proposed amendment to 
the Statute must be approved by a two-thirds majority of Members present and 
voting. If there were no objections, he would take it that the General 
Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution in document GC(XXVIII)/712, 
the purpose of which was to amend Article VI.A.1 of the Statute by replacing 
the word "nine" in the two places where it occurred by the word "ten". 
2. It was so decided 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/713 and Add.1 and 2) 
(resumed) 


3. Mr. EILAM (Israel) expressed his conviction that the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy were of vital importance for the well-being of the 
international community and for raising standards of living in the various 
countries. Israel had therefore always favoured expansion in that energy form 
and had supported the Agency in its role, particularly in the fields of 
electrical power production and applications in agriculture, industry and the 
life sciences as well as in other scientific fields. 
4. Israel had made its own contribution and was continuing to do so, in 
particular with regard to medical, industrial and agricultural applications, 
including the development and manufacture of advanced instrumentation. 
Research and development work had been done on uranium recovery as a 
by-product of the phosphates industry using a new process. Research and 
development work was also under way in the following areas: 
radiopharmaceuticals, nuclear medicine, non-destructive testing, 
radiation-induced cross-linking and grafting of polymers, isotope 
applications, environmental studies and radiation sterilization of disposable 
medical supplies and food products. At the same time, where nuclear power 
station construction was concerned, preliminary studies were being done on 
safety problems, site evaluation, reactors and improvements in local 
technology. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 3 


5. Israel was convinced that programmes for the peaceful use of atomic 
energy could be implemented in developing countries. It was itself a 
developing country with limited financial resources, but it believed that its 
experience and know-how could be useful in international technical 
assistance. Israel was prepared to donate fellowships and expert services and 
to take on foreign trainees. 
6. The fact that the international community was increasingly using atomic 
energy for power production, as well as for applications in agriculture, 
industry and the life sciences, provided the Agency with an opportunity to 
play an even more active role while remaining faithful to its purpose and its 
Statute. In order to meet its important objectives with the co-operation of 
its Member States, the Agency should respond fully to their requirements. 
7. Unfortunately, item 10 of the agenda showed a politicization of the 
Agency's work which could only have a detrimental effect. Similar initiatives 
at previous sessions had given rise to much dissatisfaction in view of the 
considerable amounts of time and energy devoted to discussing the issue 
concerned. There was no justification for renewing that discussion. 
8. With regard to resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, documents GC(XXVIII)/719 and 
720, which had been distributed to the General Conference, contained a clear 
statement of the Israeli Government's policy. The main elements of that 
policy were: Israel was aware of the substantial contribution that peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy could make to the well-being of the world and of the 
right of all countries to benefit from such use. Israel had no policy of 
attacking nuclear facilities and had no intention of attacking nuclear 
facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes anywhere. It held that nuclear 
facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes should be inviolable from military 
attack and supported international efforts to reach agreement as soon as 
possible with a view to regulating the status of those facilities and to 
strengthening the role of the Agency in ensuring that nuclear energy was a 
credible and safe means of achieving peaceful development. Israel viewed 
positively the activities of international organizations established for those 
purposes by the international community. Within that context, it considered 
the conclusions in the Director General's report in document GC(XXVIII)/719 to 
be relevant. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 4 


9. It was therefore unfortunate that the General Conference had again been 
asked to spend its precious time on that subject which might be detrimental to 
the role and the effectiveness of the Agency and also to its ability to fulfil 
its statutory functions. 
10. He renewed his assurance of confidence in the Agency's ability to meet 
its important objectives with the co-operation of its Member States, including 
the State of Israel, and appealed to all Member States to make the current 
session of the General Conference a milestone on the path to understanding and 
co-operation between States. 
11. In conclusion, he thanked the Director General and the Agency's staff for 
their untiring efforts to carry out the functions of the organization. Agency 
activities aimed at ensuring the development of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes by the application of safeguards, the training of staff and the 
furtherance of technological and scientific research were being carried out 
most faithfully and meticulously by the many people contributing to the smooth 
functioning of the organization, and the Israeli delegation was grateful to 
them. 
12. Mr. CAMPBELL (Australia) said that general political questions 
should be taken before the political bodies of the United Nations. His 
delegation looked forward to another year of collaboration which would confirm 
the Agency's deserved reputation as an effective and dedicated organization. 
13. He welcomed the People's Republic of China to the Agency and hoped, in 
particular, that that country would co-operate with Australia in promoting 
stability and well-being in their region. He also hoped that China would soon 
be in a position to join the Agency's Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA). 
The projects carried out in the context of that Agreement were continuing to 
prove beneficial for participating countries in Asia and the Pacific. 
14. The Australian delegation welcomed the fact that the twelve months since 
the previous session of the General Conference had seen a process of 
consolidation and increased activity of the Agency in the fulfilment of its 
statutory responsibilities. 
15. In applying the safeguards required by the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Agency made a unique 
contribution to international confidence and security and played an essential 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 5 


role in the context of the Treaty's objectives. Following the fifth session 
of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 


(UNCPICPUNE), it appeared that the Conference had been placed on a firm 
footing in that a draft agenda and a decision-making procedure had been 
approved. The Conference could make a positive contribution to the work of 
the Agency, but only in the context of a complementary and universal 
non-proliferation regime. The success of UNCPICPUNE would depend above all on 
that of the Third NPT Review Conference, which was to take place in 1985. 


16. As the Director General had stated, the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS) had made only modest progress, in particular with regard to the 
elaboration of principles of international co-operation in the nuclear field. 
Agreement would not be possible, in his opinion, until legitimate 
non-proliferation concerns and the central role of the principles embodied in 
NPT had been recognized. In any case, it was necessary to accept that those 
principles were to a large extent already to be found in a whole range of 
international agreements which offered the only basis on which nuclear trade 
could be undertaken in conditions of confidence. A first practical result of 
CAS would be achieved if the proposed emergency and back-up mechanism it had 
accepted could now be implemented. 
17. The past year had been important for the exercise and development of 
Australian policy concerning many important matters of interest to the 
Agency. The Australian Government, which had taken up office only a few 
months before the 1983 session of the General Conference, had undertaken an 
overall review of its nuclear policy. The positions adopted in that context 
might be of interest in view of Australia's enormous uranium reserves. The 
country had reasonably assured resources recoverable at less than US $80 per 
kilogram of approximately half a million tonnes. That represented one third 
of total world resources in that category outside the countries of the 
socialist bloc. In November 1983 the Australian Government had decided to 
permit development of the Olympic Dam uranium mine if it were commercially 
viable, but it would not be approving the development of any new mines. 
18. It had also been announced in November 1983 that all future uranium 
exports would be subject to the strictest conditions, which would be 
determined by the Government on the basis of an independent enquiry into 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 6 


Australia's role in the nuclear fuel cycle. In addition, a permanent 
commission would be established to examine nuclear fuel cycle questions and 
Australia's position in that respect. The principal recommendation in the 
report of the Australian Science and Technology Council, which had been 
entrusted with the enquiry, had been that no limitation should be placed on 
exports of Australian uranium as a matter of principle but that such exports 
should be permitted subject to stringent conditions designed to strengthen the 
non-proliferation regime. 


19. The report acknowledged the importance of national and international 
security of energy supplies in reducing international tensions and promoting a 
climate of peace in the world. As a reliable long-term uranium supplier, 
Australia could make a significant contribution to the assurance of supplies 
and to non-proliferation. The report stressed the urgent need to establish an 
international political climate which discouraged vertical and horizontal 
proliferation. It showed NPT to be the most important multilateral agreement 
on non-proliferation and arms control. 
20. The report also recognized the importance of the Agency and recommended 
measures by which Australia could assist it to attain its objectives. It 
included a thorough review of questions relating to radioactive waste 
management and drew attention to the fact that there were as yet no 
internationally agreed criteria for the permanent disposal of high-level 
waste. The potential significance of the "Synroc" waste conditioning process 
developed in Australia was also pointed out in the report, which recommended 
that work on that topic should be continued. 
21. In July 1984 the Australian Labour Party had decided, in the context of 
its biennial policy review, to allow the export of uranium from approved mines 
under the most stringent non-proliferation conditions to countries which the 
Australian Government considered to have observed the provisions of NPT and 
which had ratified the necessary international and bilateral nuclear 
safeguards agreements. 
22. The following principles were of particular importance where the policy 
of the Australian authorities was concerned: Australia believed that it had a 
moral obligation to supply uranium, under strict safeguards conditions, in 
order to contribute towards the objectives of Article IV of NPT. By remaining 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 7 


a reliable and responsible supplier, it would serve the cause of 
non-proliferation, whereas it would weaken that cause by interrupting its 
uranium exports. Any decision by Australia which added to assurance of 
supplies would also strengthen assurance relating to the non-proliferation of 
nuclear explosives. 


23. In the context of the objectives and undertakings of Article IV of NPT, 
Australia also attached considerable importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities. It was exploring avenues for expanding its technical 
co-operation programmes in the nuclear field, especially in its own region. 
It intended to continue to participate directly in international technical 
co-operation in spheres such as the use of isotopes and radiation for medical, 
agricultural and industrial applications. During the past year the Australian 
Atomic Energy Commission had decided to pay more attention to ecology, nuclear 
waste management, nuclear medicine and industrial and agricultural 
applications of radioisotopes and radiation. Australia would continue its 
active support of the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme, in particular in the context of the RCA. In addition, it was 
considering providing funds for footnote a/ projects of neighbouring countries 
which complied with the provisions of NPT. 
24. He was pleased to announce that the Australian Government was prepared to 
provide funds for the second phase of the regional project on food 
irradiation, amounting to a contribution of US $260 000 over three years. 
Australia was also playing a leading role in a sub-project of the RCA for Asia 
and the Pacific on the industrial application of isotope and radiation 
technology. That project covered the period 1983-86 and would receive an 
Australian contribution of 665 000 Australian dollars in the form of equipment 
and training. Again within the context of the RCA, Australia was continuing 
to support the Agency's project on isotope hydrology and sedimentology by 
training scientists from South East Asian countries. Direct co-operation with 
Malaysia was continuing in the form of training nuclear specialists for the 
Malaysian Prime Minister's Department and providing consultants' services. 
25. He welcomed the fact that the increase in resources for technical 
assistance had been greater in the Agency than in other United Nations bodies 
and also that the Agency's technical co-operation programme had improved as a 
result of the adoption of dynamic programming, which had enabled the Agency to 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 8 


use its resources more effectively. Australia supported the target of 
US $26 million for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1985 and 
expected to be able to pay its share in full. It had already paid its 
contribution for 1984. He wished to join the Director General in encouraging 
all Member States to pledge and to pay in full their voluntary contributions 
to the Fund. 


26. Australia was very interested in the elaboration and application of 
international guidelines and codes of practice relating to the storage and 
disposal of spent fuel and high-level waste. It was contributing to the 
search for an agreed basis for assessing the behaviour of conditioned waste 
and of repositories over long periods. 
27. Australia was also concerned about the effects of sea dumping of 
radioactive waste and encouraged the Agency to devote sufficient resources to 
the study of those effects. Within the Pacific Forum it had since 1981 always 
joined the consensus against the dumping of radioactive waste in the Pacific. 
With regard to radiation protection in ore mining and milling, Australia, as a 
uranium producer, had acquired a particular expertise and was making a 
positive contribution to the Agency's work on that topic. 
28. His delegation wished to associate itself with the Director General in 
encouraging Member States to sign and ratify as soon as possible the 
International Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material which 
his country had signed early in the year. 
29. Australia had always been and remained a firm and energetic supporter of 
the Agency's safeguards role. It would continue to provide the Agency with 
resources for increasing its safeguards activities. In that connection, 
Australia was engaged in a bilateral safeguards assistance programme 
established in consultation with the Secretariat and involving cost-free 
expert services, instrument development and demonstration exercises and a 
systems study. That programme related, in particular, to the application of 
safeguards to small enrichment plants and to the surveillance of spent fuel 
ponds. The current programme was scheduled to run until June 1986 and had a 
total budget of 695 000 Australian dollars. In addition, Australia would 
continue to co-operate with the Agency in expert and advisory groups, 
including the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI). 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 9 


30. Like the Director General, he believed that the world had a vital 
interest in having, through the Agency and its Member countries, a 
verification system which worked well and inspired confidence. Measured 
against the immense value of that system, its cost was relatively small. A 
comparison with the cost of weapons showed that the cost-effectiveness of the 
Agency's contribution to the prevention of horizontal proliferation was 
excellent. 
31. He stressed the universal desirability of all non-nuclear-weapon States 
submitting their nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards in order to provide 
their neighbours and the world as a whole with assurance that their nuclear 
programmes were devoted to peaceful purposes. In that connection, he noted 
that, according to the annual report, it was considered reasonable to conclude 
that nuclear material under Agency safeguards in 1983 had remained in peaceful 
nuclear activities or had been otherwise accounted for, with the exception of 
two cases. He welcomed the additional statement to the effect that further 
technical measures had been put into effect for those two facilities in order 
to allow the Agency to perform effective verification in the future. He also 
welcomed the conclusion of new safeguards agreements during the past twelve 
months, in particular those with Nauru and Sri Lanka, both of which were in 
the same region as Australia. 
32. The Australian delegation noted that the negotiations between the Agency 
and the Soviet Union concerning the voluntary submission to safeguards of part 
of the civil nuclear facilities of that country had resulted in an agreement. 
That further demonstration of support for Agency safeguards and for the 
objectives of non-proliferation from a nuclear-weapon State was encouraging. 
33. The commencement of negotiations between the Secretariat and the South 
African Government on the placing of a semi-commercial enrichment plant under 
safeguards was a positive step. Australia attached importance to those 
negotiations being without prejudice to the request made by the Secretariat to 
South Africa that it should begin discussions on the application of full-scope 
safeguards in that country, and his delegation urged South Africa once again 
to join NPT. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 10 


34. Where Israel was concerned, the Australian delegation hoped that that 
country would submit all its facilities to Agency safeguards and would join 
NPT. That would be consistent with the interests of the region in that it 
would represent progress towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. Similarly, he associated himself with the many speakers who had urged 
the major countries of the Indian subcontinent and of Latin America to join 
the international non-proliferation regime. 
35. He also welcomed the fact that on a number of occasions the Director 
General had mentioned the possibility of the Agency safeguards system being 
used as a model for disarmament verification purposes, since verification 
problems lay at the heart of arms control and disarmament issues. A 
verification system could make it possible to halt and reverse vertical 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, which would have a positive effect on 
efforts to obtain a universal undertaking against horizontal proliferation. 
The example of the Agency was applicable to arms control. It demonstrated 
that on-site inspection was possible and that surveillance by direct visual or 
technical means could be acceptable. It also provided a precedent for 
inspections being carried out in nuclear-weapon States. 
36. Without commitments to non-proliferation and without renunciation of the 
nuclear weapons option there could be no assurance about international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Subterfuge which could 
be employed in the construction of sensitive facilities and attempts to divert 
sensitive nuclear technology and equipment gave rise to suspicion and 
insecurity. The non-proliferation system offered a means of avoiding that 
danger. By effective and universal application of the safeguards system, it 
ensured that international nuclear co-operation and trade were and would 
remain exclusively peaceful. For all those reasons, verification issues had a 
very close bearing on the role of the Agency, and Australia's commitment to a 
comprehensive test ban treaty and to full-scope safeguards were twin 
objectives. They were interlinked as national policy objectives and as 
substantive political requirements within the context of NPT and of the review 
of that Treaty which was to take place in 1985. The Agency and the Treaty 
were closely and permanently linked and the Australian delegation intended to 
contribute to the strengthening of that link. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 11 


37. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director General and the Secretariat 
on the work they had done in 1983. The Director General's visit to Australia 
early in the year had provided the Australian authorities with a valuable 
opportunity to discuss the Agency's role with him, to pledge their moral and 
material support and to exchange views on the future. His delegation wished 
to assure him and his staff of its continued support. 
38. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) wished first to ask certain 
questions relating to procedures and organizational methods followed by the 
General Conference and the Board of Governors which wasted time and gave rise 
to controversies and even confrontations. 
39. First, for some ten years the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 
had been under consideration by both the General Conference and the Board of 
Governors - the topic was thus being discussed several times each year. The 
arguments advanced, the positions adopted and the proposals put forward 
however, remained unchanged. The question was, therefore, how many more years 
the General Conference and the Board would need to consider the problem. 
Similarly, the Agency's policy-making organs were discussing safeguards and 
technical assistance without being able to break out of a vicious circle. Why 
not modify that sterile procedure and keep any particular question under 
consideration for a maximum of three years in the Board - and thus of two 
years in the General Conference - at the end of which a decision would be 
taken by a democratic vote? 
40. Secondly, the Board held six series of meetings per year, one in the 
guise of Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee and another in that 
of Administrative and Budgetary Committee. In the latter two cases, no 
decisions were taken, since the questions were referred to the Board when it 
met as such. Why could meetings of the Techical Assistance and Co-operation 
Committee and of the Administrative and Budgetary Committee not be considered 
meetings of the Board proper? 
41. Thirdly, the Board of Governors set up committees which it entrusted with 
the examination of certain important questions. At each of its own series of 
meetings, the Board did not simply take note of the work of those committees 
but took up the discussion again. That was true, for example, of the work of 
the Committee on Assurances of Supply and of the Expert Group on International 
Plutonium Storage. Why should not a committee established in that way be 
authorized to submit its report to the Board only after its work had been 
completed? 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 12 


42. Those methods were unacceptable in that they were totally illogical. The 
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic hoped that the General Conference and 
the Board of Governors would adopt working methods which would prevent any 
wastage of time. 
43. Desirous as it was of ensuring the universality of international 
organizations, the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic urged the Director 
General to make contact through the appropriate channels with Member States of 
the United Nations which had not yet become Members of the Agency with a view 
to their joining it. 
44. At the present session, the General Conference was again being asked to 
consider an item entitled "Consequences of the Israeli military attack on the 
Iraqi nuclear research reactor and the standing threat to repeat this attack 
for: (a) the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes; and (b) the 
role and activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency". At its 
previous session, the General Conference had adopted resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/409 on that same question, giving Israel one year to comply with 
it. Even after the change of government, Israel had, however, taken no step 
in that direction. It was true that document GC(XXVIII)/720, which was before 
the General Conference, reproduced a letter dated 21 August 1984 and addressed 
to the Director General by the Resident Representative of Israel. However, 
that letter was supported by a great Power which was putting pressure on 
smaller States to adopt an attitude favourable to Israel in that matter and 
virtually committing blackmail by threatening to withdraw from the Agency if 
ever the General Conference adopted measures hostile to Israel. 
45. Recalling the history of the military attack against the reactor of a 
country all of whose nuclear facilities were subject to Agency safeguards and 
which did not intend to acquire nuclear weapons, he said that Iraq had been 
the victim of a horrible crime. Iraq had complained to the United Nations and 
to the Agency, but the measures taken by the two organizations had been 
commensurate with the unanimous condemnation of Israel by the international 
community. Israel had been requested to place its nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards and to withdraw its threat to repeat the attack. In each 
case the response by Israel had been negative. The statement that Israel had 
no systematic policy of bombing nuclear installations was worthless; 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 13 


moreover, the letter he had mentioned from the Resident Representative of 


Israel was specious, as the arguments put forward in it would not stand up to 
analysis. In fact, when the Prime Minister of Israel said that Israel was in 
favour of international arrangements guaranteeing the status and inviolability 
of peaceful nuclear installations, he never mentioned the Agency, which was 
the party most concerned. When Israel declared itself to be in favour of 
joint and co-ordinated action on the part of democratic States to impose 
sanctions on international pirates which attacked nuclear facilities, that 
meant that it recognized neither the Agency's competence nor its safeguards 
system and that the only international pirates it had in mind were Palestinian 
organizations. The Agency should condemn Israel for that statement. Finally, 
the qualification of nuclear facilities as "peaceful" would be left entirely 
to the discretion of Israel, which would bomb them as it wished and claim 
after the event that those facilities had not been "peaceful". 


46. For all those reasons, the letter from the Resident Representative of 
Israel - which went beyond the statement by that country's Prime Minister was 
unacceptable. It constituted in no way a response to resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/409. Israel's hostile attitude was thus a threat to the region 
- which was not protected against individual suicidal attacks - and also to 
Agency Member States, in particular those which had declared themselves in 
favour of that resolution. Those futile attempts at diversion, which were 
doomed to failure, were just so many threats of new bombings, since Israel 
remained blinded by its military madness. It was absolutely essential that 
Israel make a firm commitment not to bomb nuclear facilities in the region or 
anywhere else in the world. In fact, the Syrian Arab Republic would be 
prepared to accept any undertaking of that nature made on behalf of Israel by 
another Agency Member State. 
47. The Syrian Arab Republic asked the General Conference to require of 
Israel that it comply with resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409. The statements 
issued in document GC(XXVIII)/720 had no force of law, and his delegation was 
prepared to request an opinion from the International Court of Justice in that 
connection, which it would also be willing to accept. 
48. In adddition, his delegation asked the General Conference to adopt a 
resolution by which, in conformity with Article XIX of the Statute, it would 
suspend Israel from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership of 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 14 


the Agency if it bombed nuclear facilities. Such a resolution would be 
implemented immediately and definitively and would make it unnecessary for the 
General Conference to reconsider the suspension of Israel from those 
privileges and rights. 


49. Aother step was essential for the maintenance of peace and security: the 
establishment in the Middle East of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. The Syrian 
Arab Republic was in favour of that idea and, with that in mind, the General 
Conference or the Board could set up a committee consisting of between five 
and seven Member States chosen by those Member States that belonged to the 
non-aligned movement, which would work out a draft convention for the purpose, 
to be submitted for their comments to Member States in the region. Once those 
comments had been received, the committee would meet again to draw up the 
final text of the convention, which would then be communicated to interested 
States for them to sign and ratify under the auspices of the Agency. 
50. The Syrian Arab Republic urged South Africa to comply with resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/408 concerning South Africa's nuclear capabilities. 
51. His country also asked that specific measures be taken to correct the 
imbalance in the geographical representation on the Board and thereby to put 
an end to the injustice of which the areas of Africa and the Middle East and 
South Asia were the victims. 
52. The Syrian Arab Republic wished the Agency every success in its attempts 
to make atomic energy serve the interests of peace and to preserve the 
security of all of mankind. 
53. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) congratulated the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the International Atomic Energy 
Agency on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the establishment of 
the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic 
Energy for Food and Agricultural Development and wished the Joint Division 
every success with its future work. 
54. The current year was of particular importance for the application of 
nuclear energy in Chile, both nationally and internationally. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 15 


55. At a national level, the promulgation of the Decree-Law defining the 
objectives of nuclear energy utilization in Chile and of the nuclear policy to 
be followed in order to meet those objectives constituted a firm decision to 
use nuclear energy for the political, economic and social development of the 
country. As a logical consequence of that Decree-Law the Chilean Nuclear 
Energy Commission had drawn up medium- and long-term nuclear energy 
utilization plans taking into account the progress accomplished so far in 
nuclear science and technology. In addition, the Nuclear Safety Law had been 
promulgated on 16 April 1984. With the accompanying regulations and technical 
guides, that Law was an essential element in the Chilean nuclear safety and 
radiation protection programme which ensured that nuclear energy would be 
applied without undue risk to persons, property or the environment. In that 
connection, the Chilean delegation wished to thank the Secretariat for the 
legal consultancy services it had provided during the elaboration of that Law. 
56. The isotope and radiation application programme took into account the 
need to intensify the use of those techniques - which were already well 
established in Chile - in the sectors of production and services. Thus, the 
programme fostered the extended use of isotopes, radioisotopes and ionizing 
radiation in copper mining and milling, the paper industry, food preservation, 
health care, water resource evaluation, construction and quality control 
services. 
57. The most remarkable peaceful use of nuclear energy was without doubt its 
transformation into heat for electricity production. Nuclear power 
represented an energy option for Chile: it would be decided whether the time 
was right to use it and to what extent to do so when that energy source could 
join the hydroelectric power and the coal resources of Chile as a technically 
viable source of supply at minimum cost requiring minimum dependence on 
imports. In view of the size and cost of the power reactors available on the 
market and the existence of hydroelectric power resources and coal deposits in 
Chile, electricity production by nuclear means would be technically and 
economically viable only in the long term. For that reason the Chilean 
nuclear materials progamme was focused on the medium-term development on a 
pilot scale of technology for the front end of the fuel cycle, which had 
already reached the laboratory testing stage. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 16 


58. Under the technical support programme, the number of Irradiation and 
analysis facilities and that of the workshops needed for carrying out other 
programmes was to be increased. In that connection, he pointed out that the 
La Reina research reactor would soon have been operating effectively and 
safely for ten years. The reactor, which would be reloaded in early 1985 with 
new fuel enriched to 45% in uranium-235, had been submitted voluntarily to the 
Agency's safeguards system. 
59. Chile was convinced that the application of nuclear energy could see an 
expansion only if the whole nation accepted and supported it. Measures to 
publicize the advantages and opportunities offered by nuclear energy were thus 
of particular importance. To that end, Chile had set up a national 
information campaign by means of a mobile exhibition aimed at secondary-school 
pupils and the general public which had so far been held in sixteen towns and 
had been seen by almost 170 000 people. 
60. At an international level, Chile firmly supported horizontal co-operation 
as an important means of integrating and accelerating the application of 
nuclear energy at a regional level. In that connection, the agreements 
concluded recently between the Chilean and Argentine institutes responsible 
for nuclear energy illustrated a way in which nations could be brought 
together for the realization of common development objectives. He noted that 
the sixth supplementary agreement concluded on 16 August 1984 related to the 
establishment of mechanisms which would enable Chile to set up the 
installations and to acquire the knowledge needed for fabricating fuel 
elements for the research reactor of the La Reina Nuclear Research Centre. 
The results obtained from the application of the first five supplementary 
bilateral co-operation agreements - to which the results of the sixth 
supplementary agreement would be added - showed that certain malicious rumours 
about supposed nuclear rivalry in Latin America were without foundation. 
61. With regard to the application of nuclear techniques, Chile had made some 
progress which it wished to share with other Latin American countries. In 
that connection, it supported unreservedly the work of the Inter-American 
Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC), with respect both to the meeting of its 
objectives and to the organization of training courses and regional 
co-ordination activities. Thus, in April 1984 Chile had hosted a Latin 
American meeting on public acceptance of nuclear energy which had been 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 17 


attended by senior staff from the atomic energy commissions of Latin American 
countries, from IANEC and from the Agency. Under the auspices of IANEC, Chile 
would in October 1984 host a regional co-ordination meeting on analysis of the 
prospects for radioisotope production in the region and, in 
November-December 1984, a training course on research reactor operation. In 


1985, still under the auspices of IANEC, Chile would host two regional 
training courses, one on applications of radioactive tracers in industry and 
for the study of natural processes, and the other on the X-ray fluorescence 
technique. In addition, Chile had expressed the wish to participate in the 
regional uranium prospecting programme launched by IANEC, which in its second 
phase would benefit from considerable financial support from the Agency. 


62. Like other countries in Latin America, where nuclear techniques could 
help to solve problems of profound importance for the economic and social 
development both of countries individually and of the region as a whole, Chile 
believed that regional co-operation was the best means of making progress in 
nuclear science and technology. Apart from enabling better use to be made of 
material and human resources, horizontal co-operation between similar 
countries in the same socio-economic situation made for analogous development 
and better understanding of the problems encountered. In addition, the most 
advanced countries of the region which had benefited from bilateral or 
international co-operation were willing to assist other countries in their 
turn. 
63. The Chilean Government welcomed the fact that the Agency, aware as it was 
of the wishes of the Latin American region, had launched the ARCAL programme 
(Regional Co-operative Agreement for Latin America), which would contribute to 
the development of nuclear energy in spheres of common interest to countries 
in the region. Chile was fully prepared to support and to participate in the 
ARCAL programme. 


64. Reviewing the Agency's activities since the previous session of the 
General Conference, he commended the continued efforts to utilize as well as 
possible the limited resources available for technical assistance and welcomed 
the pre- and post-project evaluation activities, noting also that multi-year 
programming of the various projects made it possible to forecast the financial 
resources which would be required. All those efforts, together with bilateral 
or regional co-operation between developing countries, suggested that nuclear 
technology would eventually make a real contribution to economic and social 
development. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 18 


65. There were, however, certain causes for concern which overshadowed those 
prospects. First, the Board of Governors had still not decided to place 
technical assistance and co-operation activities under the Agency's Regular 
Budget, which meant that they were still dependent on voluntary contributions 
merely because certain Member States maintained that the mechanism for 
financing technical assistance and co-operation was reliable and predictable 
and, moreover, that technical assistance should by its very nature be 
voluntary. Those arguments surely contradicted each other: in order to be 
certain of having funds to a given amount and to be able to make forecasts, 
the financial contributions of Member States would need to be obligatory and 
not voluntary. In addition, that situation contrasted with the financing of 
safeguards, which came under the Regular Budget and which enjoyed financial 
resources in excess of those available for technical assistance and 
co-operation. 
66. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance in certain spheres of 
nuclear technology was made subject to political conditions which were 
unacceptable to certain Member States. Chile was opposed to the imposition of 
any political conditions on the provision of technical assistance. 
67. Thirdly, the Secretariat had not yet responded satisfactorily to the 
request made of it on a number of occasions through the Board of Governors 
that it state the objective policies and regulations governing the 
recruitment, assignment and promotion of Agency staff in the light of the 
possibility that subjective elements might also come into play. 
68. The Chilean delegation approved the Annual Report for 1983 
(GC(XXVIII)/713). It endorsed as a whole the activities carried out by the 
Agency - despite the difficulties encountered in reconciling the sometimes 
divergent interests of Member States - which demonstrated that clear progress 
was being made towards the conquest of nuclear energy in the service of 
progress and humanity. The Agency would continue to occupy its important 
place if it limited itself to its purely technical role and remained free of 
all political influences extraneous to its mandate. 


69. Mr. MAKHLOUF (Tunisia) said that the satisfactory results obtained 
during the past year were due to the efforts made by the Secretariat and by 
Member States to strengthen international co-operation in the peaceful 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 19 


uses of nuclear energy. Tunisia considered that the Agency's technical 
co-operation programmes relating to the applications of nuclear techniques, to 
nuclear safety and to radiation protection, as well as its safeguards 
programme, were of very great importance for progress and peace throughout the 
world. 


70. Alongside its intensive oil and gas prospecting programme, Tunisia was 
currently taking steps to promote alternative energy sources such as solar and 
nuclear energy and it was grateful to the Agency for the valuable assistance 
it provided both in that field and with regard to the applications of nuclear 
technology and radiation protection. 
71. The Agency should take particular account of the concerns of developing 
countries and respond to their special needs and goals. His delegation was 
pleased to see that the broad lines of the technical assistance provided by 
the Agency with regard to nuclear power planning, the attention given to 
training, the proposals relating to the development of small and medium power 
reactors and, lastly, the emphasis placed on the application of various 
nuclear techniques were all mutually consistent. It felt, however, that the 
constraints of zero growth should not affect the Agency's different programmes 
to the same degree or in the same way. It was clear from document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/219 that the resources available for technical assistance 
remained insufficient to meet the needs and requests of the developing 
countries. He also noted with regret the appreciable decrease in the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) contribution and hoped that it would be 
possible, firstly, to arrest that downward trend and, secondly, to improve the 
implementation rate of the Agency's technical assistance projects. While 
paying tribute to the Department of Technical Co-operation, he stressed the 
need to strengthen its resources, especially with regard to manpower. 
72. Turning to the application of safeguards, his delegation noted with 
satisfaction that in 1983 the Agency had not detected any anomaly which might 
indicate the diversion of a significant quantity of safeguarded nuclear 
materialt however, the problem of vertical proliferation remained. It was to 
be hoped that the Third NPT Review Conference planned for 1985 would yield 
better results than the previous Conference had. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 20 


73. The development of South Africa's nuclear programme unfortunately 
continued to be a source of concern for Africa and the international 
community, since South Africa refused to place all its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards as it had been urged to do by various resolutions of 
the United Nations General Assembly and of the Agency's General Conference. 
There was as yet no evidence to prove that the most recent statement by the 
South African authorities - that of 31 January 1984 - was anything more than 
an opportunistic and propagandists ploy to gain time. The placement under 
safeguards of a semi-commercial plant would have no effect on South Africa's 
nuclear capabilities unless it was extended to the Valindaba pilot plant. His 
delegation considered that no effort should be spared to ensure the 
enforcement of all the provisions of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408. 
74. Since the question of the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi research 
reactor was similar in nature to the threat posed by South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities and since, moreover, Israel was engaged in extensive nuclear 
co-operation with South Africa, he considered that the document concerning 
Israel circulated at the General Conference did not constitute an adequate 
response to resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409. Not only had Israel not withdrawn 
its threat to repeat its attack on Iraq or other countries but it still 
refused to recognize the role of the Agency's safeguards system under the 
Statute. The international community, however, could not allow Israel or any 
other country to set itself up as a supreme judge deciding arbitrarily whether 
the nuclear facilities of other countries were peaceful or non-peaceful, 
especially when those facilities were under Agency safeguards. 
75. The amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute was a question which had 
been on the agenda of the General Conference since 1977. The purpose of the 
amendment was to remedy the unjust and discriminatory treatment of the two 
areas of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia. The arguments put forward 
by the representatives from those two areas had never, unfortunately, given 
rise to the detailed discussion and understanding which they deserved. Some 
speakers had maintained that an increase in the number of seats on the Board 
would diminish its effectiveness and efficiency, while others had invoked the 
so-called problem of balance. His delegation found such arguments 
unsatisfactory and felt that the moment had come to initiate a genuine 
dialogue in order to find a just solution to the problem. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 21 


76. In conclusion/ he appealed to all countries to support the Agency in its 
endeavours to better fulfil its function of promoting, for the benefit of the 
whole of mankind, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
77. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) said that the agenda included items of 
particular importance for the Agency's activities. Many of those items had 
already been discussed by the General Conference, and efforts should be 
continued to reconcile the views of different groups or delegations on the 
main aspects of the organization's work. In spite of everything, some 
progress had been made in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
78. The Annual Report for 1983 (document GC(XXVIII)/713) indicated that the 
receipts of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund had risen by 20.2% 
over the 1982 level and that the volume of assistance financed by the Fund had 
increased by 24.4%. Those two figures were encouraging in that they reflected 
an intensification in the provision of technical assistance, a basic function 
of the Agency through which many developing countries had obtained the 
necessary resources to promote their national programmes. However, his 
delegation noted with concern the continuing decline of contributions in kind 
and of UNDP funding. The financing of technical assistance was a problem 
which must not be neglected. It was worth repeating that the indicative 
planning figure system provided a mechanism geared to the needs and 
possibilities of Member States. That mechanism, however, was justified only 
to the extent that it responded to the needs of developing countries and 
guaranteed systematic increases in the indicative figures approved and as long 
as donor countries fulfilled their obligations as defined by the Agency. 
79. At the end of 1983 the total output of nuclear power plants throughout 
the world had been almost 200 000 MW, or 12% of world electricity production. 
Nuclear power plants were in operation in 24 Member States. A share of 97.6% 
of that total output had been produced by 19 developed countries, which 
indicated that nuclear power was another area in which an extreme imbalance 
existed between developed and developing countries. In that respect, the 
outlook seemed bleak. The Director General had pointed out in his report that 
nuclear power trends in the developing countries remained uncertain. In those 
countries only three new units had been connected to the grid in 1983, and the 
ten developing Member States which already had nuclear power plants in 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 


page 22 


operation or under construction would account for most of the growth in 
nuclear power-generating capacity in the Third World between the present time 
and the year 2000. The constraints on nuclear development were various, 
relating to infrastructure, manpower and financing. One constraint was the 


fact that most of the units currently available on the market were too large 
for the grids of developing countries. That situation was clearly due to the 


increasingly severe economic crisis which most of the developing countries 
were undergoing: quite apart from their energy and financing difficulties 
those countries were also facing problems in the fields of public health and 
education which, far from improving, were growing ever more serious. It was 
not surprising that countries with such difficulties were not in a position 
even to formulate nuclear power development plans. 


80. At a time when many developing countries were struggling against poverty, 
thousands of millions of dollars were being poured into the arms race each 
year, thereby increasing tension in the world, and acts threatening world 
peace were being committed. While nuclear weapons were being further 
improved, there was talk of limited nuclear conflicts and it was even 
suggested that a nuclear war could be won. The situation was aggravated by 
the mounting tensions in various regions of the world, such as the Middle East 
and Central America, where the just aspirations of the people to peace and 
development were thwarted by imperialistic policies of aggression and 
expansionism. The developing countries must deal with those problems despite 
their low level of industrialization, inadequate technological infrastructure 
and lack of competent specialists, all of which were factors limiting the ways 
in which they could apply nuclear techniques in promoting their economic 
development. 
81. With regard to the Agency's programme for 1985 and 1986 and budget for 
1985 (document GC(XXVIII)/715), he pointed out that, given the current 
budgetary contraints, the Agency's promotional programmes might suffer from 
further reductions in funding which would render their implementation 
difficult, while at the same time its regulatory activities were to benefit 
from considerable increases. The Agency should pay as much attention to 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as it paid to encouraging 
regulatory activities. Accordingly, his delegation was in favour of an 
increase in real terms in the Agency's budget which, for the current year, had 
been very modest. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 23 


82. He noted with satisfaction that the study on small and medium power 
reactors had been included in the Regular Budget for 1985, that being a topic 
of cardinal importance for the developing countries and of not inconsiderable 
importance for the developed countries. 
83. From another important document before the General Conference - the 
Agency's Accounts for 1983 (document GC(XXVIII)/714) - he noted with concern 
that at the end of the financial year the outstanding balances in respect of 
Member States' contributions to the Regular Budget and their voluntary 
contributions had increased. He stressed the importance of timely payment by 
Member States of their contributions to the Agency and announced that Cuba 
would be paying its full contributions to the Regular Budget and the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
84. The General Conference should examine the implementation of three 
resolutions approved at its twenty-seventh session. The first 
(GC(XXVII)/RES/408) concerned South Africa's nuclear capabilities. The 
discriminatory and aggressive policies of that country had been condemned in 
various international fora. His delegation considered that South Africa had 
not done what was demanded in the resolution, which nevertheless remained in 
force. The second resolution (GC(XXVII)/RES/409) related to the consequences 
of Israel's unjustified attack on the Iraqi research reactor. Everyone knew 
that the international community had repeatedly condemned that barbaric act. 
Israel's response to the demands of the General Conference and the United 
Nations General Assembly was unacceptable and inadequate. His delegation, 
therefore, continued to consider that resolution also to remain fully in 
force. The implementation of the third resolution (GC(XXVII)/RES/407) 
regarding the protection of nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes 
against armed attacks should be fully guaranteed in view of its particular 
importance. 
85. His delegation had taken note of the review of the Agency's activities 
(document GC(XXVIII)/718) prepared by the Secretariat and approved of its 
presentation. 


86. Regarding the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat (document 
GC(XXVIII)/723), he noted that at present ten Professional posts on average 
were occupied by nationals of developed countries for each Professional post 
occupied by a national of a developing country. The Secretariat should 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 24 


continue to take all appropriate measures to increase appreciably the 
representation of developing countries on the Secretariat's Professional staff. 


87. His delegation had welcomed China's admission to the Agency the previous 
year and felt that, in view of China's nuclear development, it was fair that 
it should have a permanent seat on the Board of Governors. 
88. The Agency had continued to participate in the preparatory work for the 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). There was a direct 
connection between the success achieved by the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS) and the preparation of that Conference where the problem of 
principles of international co-operation was concerned. His delegation 
therefore considered that, at its next session, CAS should concentrate on that 
problem. It would not be possible to make progress in formulating such 
principles until there was a clear understanding of the close relation which 
existed between co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the 
principles governing non-proliferation under generally acceptable conditions. 
89. Cuba had continued to promote nuclear energy and its applications in the 
national economy with a view to meeting the country's needs and sustaining its 
development. The first two units of Cuba's first nuclear power station were 
under construction; the station would comprise four reactors each with a 
capacity of 417 MW. It would be the first in the region of Central America 
and the Caribbean, and it was an example of international co-operation in the 
utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, since the Soviet Union 
had provided invaluable assistance in its construction. It would make for 
annual savings of 600 000 tonnes of oil per reactor in operation or, in other 
words, a total of US $500 million at the present price of oil. The technical 
assistance (equipment, expert services and fellowships) provided by the Agency 
had enabled Cuba to introduce, exploit and develop nuclear techniques and 
their applications in various sectors of the economy. Cuba was pleased to be 
able to announce, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of FAO/IAEA 
co-operation, that thanks to the assistance of specialists provided by the 
Agency under its technical assistance and co-operation programme, Cuba was 
about to introduce irradiation techniques for food preservation. In the field 
of nuclear medicine, considerable progress had been made with the diagnosis 
and treatment of various diseases by means of radioisotope techniques. The 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 25 


negotiations on the subsidiary arrangements relating to the first Cuban 
nuclear power station were proceeding satisfactorily. In addition, a Nuclear 
Energy Information Centre had been set up under the Cuban Atomic Energy 
Commission for the purpose of gathering up-to-date information on the various 
relevant questions and providing valuable services to national specialists and 
technicians. 


90. With its full agenda containing items of great importance for the 
Agency's work, the deliberations of the General Conference provided an 
opportunity to pool the experience acquired and work together to ensure that 
nuclear energy was always used in the service of development and for the 
benefit of mankind. 
91. Mr. CHRISTENSEN (Denmark) said that safety, international trade in 
nuclear materials, technical assistance and the objectives of 
non-proliferation were all areas in which the Agency played a leading role and 
should continue to do so in the future. Denmark strongly supported 
international co-operation and attached great importance to the Agency's 
contribution to international peace and stability and to the attainment of 
non-proliferation objectives. To demonstrate its positive attitude towards 
technical assistance, Denmark had already announced that it would pay its full 
share of the target set for 1985. Wishing to be brief, he said he would 
confine himself to commenting on three specific questions. 
92. Regarding the Agency's budget and finances, he recalled that during the 
past year many Member States had had to cope with budgetary restrictions, as 
was apparent from the discussion on the draft budget for 1985. He noted with 
pleasure that the Secretariat was ready to co-operate with Member States in 
dealing with those problems and to endeavour to identify priority areas. He 
wished to commend the Secretariat on having drawn up a budget which observed 
the zero-growth principle while emphasizing areas of special interest. He 
hoped the Secretariat would continue strict evaluation of all activities so 
that the limited resources available could be used as effectively as 
possible. To that end, the Secretariat should be allowed greater freedom to 
reallocate resources under the approved budget and to carry over resources 
already approved from one year to the next. In other words, if expenditures 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 26 


were to be maintained at the present level, the Secretariat should be allowed 
greater leeway to ensure that the budgetary resources were always used in the 
areas of high priority. 


93. Nuclear safety was a field which should not be underestimated, and the 
Agency was quite justified in considering it a priority area. The results of 
the Agency's activities in that field were clearly illustrated by the Nuclear 
Safety Review and the recently revised Regulations for the Safe Transport of 
Radioactive Materials. He was confident that the advisory group to be 
established by the Director General would make a positive contribution to the 
Agency's nuclear safety activities. 
94. In the light of the public concern aroused throughout Western Europe by 
the "Mont-Louis" accident in the English Channel, it would be helpful if the 
Secretariat could seize the opportunity and provide Member States with 
specific information concerning whether, and to what extent, the Agency's 
recommendations on the transport of radioactive materials had actually been 
converted into binding regulations in Member States. On the basis of such 
information, the Agency might contemplate various lines of action. By 
allaying public fears regarding the transport of nuclear materials, such 
action might help considerably in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
95. His Government believed that it was essential to Member States that the 
safeguards applied by the Agency should be considered effective and credible. 
Only under that condition could safeguards activities contribute towards 
stability and peace. In that connection, the Agency's safeguards were equally 
important to all the Member States and should therefore continue to be 
financed on an equal basis. 
96. His Government, which attached great importance to the expansion and 
continuous improvement of the safeguards system, had noted with concern that 
there were still six non-nuclear-weapon States in which only some 
installations were under safeguards and in which there were nuclear facilities 
in operation or under construction which had not yet been placed under 
safeguards. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 27 


97. Like other countries, Denmark appreciated the fact that various 
nuclear-weapon States had offered to place some of their civil nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. That offer, however, would not be of real 
importance until assurance was given that that was only a first step towards 
the safeguarding of all civil nuclear facilities. Failing such assurance, it 
might be difficult in the long term to justify the considerable sums spent on 
safeguards. 
98. He noted that it had not yet been possible to reach an agreement on 
international plutonium storage and hoped sincerely that the Board would 
ultimately be able to find a solution to the problem. 
99. In conclusion, he hoped that the Agency would continue to show the same 
high degree of competence it had always shown in its work by endeavouring to 
meet the sometimes conflicting needs of Member States. 
100. Mr. LE BA CAP (Viet Nam) commended the Director General on the 
considerable contribution he had made to strengthening the Agency's role, 
which was to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, taking particular 
account of the pressing needs of the developing countries. 
101. The General Conference was taking place at a time of heightened 
international tension caused by war-mongering imperialistic forces which were 
determined to pursue the arms race, particularly the nuclear arms race, and 
were extending their military presence to different areas of the world, 
thereby seriously threatening peace, safety and national independence and 
economic development. Mankind was now confronted with the disastrous threat 
of nuclear extermination. With their expansionist and hegemonistic policies, 
the imperialist and reactionary forces were attempting to sabotage peace and 
stability and to provoke confrontations in various areas of the world in spite 
of the people's fervent desire for peace. Viet Nam supported the peace 
initiatives of the Soviet Union and other countries, in particular their 
commitment not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and not to use such 
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States, the aim being to reduce nuclear 
weapons progressively until they were completely abolished. Maintaining peace 
was a pre-condition for developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 28 


102. For more than twenty-five years the Agency had been engaged in a fine 
mission in the service of mankind and had achieved praiseworthy success, 
especially in its technical co-operation activities. It was through the 
effective work done by the Agency that the Regional Co-operative Agreement for 
Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology (RCA) had come into being. 
103. Viet Nam was taking its first steps towards using nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes, having commissioned in Dalat in March 1983, its first 
nuclear reactor with a capacity of 500 kW. His country was also interested in 
the applications of nuclear energy, especially in agriculture and medicine. 
For instance, with the Agency's assistance, it was starting a training 
programme on such agricultural and medical applications for a team of nuclear 
specialists. Viet Nam's development programme was still very modest, and the 
assistance of the Agency and of friendly countries was still needed in many 
fields. 
104. In conclusion, he announced that Viet Nam would continue to play its part 
in making South East Asia an area of peace, stability and co-operation, free 
from all foreign interference. 
105. Mr. HEMPEL (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance - CMEA) recalled 
that CMEA had held its last economic summit meeting at Moscow from 12 to 
14 June 1984. The declaration adopted at that meeting by the CMEA countries 
reflected their common approach to major international problems. The halting 
of the arms race, including the nuclear arms race, followed by the reduction 
of armaments and the maintenance of a strategic military balance at ever-lower 
levels were the chief prerequisites for improving the world situation. There 
was no objective that was more important in today's world than that of 
maintaining peace on earth and preventing a nuclear catastrophe. It was 
possible to halt the nuclear arms race if all concerned adhered strictly to 
the principles of equality and security for all, and States could take 
immediate practical steps towards nuclear disarmament. To that end, it was 
necessary to show political will and to enter into a frank and constructive 
dialogue taking account of all the security interests of all nations. The 
greatest importance should be attached to the socialist countries' proposals 
for reaching an immediate agreement concerning a total nuclear test ban, a ban 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 29 


on the use of outer space for military purposes, and a world-wide ban on and 
abolishment of chemical weapons, and as a first step their elimination from 
the European continent. 


106. The Agency, whose authority was recognized by all concerned with the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, had an important role to play in that 
situation. The CMEA member countries had the highest regard for the Agency's 
activities in connection with the application of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and were in favour of strengthening 
the non-proliferation regime. 
107. The socialist countries, which had always been opposed to autarchy and 
economic isolation, were in favour of normalizing international economic 
relations and establishing mutually advantageous co-operation with all 
countries, whether they were socialist, developing or developed capitalist 
countries, in the spirit of the Helsinki Final Act. 
108. In their statement on the main guidelines for the further development and 
strengthening of economic, scientific and technical co-operation among the 
CMEA member countries, it was recognized that there were benefits to be gained 
from changing the structure of energy production and broadening co-operation 
to take account of the development of nuclear power and the full utilization 
of all energy resources including new and renewable ones. At present the CMEA 
member countries were finalizing, for the period up to the year 2000, their 
programmes relating to the construction of nuclear power and heat supply 
plants. 
109. The CMEA countries had begun to build up a nuclear industry which was 
developing rapidly. It was now 30 years since the world's first nuclear power 
plant had been commissioned in Obninsk in the Soviet Union and the national 
nuclear research centres of the CMEA member countries had embarked on their 
first projects. Whereas in 1960 the Soviet Union had been the only CMEA 
country to have nuclear power plants, and those producing scarcely more than 
100 MW, the total capacity of the plants now operating in Bulgaria, Hungary, 
the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union was 
approximately 28 GW. It was expected that in 10 years' time the total 
installed nuclear capacity of the CMEA member countries would be 100 GW and 
that the share of nuclear energy in total electricity generation would be 
between 20 and 30% in the CMEA countries in general and over 40% in Bulgaria. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 30 


110. The rapid growth of that new industry was guaranteed by the development 
and manufacture of the modern equipment needed for nuclear power plants under 
a multilateral agreement signed in 1979 by the eight CMEA member countries. A 
multilateral agreement of such wide scope was without equal throughout the 
world. 
111. Activities had been initiated with a view to utilizing nuclear energy for 
district heating. The Soviet Union had undertaken the construction of the 
first nuclear power and heat supply plants (equipped with 500 MW turbines) and 
nuclear district-heating plants. A water-cooled and -moderated reactor had 
been specially designd for that kind of plant. 
112. The international bodies set up by the CMEA member countries took an 
active part in nuclear power development. They were co-operating in the 
production of equipment for the nuclear industry within the framework of 
international trade organizations such as "Interatomenergo" and 
"Interatominstrument", and also in the research project on WWER-type reactors, 
in which Finland had also been participating since 1980. 
113. The CMEA had established extensive co-operation with regard to research, 
not only in the field of nuclear power, but also in isotope production, 
nuclear instrumentation design and improvement, isotope, radiation and 
particle accelerator technology and equipment and techniques for nuclear 
energy applications, as indicated by the information leaflets (in Russian and 
English) distributed by the CMEA Secretariat at the General Conference. Those 
leaflets also referred to the activities of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of 
Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic Energy for Food and Agricultural 
Development, which was celebrating its 20th anniversary in 1984. 
114. In the light of the decisions taken at the economic summit meeting, the 
CMEA member countries could envisage some practical ways in which co-operation 
with the Agency might be developed on the basis of the Co-operation Agreement 
between the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance and the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. The constant exchange of information and regulatory 
documents between the two organizations and their joint participation in 
scientific and technical meetings were continuing on an ever-larger scale, as 
indicated by the review of the Agency's activities during the first 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 31 


twenty-five years of its existence. The CMEA member countries were ready to 
intensify that co-operation and to extend it to other areas related to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


115. Mr. MARTINEZ COBO (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America - OPANAL) said that the arms race had always been a determining 
factor in international politics. Disarmament was a fundamental concept of 
international law acknowledged by hundreds of legal experts and diplomats 
which had been the subject of innumerable international and regional meetings 
and activities. However, the utilization of nuclear energy for military 
purposes had changed the situation dramatically. The spectre of nuclear war 
had brought an unprecedented threat to mankind: that of the very extinction of 
the human race. The mere possession of nuclear weapons could give rise to 
aggression, by mistake, by pure chance or by one of those acts of criminal 
folly which had been known to occur in the course of history. Preventing the 
catastrophe of a nuclear war was the greatest moral challenge that man had 
ever faced: as the Director General of FAO had pointed out, if the world 
could not rid itself of nuclear weapons forthwith, they would spell the end of 
human civilizaton. 
116. Given the world-wide consequences of a nuclear confrontation, the world 
was a hostage in the hands of the superpowers. Even though the nuclear-weapon 
States would be the most affected by such a confrontation, no nation large or 
small would be safe from that terrible danger. It was distressing to note the 
meagre progress made towards nuclear disarmament, despite the efforts deployed 
in connection with NPT, the Tlatelolco Treaty and bilateral agreements between 
the nuclear superpowers. On the contrary, nuclear arsenals were increasing in 
size with each day that passed and horizontal proliferation was accelerating 
at a dangerous rate. Human destiny today depended on the precarious policy of 
deterrence pursued by the major Powers, a policy which might fail at any 
moment. 
117. In order to give practical support to the ideal of peace and to help 
establish a framework for disarmament in international law, the countries of 
Latin America had set up the first and so far only nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
The recent accession of Antigua and Barbuda had increased to 23 the number of 
sovereign States parties to the Tlatelolco Treaty. Despite 17 years of 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.263 
page 32 


constructive work, however, those countries had not yet succeeded in extending 
that zone to cover the entire territory of Latin America. The President of a 
South American State had announced that his country had mastered the 
technology of uranium enrichment by gaseous diffusion. Although that 
spectacular advance was to be welcomed, it made it more urgent than ever to 
complete the nuclear-weapon-free zone established by the Tlatelolco Treaty. 


118. Nothing would be more tragic for the Latin American peoples, with their 
vulnerable economies labouring under the burden of massive debts and their 
still unresolved border conflicts, than to embark on a senseless nuclear arms 
race. That could still be prevented if the political will of all the States 
of the region to use nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes was 
translated into an agreement with the international community that nuclear 
energy should never be diverted for military purposes. Without prejudice to 
the decisions taken by Governments, it seemed neither effective nor 
appropriate to translate that will into national laws and regulations when the 
security and survival of other nations were already compromised. 
119. OPANAL, which was linked with the Agency through an extensive 
co-operation agreement signed in 1972, would continue to maintain close and 
fruitful relations with it inspired by the common objective of the two 
organizations: to avoid a catastrophic nuclear confrontation. OPANAL was 
collaborating actively with the Preparatory Committee of the Third NPT Review 
Conference. In his opinion, in order to ensure that that conference yielded 
better results than the preceding ones, the nuclear Powers should accede to 
the repeated requests by the developing countries for technical assistance and funding 
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, requests which they 
were entitled to make in return for their voluntary commitment not to acquire 
nuclear weapons. It was also essential that the nuclear Powers take steps to 
bring about an appreciable improvement in their relations which were so bad at 
present. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
March 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FOURTH 
PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 27 September 1984, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. SULLIVAN (Canada) 
later: Mr. SEMENOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda ** 
Paragr aphs 
General debate and annual report for 1983 1 99 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Finland 1 14 
Sri Lanka 15 21 
Uruguay 22 29 
Spain 30 40 
Holy See 41 47 
Panama 48 56 
Saudi Arabia 57 65 
Mongolia 66 79 
Zambia 80 95 
Cyprus 96 99 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 22 October 1984. 
**/ GC(XXVIII)/730. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-971 



GC(XXVIII)/0R.264 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/713) 


1. Mr. YRJO-KOSKINEN (Finland) began by welcoming the People's Republic 
of China as a Member of the Agency and expressing the hope that China's 
membership would strengthen the Agency's universality, credibility, and 
authority. 
2. Continuous and concerted international co-operation was of the utmost 
importance for the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, and the Agency was 
too valuable an instrument of international co-operation in that highly technical 
field to become excessively involved in purely political controversies. 
His country therefore earnestly appealed to the Members of the Agency to 
refrain from further attempts to exclude any Member State from the work of the 
Agency on political grounds. Such attempts served only to distract the Agency 
from its primary tasks, which were essential to the whole international community. 
3. Finland currently had four operating nuclear power units with a total 
power output of more than 2200 MW; their availability factors had been very 
high, ranging in 1983 from 83 to 90 per cent. In addition to being reliable, 
the plants were also economical and safe, both the individual and the collective 
radiation doses having remained far below international averages. 
4. Nuclear power was gaining ground in the global energy mix. In 1983 it 
had accounted for 12% of world electricity production, as compared with 10% 
in 1982. In Finland the corresponding figure for 1983 was 4l.57o. Nevertheless, 
the world-wide growth of nuclear power had been slower than expected. 
Global economic recession, a sharp increase in nuclear power investment costs 
in some countries and long construction periods had been the major factors in 
that development. Public anxieties as to the safety of nuclear power, and in 
particular of waste management and spent fuel disposal, had also had a growing 
influence on the decisions taken by Governments. 
5. The Agency could not be blamed for any of those problems. On the contrary, 
it had again performed its tasks efficiently in 1983. The Agency's activities 
should be kept under continuous critical review so that programmes could be 
adapted to the changing needs of Member States when any significant qualitative 
or quantitative changes took place in the uses of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 3 


6. His Government noted with satisfaction that a major study on small and 
medium power reactors had been launched by the Agency. Finland had gained 
considerable experience with the introduction of nuclear power into a small 
country and was willing to share it with other Member States. In particular, 
it had found that an appropriate national infrastructure and strict safety 
measures were a prerequisite for the reliable and economic functioning of 
nuclear installations, rather than an area where savings could be sought. 
7. As the Director General had said in his opening statement, the safe 
management of nuclear waste remained a highly emotional issue for segments of 
public opinion in several countries. Although technical solutions had been 
developed, there were still many questions on which international consensus 
was needed. For instance, the fuel cycle in most countries still remained 
open-ended. Reprocessing was not economically attractive, and so many 
countries had developed plans for the direct disposal of their spent fuel. 
However, the time span needed for cooling spent fuel was long enough to permit 
consideration of the reprocessing option. More time was needed for the development 
of commercial reprocessing and the introduction of breeder reactors. 
The economies of plutonium recycling were also heavily dependent on systems 
still to be developed for the effective safeguarding of plutonium flows. 
International solutions must therefore be sought and the Agency should be 
encouraged to assume a central role in finding them. 
8. Owing to the inherent destructive potential of nuclear energy, no international 
co-operation or trade was feasible without effective checks on 
military uses. In that sense, his Government concurred with the view that 
safeguards and other regulatory activities of the Agency were indirectly promotional. 
It was facile to argue that technical assistance was mainly of 
interest to the developing countries and safeguards to industrialized States. 
Both functions were equally essential corner-stones of the foundation on 
which the IAEA rested. In addition, the Agency must continue to be active in 
the indisputably important area of nuclear safety norms, guidelines and 
standards. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 4 


9. The Agency's technical co-operation activities had increased substantially 
during the last years. His country welcomed that development and considered 
that the target sum for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund should 
be raised while, however, maintaining the system whereby technical co-operation 
programmes were financed through voluntary contributions. Finland had again 
pledged its share of the 1985 target and was also providing the Agency with 
extrabudgetary resources for technical co-operation. As the financial basis 
for technical assistance improved, the Agency must continue to exercise great 
care in selecting, planning, implementing and evaluating technical co-operation 
projects. The Agency should be able to provide relevant advice and guidance 
not only with regard to the direct use of nuclear energy as such, but also in 
connection with the problems that might arise when nuclear technology and 
nuclear power were adopted in a particular country. The assistance provided 
should serve the general economic and social development of the recipient 
countries and should be kept under continuous review to ensure that it remained 
efficient and responded to the changing needs of the developing countries and 
to general technical developments. 
10. His Government noted with satisfaction that in 1983 the Secretariat had 
not detected any anomaly indicating diversion and considered it reasonable to 
conclude that nuclear material under Agency safeguards had remained in 
peaceful nuclear activities or had been otherwise accounted for. At the same 
time, it was a cause for continuing concern that there were six non-nuclearweapon 
States in which unsafeguarded facilities of significance for safeguards 
were known to be in operation or under construction. Finland considered that 
all non-nuclear-weapon States should accept full-scope safeguards on all their 
nuclear materials in all their nuclear activities, present and future. The 
IAEA safeguards system must be not only maintained but continuously examined 
and developed to meet rapidly changing technological circumstances. The 
safeguards system was in the interest of all nations, a fact which should be 
taken into account in the financing of safeguards. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.264 
page 5 


11. The exchange of materials and equipment on the international nuclear 
market was becoming ever more complex, because Agency safeguards arrangements 
were usually supplemented by bilateral provisions based on the origin of the 
nuclear materials. The question of origin in international trade had become 
a question of book-keeping rather than of physical fact. The book-keeping 
requirements were often satisfied by simply swapping material because 
materials of identical composition were interchangeable despite their different 
origins. With the introduction of fuel recycling that anomaly was likely to 
become even more serious in the future. The IAEA should pay attention to that 
practical problem in order to find an internationally acceptable solution. 
12. His Government considered that the implementation of adequate physical 
protection measures in respect of nuclear material by national authorities and 
a sufficient degree of international co-ordination in that area, as provided 
for by the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, would 
create confidence among States and enhance public acceptance of the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. Finland had signed the Convention and would 
ratify it as soon as the Finnish Parliament had adopted new and comprehensive 
nuclear legislation which was currently under preparation. 
13. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was dealing with problems of 
great complexity, and the method chosen to approach them, that of consensus, 
was inherently slow. However, progress in CAS was essential for the 
success of both the Third NPT Review Conference in 1985 and the 1986 United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). The prospects for a successful 
UNCPICPUNE had improved substantially during the fifth session of the 
Preparatory Committee, which had solved the two major outstanding questions, 
and his delegation hoped that the spirit of co-operation shown by all members 
of the Committee at that session would prevail throughout the remaining 
preparatory phase and the Conference itself. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 6 


14. The international climate had deteriorated over the past few years. 
Disarmament negotiations between the nuclear-weapon States had come to a 
virtual standstill. The present climate of confrontation gave added importance 
to the forthcoming Third NPT Review Conference. The nuclear-weapon States 
parties to NPT had undertaken to pursue negotiations on nuclear disarmament in 
good faith, and the resumption of negotiations on a wide spectrum of issues, 
including a comprehensive test ban treaty, would be a vital contribution to 
the success of the Review Conference. At the same time, efforts to halt the 
horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons must continue. The possibility 
that non-nuclear-weapon States might acquire a nuclear-weapons capability was 
a particularly grave danger in regions where international peace was in 
jeopardy. An efficient and credible non-proliferation regime was therefore of 
paramount importance apart from being a prerequisite for expanded international 
co-operation and trade in the nuclear field. No effort should be 
spared to make the Third NPT Review Conference a success. The IAEA had a key 
role to play in those efforts, in which it would receive his country's full 
support. 


15. Mr. DHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) said that the importance of nuclear 
power and other peaceful uses of nuclear energy in maintaining reasonable 
living standards, particularly in the developing countries, was now well 
recognized and accepted and that the Agency's role in contributing to the 
welfare of mankind by promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was 
assuming increased significance. 
16. Every Member State must have faith and confidence in the Agency's activities 
and must assist it in fulfilling that important role, and all Member 
States must accept unconditionally that any nuclear facility placed under the 
Agency's safeguards was devoted to peaceful purposes and undertake to protect, 
or at least not to attack, such safeguarded facilities. 
17. Promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the developing 
countries should not be restricted to transfer of proven technology. It must 
also include the generation of new technology. For example, one nuclear technique 
used in quality control in a factory in his country had been ruled out 
previously in two advanced countries as impossible. Projects should not be 
turned down merely because they had not yet been tried out in an advanced 
country. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.264 
page 7 


18. One of the advantages of nuclear energy for electricity generation in 
agricultural countries was that it did not cause acid rain, which had such 
adverse effects on agricultural crops. However, most developing countries 
had small power grids which could not accommodate large nuclear power plants. 
Such countries could benefit from nuclear power only through the use of small 
and medium power reactors (SMPRs), a subject to which the Agency had not yet 
given adequate priority. 
19. The so-called "brain drain" was another major problem of developing 
countries: very often the personnel trained to carry out a project were not 
available till the end of the project. The International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste was playing an important role in controlling 
the problem. However, its services were limited to physicists and mathematicians. 
The Agency could easily extend that facility to other disciplines by 
enlarging the scope of the Seibersdorf and Monaco laboratories to include 
such a service. 
20. The peaceful applications of nuclear energy in medicine, agriculture, 
hydrology and industry had progressed smoothly during the last year in 
Sri Lanka. Local training programmes in nuclear science and engineering had 
also been expanded. One important project that had come up for discussion in 
his country was the setting up of a tissue bank where human tissue from 
voluntary donors could be sterilized by nuclear radiation and preserved for 
later use. His country held a unique record in having donated over 
12 000 pairs of human eyes to 45 countries, from the United States to Japan. 
Thus the setting up of a tissue bank in his country would serve not only 
Sri Lanka, but the entire world. 
21. Finally, the importance of the Regional Co-operative Agreement for 
Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(RCA) and many other Agency programmes had already been mentioned by previous 
speakers, and his delegation wished to join them in reiterating its appreciation 
of those activities. As in the past, his country would be contributing 
its share to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 8 


22. Mr. PI BIASE (Uruguay) said that technical assistance and cooperation 
was an activity of primary importance for developing countries and 
Uruguay, where a number of projects were currently being carried out, was 
gratified by the way in which the Agency fulfilled its functions in that area. 
His country wished to co-operate with the Agency in that sphere and would be 
making a voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1985. 
23. Safeguards were another fundamental activity of the Agency and an appropriate 
formula should be found for financing them. The sums to be paid by 
developing countries should be directly related to their capacity to pay and 
to the extent of their nuclear activities subject to safeguards. Nuclearweapon 
States should bear the brunt of safeguards costs. 
24. Uruguay participated in and supported the Agency's work on implementation 
of the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for Latin America since it 
believed that regional co-operation was an appropriate mechanism for national 
development. For the same reason, it participated in the activities of the 
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC), the Latin American Energy 
Organization (OLADE) and the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America (OPANAL). Each of those regional organizations was competent 
in a specific field, and Uruguay was in favour of co-ordinated co-operation 
which maximized results and economized on resources. 
25. In the past year Uruguay had continued its efforts to develop applications 
of nuclear technology, in particular where medicine and agriculture were 
concerned, and a feasibility study on a nuclear technology centre had been 
completed with considerable support from the IAEA, UNDP and the Argentine 
Atomic Energy Commission. 
26. Uruguay wished to congratulate the FAO/IAEA Joint Division on its 
twentieth anniversary. The Joint Division was concerned with a wide range of 
agricultural subjects, and its work brought particularly great benefits to countries 
in which agriculture was of decisive importance for internal consumption 
and foreign trade. The training of young technicians at the Agency and, in 
particular, at the Seibersdorf Laboratory was very valuable for developing countries 
such as Uruguay. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.264 
page 9 


27. His country supported equitable geographical distribution, and also the 
fair representation of developing countries, especially Latin American 
countries, in the Professional staff of the Agency. Unfortunately, the proportion 
of such staff members who came from developing countries was still 
unsatisfactory. While recognizing the efforts made by the Director General 
to comply with resolution GC(XXVI)/386, he felt that there was still room for 
improvement. 
28. Reiterating his delegation's position on the amendment of Article VI of 
the Statute, he said that any amendment should ensure equitable geographical 
distribution between the regional groups and should maintain the current level 
of representation of the Latin American region. 
29. Finally, he thanked the Agency for the support it had given to his 
country and also expressed Uruguay's gratitude to friendly countries for their 
continuing support with its nuclear programme. 
30. Mr. MADRID GONZALEZ (Spain) welcomed China as a Member of the Agency 
and of the Board of Governors. His country maintained excellent relations 
with China and would now, through the Agency, extend them to the nuclear field. 
He noted in the context of the expansion of the Board that Spain would pursue 
its efforts to join the Board on as permanent a basis as was possible under 
the Statute with as much vigour as it had done before. 
31. As in previous years, his delegation wished to describe briefly recent 
activities carried out in Spain in relation to the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy. 
32. In 1983, total electrical energy production had amounted to 117 191 GWh, 
representing an increase of 1.287o over the previous year. The greatest 
increase had been seen in the nuclear sector which had produced 10 661 GWh, or 
21.5% more than in 1982. The installed capacity at the end of 1983 was about 
35 000 MW, of which 3765 MW was attributable to nuclear power plants. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.264 
page 10 


33. Uranium exploration had continued in 1983 with 87 000 metres of boreholes 
being drilled. At the end of the year, reserves amounted to some 30 000 tonnes 
which represented an increase of 9% over the previous year. National production 
of uranium concentrates had been restricted to 200 tonnes since arrangements 
had been made for such concentrates to be supplied from elsewhere. 
34. The Juzbado fuel element fabrication plant had been completed. The 
initial capacity of the plant in terms of uranium content would be 500 tonnes 
per year. The first fuel elements produced in Spain for power reactors would 
be supplied in the early months of 1985. 
35. In the first half of 1984, his Government had approved and submitted to 
Parliament the National Energy Plan for the period 1984-1992. The Plan 
foresaw that the installed capacity of nuclear power stations would reach 
7690 MW(e) by 1992. Allowance had been made in that figure for the fact that 
a number of projects were being terminated to prevent funds being invested in 
plants which would not have guaranteed a sufficient number of operating hours 
when connected to the grid. It was planned by 1992 to bring into operation 
four nuclear power stations which were currently at different stages of construction. 
Two of those would be coming into operation during the current 
year while the remaining two were due to be commissioned in 1988 and 1990. 
According to the Plan, nuclear power stations would be supplying about 30% of 
all electric power by 1990. 
36. The Plan also provided for the establishment of a public company concerned 
exclusively with radioactive waste management. Accordingly, the Government had 
approved the creation of such a body the previous July and had drawn up the 
terms of reference for its operation. An integrated and appropriate policy in 
that area was essential for the utilization of nuclear power. The key elements 
in the regulations established in Spain were the performance of disposal site 
research and construction programmes, the financing of those programmes, the 
transfer of costs to the producers of waste and the establishment of procedures 
to ensure the maximum transfer possible. International co-operation was vital 
in that field. His country had recently joined international research programmes 
and felt that the Agency had an important role to play in fostering 
international co-operation. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 11 


37. At present, his country's policy on radioactive wastes was to consider 
spent fuel as waste. Spain currently had no plans for reprocessing such fuel. 
38. In order to find the best solution to the problem of waste disposal, it 
was essential to compare all the different possibilities. The most suitable 
way of dealing with low- and medium-level wastes was storage on land. His 
country felt that sea-dumping must be terminated and called on all countries 
to give careful consideration to the facts that sea-dumping was irreversible 
and difficult to monitor and that the country dumping the waste relinquished 
its responsibility for it. Sociological and cultural considerations as well 
as the views of the countries nearest the dumping zone should not be neglected. 
National policies should be co-ordinated through international collaboration 
so as to avoid confrontations between countries. In any case, the selection 
of dumping sites without taking into account all the above aspects was not 
acceptable. 
39. Extreme caution should be exercised with regard to the burial of highlevel 
wastes in the sea-bed since that subject was still in the very early 
stages of development. 
40. Finally, his Government was satisfied at the progress made with technical 
co-operation in 1983 despite the limitations imposed by the economic difficulties 
all countries had been experiencing for many years. Spain had cooperated 
with the Agency by providing assistance and support for various 
courses and a seminar which had been held in Spain in 1983. In addition, 
Agency fellows had received technical and scientific training at Spanish 
centres and Spanish experts had worked on various Agency projects. 
41. Mr. CEIRANO (Holy See) welcomed the important step which the Agency 
had made towards universality of membership in the year that had passed. It 
was imperative that all States, especially those which already possessed 
nuclear power plants, should co-operate effectively within the framework set 
up by the Statute of the Agency. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons and subsequent safeguards agreements should also be regarded 
as an integral part of those regulations which sought to control the development 
and use of nuclear energy for the benefit of all. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 12 


42. His delegation appealed to Member States to alleviate the fears of 
humanity by joining together in a common effort to control, restrict and 
ultimately ban nuclear weapons. 
43. It was to be regretted that the general public was too often unaware of 
the safety standards governing the operation of nuclear installations and the 
management of nuclear waste. There were many reasons to account for the 
strong opposition to nuclear power in some sectors of public opinion, but 
underlying them all was the fear of the unknown. Member States should 
therefore make a greater effort to inform the general public about nuclear 
power with realism, honesty and sensitivity. 
44. The Church was ready to give help and moral guidance. That guidance had 
to be based on a careful examination of the matter, such as that carried out 
by the Pontifical Academy of Sciences in November 1980 on the subject 
"Humanity and Energy: Needs - Resources - Hopes", and again the study carried 
out in May 1983 on the effects of ionizing radiation. 
45. With the growth in nuclear power production, public attention should be 
drawn not only to the safety measures required but also to the benefits that 
the world, particularly the developing world, were deriving from the proper 
use of nuclear energy and research. The Holy See had repeatedly urged that 
every country should become self-sufficient in the production of foodstuffs 
and that technology should be developed and applied in accordance with the 
needs and capacities of the people, with due consideration for cultural, 
social, ethical and spiritual values. In that connection, the fruits of the 
joint work carried out by the Agency and FAO as well as the positive results 
of various medical projects aimed at reducing disease, especially in tropical 
climates, should be publicized. The Agency's commitment to supporting 
institutes in developing countries to enable them to undertake research in 
various scientific fields also deserved praise and wider recognition. 
46. While in the past the scientist might have been viewed uncritically 
as the solver of all problems, in recent times certain circles had criticized 
the scientist and had even castigated him for being unfaithful to the noble 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.264 
page 13 


aspirations of knowledge and truth. There was no doubt that some used science 
for personal gain at the expense of others and of the common good. The values 
of knowledge should always be wedded to the overriding values of the human 
being in society. 


47. In an address to the members of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences on 
12 November 1983, Pope John Paul II had concluded that the scientific truth 
which ennobled the intellect and lifted research to the level of contemplation 
of the world and of its Creator, should be transmitted to the whole of 
humanity for the integral development of each human being and of all nations, 
and for the service of peace, which was the object of everyone's reflections 
and projects. The words of Pope John Paul were particularly appropriate to 
the work of scientists in the field of nuclear energy. It was to be hoped that 
the Agency would have even greater success in its efforts to serve humanity in 
a field where abuse could mean death and destruction to man and his culture, 
but where there existed one of the most important sources for the economic and 
technical progress of future generations. 
48. Mr. KOREF (Panama) said that for his country technical assistance 
was the Agency's most important function, and especially in connection with 
medicine, agriculture and hydrology since Panama was so well endowed with 
hydroelectric potential that nuclear power was not even under consideration. 
Technical assistance was important also for the industrialized countries, 
however, as it created a demand for more sophisticated imported goods in the 
developing countries and at the same time enabled those countries to pay for 
them with their own exports. 
49. The annual sessions of the General Conference were not only valuable 
occasions for professional and political contacts, as the Director General had 
pointed out in his opening statement, but also a welcome opportunity for the 
many Member States not Members of the Board of Governors to voice their 
opinions and to thank the Secretariat for its efforts and donor countries for 
their contributions in cash and in kind. His delegation was gratified to learn 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 


page 14 


from the various documents that there had been a substantial increase in 
technical assistance from 1983 to 1984 as a result of dynamic planning. 
Increases of 35% for experts, 24% for equipment and 13% for fellowships 
without any corresponding increase in Secretariat staff were remarkable, and 


if a few additional staff members should be required to do the work involved 
there would surely be no objections. 


50. However, his delegation noted with dismay that 50 Member States had so 
far made no voluntary contributions for 1984, whereas a country so poor as his 
own had paid its full share; however, Panama could not yet commit itself for 
1985 because a new Government would shortly be taking office there which had 
not yet worked out its budget for 1985. In view of the successes of the 
Agency's technical assistance activities it was to be hoped that those 
50 Member States would eventually pay their contributions. 
51. His authorities had read with great interest the Joint Inspection Unit 
*/ 
(JIU) report on the Agency's technical co-operation and noted with satisfaction 
that many of the recommendations contained therein were being put into 
effect. 


52. His delegation was pleased to learn of the success of RCA activities in 
Asia and of the attempt to set up a similar scheme for Latin America, where 
there were several countries sufficiently developed to provide assistance in 
nuclear matters, for instance in the form of fellowships and seminars. 
53. Project evaluation was a very important activity, and his delegation 
looked forward with interest to the publication of the report on the evaluation 
of training courses from 1977 to 1983. 
54. The expansion of nuclear power had suffered severe setbacks in recent 
years due in part to the explosion of costs. Fortunately, 1983 had again seen 
no serious accident in the world's 300 or so nuclear power plants. The Agency 
had done much valuable work in the field of safety, but it should produce more 
public information material to counteract those forces which opposed nuclear 
*/ Document JIU/REP/84/9. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 15 


power on the grounds that nuclear power plant operation and radioactive waste 
disposal were excessively dangerous. Nuclear power plants were needed in many 
places around the world, and the sooner the true situation was made clear the 
better. An agreement on nuclear disarmament would probably also help to allay 
public misgivings about atomic energy. 


55. While nuclear power plants were becoming safer, the number of accidents 
in nuclear activities relating to agriculture and medicine was increasing. 
The Agency should send experts to developing countries to help prevent such 
accidents, which might pose severe hazards as nuclear activities expanded. 
56. With regard to the problem of military attacks on nuclear facilities, his 
delegation considered that the General Conference should press for world-wide 
ratification of the 1949 Geneva Convention, which prohibited such attacks. 
It would be said by some that the Geneva Convention was no business of the 
General Conference, but he felt that an appeal by the Conference to all its 
Members to come quickly to an agreement concerning the points at issue would 
be all to the good and would also have a stimulating effect on the work of CAS, 
which was doing its utmost but encountering apparently immovable obstacles. 
57. Mr. KATTAN (Saudi Arabia) wished to emphasize the Agency's lofty 
objective of promoting the use of nuclear energy for the prosperity and health 
of mankind and of preventing its diversion from peaceful purposes with complete 
impartiality and sincerity. 
58. Commending the annual report, he pointed out that it showed the important 
role which the Agency had played in introducing the uses of nuclear energy in 
various areas for social and economic development. The international community 
expected a great deal in that regard from the Agency in co-operation 
with other organizations of the United Nations system. In that connection, 
the Agency could make a vital contribution to the success of the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy, and it was gratifying to learn that the Preparatory 
Committee for that Conference had recently agreed on its agenda and rules of 
procedure. He hoped that the latter Conference would lay a firm foundation 
for international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 16 


59. All Member States were happy that the People's Republic of China had 
joined the Agency and had accepted its Statute. He had noted how easily the 
question of that country's membership of the Board had been resolved by recommending 
an amendment to Article VI.A.1 of the Statute, whereas the amendment 
of the same Article with a view to improving the representation of the areas 
of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia had been the subject of fruitless 
discussion at the Board for a number of years mainly because of the unwillingness 
on the part of advanced countries to do justice to those areas. His 
delegation urged the General Conference as well as the Board to find a satisfactory 
solution to that problem. 
60. Israel was in the habit of ignoring the international community, flouting 
international norms and conventions, and despite international indignation, it 
continued to attack not only military but also civilian targets. One such act 
was its bombing of the Iraqi reactor, a peaceful research facility, which was 
being built under Agency safeguards. 
61. As for the General Conference resolution which had called upon Israel 
specifically to withdraw its threat to attack nuclear reactors, no such undertaking 
was contained in that country's statement (GC(XXVIII)/719, Annex 4). 
Furthermore, it arrogated to itself the right to decide whether a facility was 
for peaceful or military purposes. Since Israel had clearly not satisfied the 
requirements of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, the Agency should implement that 
resolution. 
62. The Agency's safeguards system was a statutory requirement and was a 
natural consequence of the possession by industrialized countries of nuclear 
capability and weapons. Its purpose was not only to deter non-nuclear-weapon 
States from acquiring nuclear-weapon technology and to ensure non-proliferation 
but also to prevent vertical proliferation by the nuclear-weapon States. 
63. The safeguards programme was of importance from the standpoint of international 
stability, confidence and security, and his delegation considered 
that it was a moral obligation on the part of nuclear-weapon States in particular 
to create favourable conditions for the fulfilment of the objectives of 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 17 


safeguards by assuming a higher proportion of the costs and also by not providing 
financial and technical help to countries with aggressive intentions 
such as Israel and South Africa. 


64. Following the teachings of Islam, which enjoined actions promoting human 
welfare and happiness, his delegation supported the efforts of the world community 
and international organizations to fulfil their noble mission of 
bringing benefit to mankind. 
65. In conclusion, he observed that his Government had always discharged its 
responsibilities and obligations towards the Agency without delay and had made 
additional contributions in excess of its assessed share of the budget. 
66. Mr. SODNOM (Mongolia) said that the twenty-eighth session of the 
General Conference was taking place at a time of serious deterioration in the 
international situation as a result of the adventurist policies of reactionary 
and imperialistic circles. Those dangerous policies were aimed at further 
expansion of nuclear arsenals in order to upset the existing world balance of 
forces and thereby to achieve military supremacy with which to impose their 
will on the peoples of the world. 
67. The USSR and other countries of the socialist community were against any 
form of nuclear proliferation, the installation of nuclear weapons in countries 
where they had not previously existed and the extension of the arms race into 
space. The Soviet Union had undertaken not to make first use of nuclear 
weapons. Recently, it had proposed that the behaviour of the nuclear-weapon 
States should be subject to specific standards which would be mandatory in 
nature. The Mongolian People's Republic fully supported those initiatives. 
68. Ensuring world peace and improving trust between States were tasks for all 
countries. For that reason, in 1981 Mongolia had proposed that a convention 
on mutual non-aggression and non-use of force in relations between States in 
Asia and the Pacific should be drawn up and concluded; in July 1984 the 
Mongolian Government had further proposed that the agenda for the thirtyninth 
session of the UN General Assembly should include the item "The Right of 
Peoples to Peace" and had submitted for distribution as an official General 
Assembly document a draft declaration on the right of peoples to peace. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 18 


69. His delegation was convinced that, at a time of dangerous deterioration 
in the international situation, the Agency could and should act as an effective 
means of easing international tensions and consolidating peace through 
its statutory functions of safeguards, which were aimed at maintaining the 
non-proliferation regime. Noting the positive efforts of the Agency in that 
direction, his Government attached great significance to the increase in the 
number of parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), was firmly against 
any attempts to undermine the Treaty and was concerned that not all countries, 
in particular so-called "threshold" nuclear States, had adhered to it, thereby 
limiting its effectiveness and universality. 
70. The Mongolian delegation welcomed the results of the talks between 
representatives of the USSR and the Agency on the placing of certain peaceful 
Soviet nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. That act of goodwill would 
contribute to the consolidation of trust between States, to a further strengthening 
of the authority of the Treaty and of the Agency and also to improvements 
in the Agency's safeguards system. 
71. Application of the safeguards system was one of the Agency's main tasks, 
and on its effectiveness and reliability depended the confidence between 
States where compliance with NPT was concerned. 
72. His delegation welcomed the Director General's statement about compliance 
with resolution GC(XXVIl)/RES/408 on the exclusion of South Africa from all 
technical groups of the Agency. The Mongolian Government also welcomed the 
inclusion in the General Conference's agenda of item 11 on protection of 
nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes against armed attacks and 
supported the conclusion of a convention designed to prevent such acts in the 
future. 
73. Another important function of the Agency was co-operation with Member 
States in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Agency technical co-operation 
with developing Member States was highly beneficial since it enabled such 
countries to obtain the know-how and modern technology needed to use atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes. In that light, his country endorsed the work 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 19 


of the International Nuclear Information System (INIS), in which developing 
countries also participated actively. Mongolia also wished to thank the 
Agency for the technical assistance it had received in the form of expert 
services and equipment. 


74. In Mongolia, nuclear physics research had been under way since 1956, when 
the International Research Centre of the Joint Nuclear Research Institute at 
Dubna had been founded, one of the founder countries of which had been 
Mongolia. At the institutes of the Mongolian Academy of Sciences, at the 
University and other institutions of higher education and also at various 
scientific institutes, theoretical and experimental studies were being carried 
out on the physics of elementary particles and the atomic nucleus and work was 
being done on the application of isotopes and radiation in industry, agriculture, 
geology and biology. Medical centres had long been using isotopes 
and radiation for cancer diagnosis and therapy. A radioimmunological service 
for early detection set up with technical assistance from the Agency and WHO 
was in operation. At the Plant Growing Institute of the Mongolian Ministry of 
Agriculture, work had been begun with the assistance of the Agency on radiation 
genetics and selection of wheat. 
75. The Nuclear Research Laboratory at the University, which had been 
partially equipped with assistance from the Agency, was successfully engaged 
in multiple-element analyses with neutron activation, X-ray fluorescence 
and atomic absorption techniques. The Laboratory's research results were 
already being applied in production processes. At the Laboratory, an important 
part was played by the instruction of students in nuclear physics research 
techniques using modern equipment. The success of scientific research and 
technical work was to a large extent dependent on the systematic renewal of 
apparatus and on improvement of the qualifications of local staff. In that connection, 
his country had high hopes of assistance both from the Agency and from 
Member States. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 20 


76. The experience of previous years had demonstrated the effectiveness and 
acceptability of voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund and of the principle of making such payments in national 
currency. The transfer of the Fund to the Agency's Regular Budget would place 
a burden on Member States, especially developing countries. 
77. With regard to the proposed amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, 
Mongolia believed that any amendment of the Statute was a serious step and 
should be carefully thought out with the interests of all Agency Member States 
being taken into account. In that connection, the principles of equitable 
geographical distribution and of alternation should be respected where representation 
in the policy-making organs of the Agency was concerned. 
78. The review made of the Agency's activities over the past 25 years satisfactorily 
reflected the Agency's successes in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, which had been achieved in compliance with the objectives and tasks 
of the Agency on the basis of international co-operation. The review also 
showed the responsibilities borne by the Agency and its importance as a coordinator 
and organizer of the efforts of Member countries to co-operate 
internationally and to apply atomic energy for peaceful purposes only. 
79. Finally, the Mongolian Government endorsed the Agency's activities for 
1983 and expressed itself in general agreement with the programme and budget 
for 1985. 
80. Mr. SIAMWIZA (Zambia) reaffirmed Zambia's strong commitment to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was the collective responsibility of the 
Member States of the Agency to ensure that nuclear energy was readily available 
to all countries for the purposes of improving human living conditions. 
It was also their responsibility to ensure that nuclear arms were reduced if 
not completely abolished. In order to achieve those objectives, Member 
States would have to exercise more political will and flexibility. 
81. Although his delegation generally approved of the Agency's Statute, 
certain sections were clearly discriminatory, particularly in view of the 
increased membership of the Agency. All provisions of the Statute should be 
representative of all Member States' interests. In that respect, Zambia 
supported the amendment of Article VI.A.l. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 21 


82. Zambia's economy had continued on a downward trend in 1983 because copper, 
which was its main foreign exchange earning commodity, had continued to fetch 
low prices on international markets and severe drought had continued to affect 
agriculture. However, despite the gloomy economic situation, national efforts 
in the application of nuclear science and technology had continued. 
83. Both the Geological Survey Department and private international companies 
had continued uranium prospecting. In 1983 Zambia had produced about 9848 GWh 
of hydroelectricity and about 4628 GWh with coal. Consumption figures were 
6504 GWh for hydroelectricity and 4146 GWh for coal. The excess hydroelectric 
power was being exported. Both hydroelectric power and coal had great potential 
for further exploitation and so Zambia was almost self-sufficient in 
energy supplies for industrial uses. Zambia was, however, a net importer of 
fossil fuel, since in 1983 about 608 225 tonnes of oil had been imported, 
mostly for use in cars. 
84. In the national development plans for 1983 agriculture had continued to 
be given priority. Good progress had been made on Agency-assisted hydrological 
and agricultural projects. The project for the application of the 
sterile-insect technique in tsetse fly control had suffered initially from a 
lack of equipment, but the problem had been overcome with assistance from the 
Swedish Government under the 1982 regular programme of technical co-operation. 
85. Earlier in 1984, Zambia had hosted an international seminar on the 
application of the sterile-insect technique for tsetse fly control operations 
in developing countries of Africa. 
86. Zambia supported and encouraged the work of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division 
of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic Energy for Food and Agricultural 
Development. 
87. Steady progress had continued on the establishment of a nuclear analytical 
laboratory. When completed, the laboratory would provide the most comprehensive 
and sensitive analytical service in the country. The footnote a/ project 
on improving nuclear equipment maintenance capability had not been 
supported and had made little progress owing to the lack of much-needed assistance 
with spare parts and expert services during the year. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 22 


88. The Zambian Government was grateful to the Indian Government for its 
assistance on the radiation protection service project. That assistance 
involved training of key personnel and fabrication of radiation monitoring 
equipment. 
89. Although the level of assistance received by Zambia in 1983 was comparatively 
less than that received in 1982, Zambia was nonetheless grateful for 
all the assistance received. 
90. It was pleasing to note that financial resources for the technical cooperation 
programme had increased in 1983 as compared to 1982. However, the 
increased resources still did not match the number of technically sound projects, 
many of which had remained unfunded. Zambia would therefore continue 
to urge that the technical co-operation programme be financed from the 
Regular Budget. 
91. Zambia welcomed the positive conclusion that had emerged from the Agency's 
safeguards inspections and hoped that all significant nuclear facilities would 
eventually be placed under safeguards. 
92. His delegation noted the report by the Director General on the implementation 
of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 but believed that the threat of a military 
attack on safeguarded and peaceful nuclear facilities had not yet been banished. 
Zambia would support measures adopted by the General Conference and the international 
community aimed at effectively curbing such acts. 
93. As far back as 1976 Zambia had urged the Agency to stop contacts which 
would give the racist and fascist apartheid regime of South Africa any 
semblance of respectability. His country was therefore pleased to note that 
some progress had been made in minimizing technical group contacts between the 
Agency and the apartheid State. It was not surprising that discussions on 
comprehensive safeguards for nuclear installations in South Africa had been 
negative. Even if the negotiations on safeguards for the semi-commercial 
enrichment plant did achieve some measure of success, the enrichment pilot 
plant would still remain unsafeguarded. South Africa's nuclear programme was 
intended to defend its racial policy of apartheid, and the international community 
had a duty to help abolish that policy of apartheid. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 23 


94. It was regrettable that once again the Board of Governors was presenting 
an essentially negative report on the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute. Efforts should be renewed to find a solution to the problem and to 
correct the unjust under-representation of the regions of Africa and the 
Middle East and South Asia on the Board of Governors. 
95. Despite Zambia's economic difficulties, it had fully met its current 
financial obligations to the Regular Budget and the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1984. Zambia had also pledged its contribution to the 
target figure for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1985. 
96. Mr. PAPADEMAS (Cyprus) said that it had taken man only two generations 
to harness nuclear energy, which was capable on the one hand of contributing 
to the betterment of human life and the alleviation of famine and 
disease but, on the other, of completely destroying all life on earth. It was 
only when nuclear energy was used exclusively for peaceful purposes that man 
could congratulate himself on his greatest achievement. 
97. Sixteen years previously, he had been privileged to sign the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons on behalf of his country. That 
Treaty continued to be an important instrument for the promotion of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the prevention of the spread of nuclear 
weapons. His delegation strongly supported the Agency's verification and 
safeguards system and the submission by signatories of the Treaty of their 
nuclear establishments to that system. It was only when all nuclear facilities 
were submitted to safeguards that the rest of the world would be able to feel 
safe. 
98. In his statement, the Director General had referred, inter alia, to the 
application of nuclear energy in the fields of medicine, agriculture and 
animal and food production. Those were important areas in which nuclear energy 
could make a major contribution towards solving the severe problems which faced 
the world. His country, for example, had benefited considerably from the use 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.264 
page 24 


of nuclear products in agriculture and medicine. The use of isotopes in 
hydrology was of particular interest to Cyprus. Shortage of water had always 
been a problem, with aquifers and dams having to be built in an attempt to 
overcome the difficulties. The correct management of water through research 
using isotopes was essential to optimize the storage of water in dams and it$ 
rational distribution. The protection of crops such as citrus fruits from 
pests and the improvement of animal productivity were also major concerns of 
his country. His delegation thanked the Agency for its assistance in projects 
relating to those subjects and expressed the hope that such assistance would 
continue. 


99. In conclusion, his delegation was grateful to the Government of the 
United Kingdom for its offer to provide funds for badly needed training in 
radiation physics in connection with work to be performed in the Physics 
Department of Nicosia General Hospital. 
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
April 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIFTH 
PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 27 September 1984, at 8.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. SIAMWIZA (Zambia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


General debate and annual report 
for 1983 (continued) 85 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Morocco 1-14 
Austria 15 - 26 
Jordan 27 - 42 
Turkey 43 - 51 
United Republic of Tanzania 52 - 60 
Ecuador 61 - 69 
Greece 70 - 75 
Guatemala 76 - 85 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 22 November 1984. 
**/ GC(XXVIII)/730. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-965 
0252e 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/713 and Add.1 and 2) 
(continued) 


1. Mr BADDOU (Morocco) said that although the documents submitted to 
the twenty-eighth session of the General Conference reported many successes, 
they also contained matters for common concern. On the technical level, the 
Agency had fully attained its annual goals with regard to the design, 
management and operation of nuclear power plants, radioactve waste management, 
nuclear safety and radiation protection and also the basic applications of 
nuclear energy in agriculture, food, health and industry. Note should be 
taken of the preponderant share of resources allocated to technical 
co-operation, in particular the support given to the developing countries in 
drafting regulations, training personnel, designing, structuring and launching 
programmes and facilities and also introducing nuclear techniques in areas of 
fundamental importance such as agriculture, medicine and hydrology. Where 
Morocco was concerned, he welcomed the continuation and strengthening of the 
co-operation which had existed between his country and the Agency for almost 
ten years. 
2. Morocco's main concern at present related to its energy situation. It was 
spending ever increasing funds on importing oil to cover its energy 
requirements. For over four years it had been implementing a national energy 
plan aimed at exploiting the country's resources while giving due emphasis, in 
view of their future role, to new and renewable energy sources. Stress was 
also laid on controlling consumption by optimizing energy choices in the 
evaluation and classification of development projects as a whole. 
3. However, it could not be denied that Morocco was confronted with energy 
requirements which were increasing at a faster rate than its progress in 
utilizing its conventional energy resources or the financial resources it was 
able to devote each year to importing energy. That situation had been 
aggravated by the drought of recent years, which had brought out the unstable 
nature of hydroelectric resources and the close relationship between the 
availabiity of water and energy. It was therefore necessary to turn as soon 
as possible to a reliable, technically sophisticated and economically viable 
and competitive source of energy, namely nuclear power. In the short term, 
therefore, a resumption of nuclear power development could be expected. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 3 


4. The Agency's role in those various areas would be reflected in the 
increased range and complexity of the tasks to be performed and obstacles to 
be surmounted. In that regard, it was felt that the Agency's long-term 
planning activities relating to energy in the strict sense should be 
intensified. A specific programme aimed at identifying the energy 
requirements of each Member State should be established with a view to drawing 
up a report giving guidelines for, and a preliminary evaluation of, an energy 
development plan, which would assist those Governments wishing to determine 
the best options. With respect to technological development, particular 
attention should also be given to the technology of small and medium power 
reactors. 
5. The Agency should take a marked interest in the very serious problems of 
water availability such as drought and desertification and should encourage 
the development of nuclear techniques designed to improve the fresh-water 
resources exploitable by man. 
6. Co-operation between his country and the Agency was continuing to expand 
in both quantity and range and covered all the basic activities necessary for 
the implementation of the national nuclear programme, whose aim was to 
construct five units of 600 MW(e) each to be commissioned by stages 
between 1997 and 2005. The year which had elapsed since the twenty-seventh 
session of the General Conference had brought substantial progress in the 
formulation of national nuclear regulations, the performance of feasibility 
and siting studies for the first power plant and the establishment of 
appropriate scientific and technical bodies. 
7. It should be added that Morocco, a party to all the basic treaties and 
agreements relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, had begun the 
process of ratifying the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material and had also embarked on evaluation studies with a view to accession 
to the Vienna Convention on Civil Liabibility for Nuclear Damage. 
8. His delegation noted with satisfaction that the Agency was acquiring new 
Members each year and that the countries already belonging to the Agency were 
acceding in increasing numbers to the various treaties and agreements 
regulating its activities. Those new accessions demonstrated that the Agency 
was perceived not only as a body useful because of the services which it 
rendered, but also and above all as a necessary focal point for joint 
endeavours in the service of mankind. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 4 


9. The progress made also augured well for a better future with regard to the 
general and unqualified observance of the regulations governing the Agency's 
work and its relations with its Members and of the decisions taken by its 
General Conference. 
10. Morocco was particularly interested in the establishment of radiation 
protection advisory teams and supported the initiative taken in that regard. 
The Agency's Division of Nuclear Safety had concentrated all its efforts on the 
management of the nuclear fuel cycle and attached less importance to the 
utilization and marketing of radioactive sources used in industry, medicine 
and agriculture, although the environmental effects of such sources had caused 
more incidents than had nuclear power plants. 
11. His delegation had substantial misgivings regarding the real reasons 
preventing South Africa from placing all its nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards and strongly denounced its arrogant attitude to the decisions of 
the General Conference to which it refused to respond. 
12. The protection of civil nuclear facilities against armed attack was a 
primary objective to be attained with a view to promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. His delegation hoped that unanimous and whole-hearted 
agreement could be reached on ways and means of attaining that objective, 
thereby filling a serious gap in the coverage of safeguards relating to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that respect, the serious consequences of 
the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi research reactor should serve as an 
example to all who might still be uncertain about the need to prohibit such 
attacks or even to prevent them or obtain reparation for them. 
13. His delegation considered that the facilities affected by that measure 
should be identified according to precise criteria and should meet 
well-defined requirements leaving no doubt as to the peaceful nature of the 
objectives for which they had been built or the nature of the activities 
undertaken in them. Furthermore, those facilities should be subjected to 
appropriate controls by the competent organs of the Agency, controls which 
could include the compulsory notification of research programmes undertaken. 
14. In conclusion, he expressed his satisfaction at the untiring efforts 
deployed by the Agency with a view to promoting the use of the atom for the 
good of mankind. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 5 


15. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that the nuclear age confronted States 
with world-wide challenges which should be taken up by the international 
community within a universal framework. Since the Agency was an essential 
part of that framework, the presence of the Chinese delegation, participating 
for the first time in a session of the General Conference, was to be 
welcomed. China's membership was an important step towards the goal of 
universality and would strengthen the Agency's capacity to serve the 
international community as a whole. 
16. As the Director General had pointed out, one of the Agency's most 
important functions was to promote the development and peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy through the exchange of knowledge, experience and technology 
among the Member States. 
17. His delegation had noted with interest that 25 nuclear power plants had 
been put into service in 1983, bringing the total number of operational plants 
to 313, which represented a world electricity generating capacity of 
approximately 12% of the electricity produced in 1983. However, several power 
plants already under construction had been cancelled and other projects 
postponed, which indicated that world nuclear capacity was now increasing at a 
slower rate. 
18. One of the many reasons for that situation was the relatively moderate 
growth in electricity demand due to a more rational public attitude towards 
energy consumption and to the international economic situation. Public 
attitudes towards nuclear energy also had decisive repercussions on national 
projects and their implemenation rate. It was important to realize that 
"public acceptance" was closely related to the amount and quality of the 
information provided. More and better information was needed to facilitate 
public discussion at an educated level and create the conditions conducive to 
sound decision-taking. 
19. With regard to waste management, it had been stated that there were no 
technical barriers to adequate and safe management of nuclear waste. The 
issue, however, continued to evoke heated argument among the public. It was 
therefore essential to show that the problem could not only be solved, but had 
actually been solved. In that regard, his delegation had noted with 
satisfaction that a code of practice on the management of radioactive wastes 
from nuclear power plants had recently been completed. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 6 


20. In the next few years there was another problem which would be acquiring 
ever greater importance: the older nuclear power plants were approaching the 
end of their economic or technical lifetime and would have to be shut down. 
It was therefore important to endeavour to resolve the problems of 
decontamination and decommissioning. Austria supported the activities 
undertaken in those areas by the Secretariat. 
21. Regarding nuclear safety, Austria had noted with satisfaction that in 1983 
no major accident jeopardizing human health or the environment had occurred in 
any nuclear power plant. The operational safety review teams set up the 
previous year had peformed well and made valuable contributions to reactor 
safety. Since Austria had always encouraged efforts to improve nuclear 
safety, his delegation supported the Director General's proposal to set up an 
international nuclear safety advisory group to examine and analyse information 
on safety, provide a forum for the exchange of information and formulate 
projects accordingly. 
22. In view of Austria's interest in the transfrontier aspects of nuclear 
power plants, it was with great satisfaction that he was able to state, as the 
delegate of Czechoslovakia had already done, that negotiations on that subject 
between the Republic of Austria and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic had 
been concluded successfully and that an agreement on "questions of mutual 
interest in connection with nuclear facilities" had entered into force 
in June. That agreement was an example of fruitful co-operation between 
neighbouring countries in the nuclear sphere. Austria was already, or would 
in due course be, holding talks on that subject with all its neighbours. 
23. The main function of the Agency's safeguards system was to create 
confidence among the States in such a way as to guarantee that all the nuclear 
facilities placed under that system served exclusively peaceful purposes. 
That was an essential means of dispelling misgivings whose consequences might 
hamper the development of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. His 
delegation noted with satisfaction that safeguards negotiations had been 
opened or were being continued between the Member States and the Agency's 
Secretariat with a view to increasing the total number of facilities 
inspected. Austria was convinced that the Agency was performing an essential 
task for the international community by administering the non-proliferation 
regime verification system. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 7 


24. With regard to the resources allocated to the safeguards system and the 
technical assistance programmes, it was mistaken to think of those two areas 
as being in competition. It would be better to aim at a balance between those 
two goals, both of which had their own merits. 
25. His delegation regretted that the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) 
had made little progress in reconciling the conflicting positions held by 
different Member States regarding freedom of access to nuclear technology, on 
the one hand, and non-proliferation, on the other. It hoped that CAS would be 
able to find a mutually acceptable solution satisfying the requirements of 
both nuclear trade and non-proliferation. 
26. One of the Agency's most important tasks was to promote the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy in the developing countries through technical assistance and 
co-operation. It was therefore encouraging to note that all the indicators of 
the Agency's technical assistance - the number of expert assignments, the 
resources allocated for equipment and the number of fellowships awarded showed 
a clear uptrend as did the resources made available to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) since 1982. The system of indicative 
planning figures had yielded good results in the past and it provided an 
effective means of ensuring the predictability of technical assistance 
funding. He drew attention in that connection to the excellent work which the 
Seibersdorf Laboratory was continuing to perform. 
27. Mr BADRAN (Jordan) said that the twenty-eighth session of the 
General Conference was being held under very difficult circumstances, which 
called for a maximum of concerted action to meet the challenges and find the 
best solution for the entire international community. The political, economic 
and technological problems were growing ever more acute and there seemed to be 
no indication that they would be solved in the near future, all of which added 
to the fears of the international community, in particular the developing 
countries. 
28. Furthermore, the arms race, in the case of both conventional and nuclear 
weapons, was continuing to escalate at an alarming rate and the nuclear weapon 
stockpiles which had been built up were now sufficient to destroy human 
civilization several times over. It was regrettable that the international 
community had not yet been able to halt that terrifying race. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 8 


29. Moreover, the small countries with modest military and technological 
capabilities continued to feel vulnerable and apprehensive for their future, 
not only because of world-wide nuclear threats and uncertainties, but also 
because of direct threats by neighbouring countries such as Israel and South 
Africa, which had their own highly developed military and technological 
potential and were also supported by non-peaceful nuclear capabilities. Both 
those countries represented a serious threat to their neighours and to peace 
and stability in their respective regions. 
30. His delgation noted that there were two points on the agenda devoted to 
the present question. The first concerned the consequences of the Israeli 
threat and the second South Africa's nuclear activities. 
31. The General Conference of the Agency in its resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 
had given Israel ample time to demonstrate its good intentions with regard to 
the international community and the Middle East region and had requested 
Israel to withdraw its threats to destroy the nuclear facilities of 
neighbouring countries? only if it did so could the Agency continue its 
co-operation with Israel in a normal way. One year later, however, his 
delegation was forced to note with regret that: firstly, the statement made by 
the Israeli Prime Minister did not respond to or comply with resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/409. And what was even more serious, the statement left it to 
Israel to decide whether the installations which it was threatening in 
neighbouring countries were peaceful or not. That attitude was dangerous for 
it constituted a total negation of the Agency's role and its credibility, 
especially where the safeguards systems was concerned. Secondly, the Agency 
had concluded three contracts during the past year without waiting for 
approval by the General Conference, the only authority empowered to pronounce 
upon Israel's compliance with resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409. That called for 
an explanation by the Secretariat. 
32. His delegation wished to associate itself strongly with other delegations 
in requesting the General Conference to adopt a decisive and definitive 
position with regard to the international and regional threats posed by Israel 
and the South African regime. It also requested the international community 
to co-operate, through recognized bodies and governments, in putting an end to 
those threats and totally rejecting them as a political weapon, especially 
when they were directed against peaceful nuclear facilities safeguarded and 
inspected by the Agency. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 9 


33. It had to be stressed that all the developing countries had a long way to 
go before being able to use nuclear technology to cover their energy 
requirements and would not even have reached that stage by the year 2000. 
That was due to the international nuclear technology markets and the 
constraints upon it, and was not only attributable to inadequate financial 
resources and infrastructure and the lack of trained personnel. 
34. if the developed countries wished to broaden their local market by 
incorporating district heating and process heat production schemes, then it 
would be necessary to expand the international nuclear technology market, to 
remove the constraints imposed on the developing countries in that regard and 
to find satisfactory solutions to the political and military problems posed by 
nuclear facilities. His delegation was convinced that the Agency, with its 
international reputation, could play a vital role in that regard. In addition 
to the study on small and medium power reactors in which the Agency was 
currently engaged, it should also, without further delay, set up a task force 
composed of a small number of representatives from developing countries to 
conduct a thorough investigation of the obstacles preventing the expansion of 
the international nuclear technology market and to propose solutions and 
possible options. That study could then serve as a practical basis for a 
realistic and well-defined programme designed to give the developing countries 
every opportunity to solve their energy problems through nuclear technology. 
35. With regard to the application of nuclear techniques in medicine, 
agriculture, food preservation, water exploration and other areas, the great 
efforts which had been deployed were appreciated although there was still much 
to be done. Co-operation between the Agency and the FAO had the support of 
all the Member States, especially his own country. 
36. With regard to the international safeguards system, Jordan requested, as 
it had done at the twenty-seventh session the previous year, that it should be 
developed along the lines of a dual responsibility system, whereby the country 
concerned would be required to provide all the guarantees requested by the 
Agency, including permission to conduct direct inspections to prove that the 
country's nuclear facilities were intended for peaceful purposes. At the same 
time, the international community should guarantee by means of a special 
arrangement adminstered by the Agency that the facilities in question would 
not be exposed to threats or destruction by conventional or nuclear weapons. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 10 


37. A system of that kind would greatly help to allay the fears of the 
developing countries, in particular the smaller countries, and would assure 
them that their investment could not be threatened by aggressive States, as 
was the case in the Middle East. 
38. Jordan welcomed the efforts deployed by the Agency with regard to nuclear 
safety and considered that the Director General's proposal to set up 
operational safety review teams ready to take action at the request of any 
Member State should be encouraged. However, as the Indian delegation had 
already said, preoccupation with safety should not be carried to the point 
where it became an obstacle to progress in the developing countries' nuclear 
capacity. 
39. The Agency's work regarding nuclear waste management also deserved 
support, especially the establishment of internationally accepted standards 
and criteria for the disposal of high-level waste. The code of practice on 
the management of radioactive wastes from nuclear power plants would therefore 
be very useful. 
40. His delegation welcomed the progress made in terms of both quantity and 
quality in the field of technical co-operation. There was a need, however, 
for better programming and broader co-operation in order to narrow the 
technological gap between Member States and the division of countries in two 
categories: those interested in obtaining technical assistance, i.e. the 
developing countries; and those interested in improving the safeguards system, 
i.e. the developed countries. Only then would it be possible to discuss 
certain issues with greater objectivity. 
41. Jordan considered that the Agency's annual report and the statement by the 
Director General faithfully reflected the Agency's persistent efforts to serve 
the international community in the sphere of atomic energy. Moreover, the 
more the Member States co-operated in observing the Agency's Statute, the 
greater the chances of transforming the nuclear nightmare into an instrument 
of peace and progress. 
42. He confirmed Jordan's pledge to pay its share of the target fixed for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1985. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 11 


43. Mr. ERNER (Turkey) recalled that under Article II of the Statute one 
of the Agency's objectives was to "ensure, so far as it is able, that 
assistance provided by it or at its request or under its supervision or 
control is not used in such a way as to further any military purpose". 
Against that background, he wished first of all to make some comments on the 
Agency's safeguards activities, to which part of the Annual Report for 1983 
was devoted. His delegation had noted with great satisfaction that the Agency 
had not detected during the year in question any anomaly which might indicate 
the diversion of a significant quantity of safeguarded nuclear material. That 
fact was most reassuring and helped to build confidence among States and, 
hence, to establish regional and world-wide peace and security. The Agency 
was to be commended for its considerable efforts in the area of safeguards 
in 1983. Generally speaking, despite the relatively low number of man-days 
recorded for assignments in nuclear-weapon States, the overall level of 
inspection activity had been highly satisfactory. 
44. Nonetheless, he could not hide his concern about the unsafeguarded 
facilities of significance for safeguards which existed in various States. 
Unsafeguarded materials, whether in nuclear-weapon or non-nuclear-weapon 
States, were a real source of concern for Member States. In that regard, his 
delegation wished to express its satisfaction at the latest voluntary 
safeguards agreement offer by one of the nuclear-weapon States, now the fourth 
such State to place some of its civil nuclear facilities voluntarily under the 
Agency's safeguards. 
45. The other pillar of support provided by the Agency as an organization was 
its technical assistance and co-operation programme. Without technical 
assistance many developing countries would be confronted with enormous 
difficulties. In the course of the years, the Agency had proved to be not 
only a trustworthy and impartial instrument for the provision of technical 
assistance in the form of fellowships, expert services and equipment and for 
the transfer of various kinds of nuclear technology, but had also served as a 
unique means of providing objective guidelines on almost all aspects of the 
nuclear fuel cycle. The Director General and the Secretariat were to be 
complimented on the satisfactory results which they had obtained with regard 
to technical assistance in 1983. In June 1984, the Director General had 
stated at a meeting of the Board of Governors that the resources allocated for 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 12 


technical assistance had increased by 25% over 1982, reaching a total ox 
$34.5 million. It was also gratifying to note the increase in the technical 
assistance implementation rate during the first months of 1984, which had 
increased by 50% compared with the same period in 1983. Mention should also 
be made of the large number of footnote &/ projects for 1983 made operational 
by April 1984. 

46. Those results were proof of improved administration and co-ordination 
between the different Departments of the Secretariat. Such close co-operation 
not only contributed to the Agency's efficiency, but also helped to increase 
the actual assistance received by Member States. 
47. His country pledged its assessed share of the target for voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1985. It 
was grateful to the Department of Technical Co-operation for its valuable aid 
and thanked the Division of Nuclear Safety, which had been very helpful in 
introducing clarity into, and also expediting, the Turkish nuclear power 
programme. 
48. His delegation had followed the work of the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS) with interest and had taken part in its discussions. The fact 
that the Committee had reached an agreement on emergency and back-up 
mechanisms gave cause for cautious optimism. Some headway had also been made 
in the revision mechanisms. On the other hand, it was somewhat perturbing to 
note the difficulties which had arisen during the twelfth session of CAS, when 
the Committee had tackled principles (16) to (19). He was aware of the 
concern among participants of CAS for various definitions relating to the 
issue of non-proliferation. It should be stressed, however, that if no common 
ground could be found on that issue, the progress made by CAS so far would be 
rendered meaningless. If it were not possible to reach an agreement on the 
question of non-proliferation, CAS would become a forum for unproductive 
deliberations which would only be a waste of time for all concerned. Turkey 
therefore urged all the delegations represented on the Committee to show 
courage, flexibility and greater understanding in considering the matter of 
principles. Without greater political goodwill CAS would be unable to make 
any real progress. Furthermore, it should not be forgotten that failure or, 
at any rate, the strong probability of failure, on the part of CAS, would have 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 13 


repercussions on other important conferences, namely the Third Review 
Conference of the Parties to NPT and the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy (UNCPICPUNE) to be held in September 1985 and in 1986 respectively. 


49. Turkey's electricity generating capacity had increased since 1982 by 13% 
per year, reaching a level of 33 000 GWh in 1984. However, since that level 
had proved insufficient to cover the increasing demand, the difference had 
been made up by importing 2000 GWh from the USSR and Bulgaria. That situation 
showed that the target set for the nuclear power capacity to be installed by 
the year 2000, namely 3000 MW, was realistic. In 1984, Turkey's thermal power 
plants had accounted for 56% of the total electricity produced, the 
remaining 44% being supplied by hydroelectric energy. When the first two 
reactors currently planned came on line in 1992, Turkey would have a total 
installed nuclear capacity of 1650 MW(e), amounting to 10% of its total 
electricity production. Studies were now under way for a further reactor witn 
an output of 1000-1200 MW(e), which would be connected to the grid in 1996. 
50. The site chosen for the first two reactors lay in the region of Akkuyu, in 
the south of Turkey. The next reactor would be built at Sinope in the north 
of Turkey. In view of seismic conditions in Turkey, safety analyses and 
quality assurance programmes were of great importance and raised particular 
difficulties. The Agency had already provided valuable assistance during the 
preparatory phases of the programme. Two bilateral co-operation agreements 
had been signed in May and June 1984, with the Federal Republic of Germany and 
Canada, respectively. Through these agreements, Turkey should be able to 
benefit from the experience and expertise already acquired in those 
countries. Turkey would require further assistance from the Agency in the 
matter of licensing. Long-term arrangements had accordingly been made for 
the provision of experts and a training programme had been devised jointly 
with the competent Divisions of the Agency. 
51. The Turkish example was yet another illustration of how important the 
Agency's services could be for Member States. His delegation wished to thank 
the Secretariat once again for its co-operation and remained convinced that 
the Agency, through its promotional and regulatory activities, would continue 
to help maintain peace and prosperity throughout the world. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 14 


52. Mr. CHAGULA (United Republic of Tanzania) said that his delegation 
attached the greatest importance to the Agency's vital function of 
accelerating the economic development of the developing countries and 
strengthening world security through the transfer of nuclear technology for 
peaceful purposes. It was gratifying to note the considerable effort made by 
the Agency in promoting the exchange of knowledge and the transfer of 
technology, in particular through meetings, publications, expert missions, 
fellowships and the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) . 
53. Nonetheless, despite the recent measures taken to improve the services it 
provided to Member States, the Agency should not lose sight of the needs of 
the least developed Member States. The latter could not derive full benefit 
from the Agency's services unless they were given the opportunity to develop 
their capacity to use atomic energy for peaceful purposes, in particular in 
agriculture, hydrology, medicine and industry. Those countries needed 
qualified personnel and the necessary infrastructure if they were to attend 
the technical meetings organized by the Agency, take advantage of the 
information contained in the technical reports and make use of INIS. It went 
without saying that all efforts in that direction had to be co-ordinated with 
those of other competent bodies within the United Nations system. 
54. Resolution GC(XXVI)/RES/399 had been adopted by the General Conference in 
recognition of the growing needs of the developing countries for the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy. Like other developing countries, Tanzania was 
appreciative of the results of the review of the Agency's activities 
undertaken in response to that resolution. However, document GC(XXVIII)/718 
did not contain any practical suggestions or recommendations on the best ways 
in which the Agency might respond to the needs of the developing countries. 
There had not even been any need to investigate those needs, since the 
representatives of the developing Member States had voiced their concerns 
eloquently at each year's General Conference. His delegation would continue 
to express serious concern regarding a number of points where improvements 
could be made in the Agency's efficiency and its credibility from the point of 
view of all its Member States. 
55. During the past decade the number of developing countries belonging to the 
Agency, particularly those in the regions of Africa and the Middle East, had 
increased considerably and their representation on the Board of Governors 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 15 


should have increased proportionately. It was laid down in the Statute that 
the Agency was based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its 
Members and that they had equal rights and obligations. That being so, there 
was no clear reason why the Member States from certain regions should be 
denied equal representation on the Board. He appealed to the sense of justice 
of the developed Member States and asked them to accept a modest increase in 
the number of seats on the Board. It was high time that a decision was taken 
on the matter. 


56. Technical co-operation was of the greatest importance for his delegation, 
especially in that it enabled the Agency to bring its Member States together 
in providing assistance to the least developed countries, including Tanzania. 
It was most regrettable that the insufficiency and unpredictability of those 
resources had made it more difficult to perform that important task. It was 
an unfortunate historical accident that the funding of technical co-operation 
was based solely on voluntary contributions. The Agency should move with the 
times. Although it had had very few developing Member States during the first 
years of its existence, a draft resolution proposing that all its activities 
be financed from the Regular Budget had been submitted back in 1962 at the 
sixth session of the General Conference. That resolution had not been 
adopted. The number of developing countries belonging to the Agency and the 
needs of those States had increased substantially since that time. The 
adoption by the General Conference in 1981 of a resolution very similar to the 
1962 draft resolution illustrated the inadequacy of all the alternative 
proposals put forward so far. His delegation therefore considered that the 
earlier proposal, i.e. the one contained in the draft resolution submitted to 
the sixth session of the General Conference, should be seriously re-examined 
by the General Conference. Until a satisfactory solution to the problem had 
been found, it would be difficult to realize the Agency's ideal, which was to 
promote the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, particularly in the 
developing Member States. 


57. All delegations were well aware of the constant threat to the African 
continent posed by the nuclear capability of the racist South African regime. 
Tanzania, along with all peace-loving nations, was deeply disappointed that 
many developed Member States and a number of international organizations were 
continuing to collaborate with South Africa despite the many resolutions tabled 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 16 


by the United Nations General Assembly and the General Conference of the 
Agency. Such collaboration was dangerous because, despite its undertaking to 
pursue its nuclear programme in accordance with the spirit, principles and 
objectives of NPT, the South African regime still refused to place its nuclear 
facilities under full-scope IAEA safeguards. Its pledge was therefore 
insincere, contradictory and a mockery of the spirit and objectives of NPT. 
The South African regime could only win the confidence of the international 
community if it guaranteed the transparency of all its nuclear activities by 
placing all its nuclear facilities, including its uranium enrichment plants, 
unaer Agency safeguards. He commended the Agency on its efforts to put 
resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408 into effect, and hoped that the Member States 
would provide the necessary support for its full implementation. In that 
connection, his delegation had been alarmed to learn of the existence of 
international plans (involving several Member States of the Agency) to use 
Namibian territory as a dumping ground for nuclear wastes in return for 
substantial sums of money, which could be used by the racist South African 
regime against the oppressed people of Namibia. The Agency was urged, in 
collaboration with the United Nations Council for Namibia, to watch out for 
those sinister plans with a view to bringing them to the attention of the 
international community and preventing their implementation. The Secretariat 
of the Agency should also, in future, provide the Board of Governors and the 
General Conference with information on any co-operation enjoyed by the South 
African regime with Member States of the Agency, in particular in the nuclear 
sphere. 


58. It was true that nuclear power trends in most of the developing countries 
were very uncertain, not for want of interest on the part of those countries, 
but because they lacked the means necessary to integrate nuclear power plants 
into their energy systems, the capital outlay required for the construction of 
such plants being prohibitive. The developing countries were struggling hard 
to become industrialized and energy was, of course, an important pre-condition 
for the process of industrialization. They were also trying to protect their 
physical enivronment and would therefore be pleased to do so by opting for 
nuclear power (provided it was within their means) in preference to fossil 
fuel energy, which polluted the environment. Furthermore, most of the 
developing Member States of the Agency had no fossil fuels of their own and 
were unable to afford them on the scale necessary for their industrialization 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 17 


programmes. Nuclear energy was therefore very promising as both a clean and 
reliable energy source, provided that the safety of nuclear power stations 
could be guaranteed. The envisaged study on small and medium power reactors 
could be of aid to the developing countries in overcoming the main 
difficulties involved in the use of nuclear energy. His delegation was 
pleased that such a study had been undertaken, and hoped that it would help to 
increase confidence in nuclear energy and to promote its use, particularly in 
developing countries. 


59. Lastly, his delegation was grateful to the Agency for facilitating the 
exchange of experience and formulating various kinds of regulations for the 
safe operation of facilities and handling of nuclear materials. He supported 
the idea of setting up a nuclear safety advisory group for the purpose of 
studying general nuclear safety issues. 
60. The aim of safeguards was to ensure that all nuclear activities were being 
conducted without any diversion of fissionable materials for non-peaceful 
purposes. Attaining that aim would certainly create the desired confidence, 
but such confidence should be gauged in accordance with the proportion of 
nuclear activities not yet placed under safeguards. That proportion was still 
far too high, especially as it included most of the military programmes of the 
nuclear-weapon States which were Members of the Agency. The threat of nuclear 
annihilation still hung over the world in spite of the large number of States 
parties to NPT. Most of the Agency's Member States had committed themselves 
to safeguards verification and were also parties to NPT. Nonetheless, there 
remained much to be done in order to make the solemn commitments given by 
those States fully valid. The present system, whereby the Member States 
voluntarily offered to place their nuclear facilities under safeguards, a 
system which lacked coherence, should be reviewed. He therefore hoped that 
corrective measures would be adopted at the next Review Conference of the 
Parties to NPT in order to create the desired confidence in the realm of 
safeguards. 
61. Mr. VASCONEZ (Ecuador) said that the detailed report by the Director 
General had brought out with greater clarity the vital importance of the 
mandate entrusted to the Agency, which was to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world and to assist in efforts to prevent the use of such energy for military 
purposes. 

GC(XXVHI)/OR.265 
page 18 


62. The economic and political crisis, the idealogical conflicts between the 
different blocs and the insecurity which marked international relations 
prompted one to reflect on the urgent need to develop the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy for the benefit of all peoples, more especially, the developing 
countries. His delegation hoped that the competent international fora would 
make substantial progress towards limiting, and if possible halting, the 
nuclear arms race, the cost of which - in terms of potential victims as well 
as money - was irrational and offensive to mankind. Traditionally a 
peace-loving country, Ecuador was making a fresh appeal to the international 
community to do its utmost to show wisdom in decisions regarding world 
disarmament, a united will on the part of all the States being an essential 
condition for constructive dialogue. 
63. His delegation reaffirmed its allegiance to the Agency's safeguards 
system, which it considered an extremely useful instrument. He noted, 
however, that the cost of safeguards tended to exceed the funds allocated for 
technical assistance and co-operation. Since the latter provided the real way 
forward to the international collaboration necessary for devising national 
nuclear power programmes and, hence, the economic advancement of the 
developing countries, there was no choice but to freeze the safeguards budget 
for two years. 
64. Ecuador had been following the discussions of CAS carefully. While fully 
aware of the progress made in establishing an emergency and back-up mechanism, 
it was important to recall that the parallel negotiation of all the principles 
of international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy was a sine qua non 
for implementing such a system. It would not slacken its efforts to ensure 
that such negotiation work was continued within CAS. 
65. Latin America was proud of having established the first and so far only 
nuclear-free zone. The Tlatelolco Treaty was one of the region's main 
contributions to the objectives of peace and international disarmament. The 
grave world situation highlighted the importance of that treaty which, despite 
17 years of fruitful work, would not have fully attained its objective until 
the entire region was a nuclear-weapon-free zone. He therefore appealed to 
those few countries which had not yet acceded to the Treaty to sign or ratify 
it, thereby associating themselves with the 23 States sovereign members of the 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL). 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 19 


66. The efforts deployed by the Director General in appointing nationals from 
developing countries to directorial posts within the Secretariat were to be 
welcomed. In the firm belief, however, that those efforts were still 
insufficient, his country would continue to assist the Director General in his 
endeavours to rectify the existing imbalance. It also attached particular 
importance to the proposal by a significant number of countries to place the 
financing of technical assistance and co-operation on a reliable and 
predictable basis by paying for those activities from the Agency's Regular 
Budget; it would then be possible to respond fully to the needs of the 
developing countries in accordance with their national programmes. 
67. China's admission to the Board of Governors was a very important event and 
there was no doubt that the assistance of China would be greatly appreciated 
by all Member States. He also wished to reaffirm his delegation's position, 
which it shared with the entire Latin American Group, regarding any amendment 
of Article VI of the Statute: such an amendment should not reduce the number 
of seats occupied by Latin America on the Board. Ecuador was prepared to take 
part in negotiations on that point. 
68. His delegation was convinced that suitable mechanisms were necessary for 
the protection of peaceful nuclear facilities against armed attacks and 
therefore strongly supported the draft resolution submitted by Argentina. 
69. Ecuador, which had participated actively in the Andean Group project, 
would continue to do whatever was necessary to attain its objectives and 
reaffirmed its full support for the project and for the action taken by the 
Agency in launching the Regional Co-operative Arrangements for Latin 
America (ARCAL). His country welcomed the donor countries which had helped to 
upgrade the programme and, as a token of its interest in ARCAL, had invited it 
to meet at Quito in August 1985 and had assured it that it could count on the 
collaboration of the Government and Ecuadorian people. 
70. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece) said that his country, a firm believer in 
nuclear disarmament and in the prevention of nuclear-weapon proliferation, had 
continued to work towards that goal in the course of 1984 as in previous 
years. With regard to the Balkan peninsula in particular, the Greek 
Government believed that its efforts would be instrumental in establishing a 
nuclear-free zone and creating a climate of mutual trust among the peoples of 
the region. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 20 


71. As well as being a staunch supporter of the non-proliferation regime, 
Greece also supported the Agency's safeguards system. In that connection, his 
delegation noted with satisfaction that in 1983 the Secretariat had not 
detected any anomaly which might indicate the diversion of safeguarded nuclear 
materials, whether for the manufacture of nuclear weapons or any other 
military purpose. However, the existence of non-nuclear-weapon States which 
had not yet agreed to place all their nuclear activities under the Agency's 
safeguards system was a salutary reminder that, there was no cause for 
boundless optimism. His delegation therefore urged those countries to place 
their activities under full-scope safeguards, thereby making a significant 
contribution to the creation of the climate of international trust necessary 
for the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. On the more 
general level of safeguards procedures, it was suggested that the Agency 
should report regularly on the nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States 
which might be regarded as preparatory to non-peaceful nuclear activities. 
72. His delegation had read with interest the Nuclear Safety Review for 1983 
and had noted the satisfactory record achieved by nuclear power plants, the 
number of which had passed the 300 mark and which, with an operating 
experience of over 3000 reactor-years, accounted for 12% of the world's 
electricity. It also welcomed the substantial progress which seemed to have 
been made in reducing occupational exposure to radiation at nuclear power 
plants. 
73. He was somewhat concerned, however, about safety standards in the wider 
sphere of nuclear energy applications and basic research, and noted that three 
serious accidents had taken place in nuclear facilities other than power 
plants, claiming the lives of two people and resulting in the exposure of a 
number of other individuals to high levels of radiation. His delegation 
therefore strongly supported the establishment of an advisory group answerable 
to the Director General for the purpose of examining safety issues. 
74. Greece also supported the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme which, 
by providing the necessary background for implementing a set of codes and 
guides on the safety of nuclear power plants, was particularly useful to 
countries still relatively inexperienced in the nuclear field. Completion of 
the set of safety codes and guides in 1985 should not, however, be taken as a 
signal for slowing down the programme. His delegation also welcomed the 
establishment of the IAEA Incident Reporting System. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR. 265 
page 21 


75. Although Greece had deferred adoption of the nuclear option, it was aware 
of the potential advantages of it and was seriously considering developing the 
infrastructure necessary should a decision be taken at a future date to 
introduce nuclear power. Nevertheless, Greece was engaged in an active 
uranium prospecting programme and was developing and applying nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, medicine and industry. In that connection it 
considered the Agency's technical co-operation programme to be of vital 
importance. The Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund should continue to 
increase in volume so that greater aid could be provided, especially to those 
countries with less potential for utilizing nuclear energy. Being both a 
donor and a recipient of the Agency's technical assistance, Greece was a 
staunch supporter of the programme. It had already pledged its full assessed 
share - $101 400 - of the target for voluntary contributions to the Fund for 
1985. 
76. Mr. PINEDA GONZALEZ (Guatemala) said that his country would not be 
able to turn to nuclear power as a viable source of energy within the next few 
years. However, the peaceful applications of nuclear energy could contribute 
significantly to the economic and social development of Guatemala, which was 
endeavouring to establish the infrastructure necessary in terms of material 
and manpower for applying nuclear techniques in agriculture, medicine and 
industry, especially the mining industry. In the agricultural sector, 
Guatemala was particularly interested in nuclear techniques for pest control, 
more efficient use of fertilizers, plant breeding and food preservation. For 
example, under a tripartite programme, a laboratory had been set up for 
rearing and sterilizing the Mediterranean fruit fly, which posed a serious 
economic threat through spoilage of large quantities of fruit, loss of 
currency for the purchase of insecticides and problems in marketing various 
products. In 1984 sterile flies reared in Guatemala had been released for the 
first time and the use of the technique for eradicating other types of pest 
was arousing increasing interest. 
77. With regard to the use of radiation to induce phytogenetic mutations, 
studies had been undertaken to improve the nutritional value of the bean, 
which was an important component in the Guatemalan diet. The Agronomic 
Research Institute was interested in applying that technique to other crops. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 22 


7a. The irradiation of food for purposes of preservation was attracting great 
interest as an alternative to the use of chemical additives for controlling 
parasites and prolonging the shelf life of various products which normally 
spoiled rapidly. Guatemala had recently set up an interministerial commission 
to study, with the help of an Agency expert, whether that procedure could be 
applied to the problem of food losses and whether its application on an 


industrial scale would be feasible and cost-effective in Guatemala. 


79. He wished to pay tribute to the Agency, and, in particular, to the Joint 
FAO/IAEA Division, which was celebrating its 20th anniversary, for their 
valuable assistance in the above-mentioned areas of activity. 
80. Mention had also to be made that in 1984 a radioimmunoassay laboratory had 
been set up, and a gamma camera was soon to be brought into service; in 
addition, facilities tor the manufacture of radiopharmaceuticals would soon be 
operational. Work was continuing on an analytical laboratory permitting 
practical studies for use in industry or for teaching purposes. 
81. In 1983 Guatemala had launched a uranium prospecting programme. It was 
also participating in a regional co-ordinated hydrological research project 
and a regional project relating to non-destructive assay. The assistance 
provided by the Agency with regard to those regional projects was welcomed. 
82. In view of the risks involved in the use of radioisotopes and ionizing 
radiation in public health care, his country had decided to construct in the 
near future a secondary standard dosimetry laboratory for the purposes of 
radiation protection and, as a parallel measure, to introduce legislation 
covering all aspects of the import, transport, utilization, storage and 
disposal of radioactive materials. 
83. It was clear that, in order to derive the greatest possible benefit from 
nuclear technology, there was need to have qualified personnel. Guatemala had 
therefore stepped up its training programme by taking advantage of the 
fellowship programmes, courses ana study tours offered, in particular, by the 
Agency and the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission. 
84. Parallel to the activities undertaken with the assistance of the Agency, 
Guatemala had established fruitful co-operation with Argentina, Brazil, Chile, 
the United States and Mexico. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.265 
page 23 


85. Although Guatemala was at present passing through a difficult economic 
situation, it would continue to pay its voluntary contribution to the Agency 
for the implementation of technical assistance programmes. Guatemala, which 
was one of the founding Members of the Agency and had twice occupied a seat on 
the Board of Governors, hoped that it would be readmitted to the Board for the 
period 1985-1987. 
The meeting rose at 10.5 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
International Atomic Energy Agency March 1985* 
GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 28 September 1984, at 10.35 a.m. 


President: Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) 


CONTENTS 


Item 
of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda ** 


7 General debate and annual report for 1983 
(continued) 1-46 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Democratic People's Republic of Korea 1 -7 
Namibia 8-20 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 21 - 27 
Kenya 28 - 36 
Portugal 37 - 46 


9 South Africa's Nuclear Capabilities 
47 - 67 


10 Consequences of the Israeli military attack on 
the Iraqi nuclear research reactor and the 
standing threat to repeat this attack for: 


(a) 
the development of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes; and 
(b) 
the role and activities of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency 68 - 78 
11 Protection of Nuclear Installations Devoted to 
Peaceful Purposes Against Armed Attacks 79 - 81 


12 The International Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear materials 82-90 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 16 November 1984. 
**/ 
GC(XXVIII)/730. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-707 
0214e 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/713 and Add.1 and 2) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. CHOI (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that the 
present session of the General Conference was being held in a world climate 
that was tenser and more complex than ever before. The adventurism engaged in 
by the imperialist countries in their schemes for aggression and war, by which 
they encouraged the arms race, particularly the nuclear arms race, had 
increased the apocalyptic threat of nuclear war which hung over the whole of 
mankind. The peaceful use of nuclear energy for the good of peoples, to which 
the Agency was devoted, could only be a practical reality in an atmosphere of 
peace. It was therefore by ending the nuclear arms race, by general and 
complete disarmament, and by the creation and further expansion of 
nuclear-free zones of peace throughout the world that international tension 
could be eased and all risk of war eliminated. The Agency possessed the means 
of actively achieving those ends and of adopting practical measures to prevent 
the stock-piling of nuclear weapons. 
2. His delegation had carefully studied the documents before the General 
Conference and noted from the Annual Report for 1983 (GC(XXVIII)/713) and the 
Director General's opening address that the production of nuclear power had 
progressed on a world-wide scale, despite various obstacles, and that it now 
accounted for some 12% of the world's electricity. That figure was an 
indication of the promise of nuclear power for the future. 
3. His delegation much appreciated the activities conducted by the Agency 
in the area of nuclear safety and radioactive waste management, and welcomed 
the action that the Agency had taken in the application of nuclear techniques 
in agriculture, medicine and other areas. 
4. Technical assistance and co-operation was very important for promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in Member States, especially the 
developing countries; the Agency had done a great deal in 1983 for the 
transfer of numerous technologies to those countries. His own country had 
benefited from Agency assistance in 1983, chiefly in the form of supplies of 
equipment intended for the Secondary Standard Dosimetry Laboratory. His 
delegation nevertheless felt that the Agency's assistance was still too modest 
to meet the growing needs of the developing countries. Hence ways would have 
to be found of increasing the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 3 


5. In view of the fact that the Agency's safeguards system helped to 
prevent the risk of nuclear proliferation, it was gratifying to note that in 
1983 no nuclear material had been used for other than peaceful purposes. He 
believed, however, that ways and means should be devised for improving still 
more the effectiveness of the safeguards system. It would be more reasonable 
for inspections to be concentrated at sites and in regions where the danger of 
the manufacture of nuclear weapons and their proliferation was more probable. 
6. His Government was doing everything it could to see that nuclear energy 
served the wellbeing and prosperity of the people. It had explored the 
possibility of constructing a nuclear power plant jointly with other States to 
meet the country's growing electricity demand and that project was now being 
actively pursued. 
7. His delegation complimented the Secretariat on the valuable work it had 
done and thanked the Agency for the aid it had given his country. 
8. Mr. BUHOARA (Namibia) said he would first like to welcome China as 
a Member of the Agency and of the Board of Governors. The present session of 
the General Conference was being held in an international climate of confusion 
and complexity. All the peoples of the world were perturbed by the escalation 
of the arms race, particularly in the case of nuclear weapons, the 
perpetuation and increase of conflicts and hotbeds of tension, as well as the 
widening gap between the developed and the developing countries. It was 
therefore essential more than ever before to create new relationships between 
States based on full equality of rights, strict observance, by all countries 
and under all circumstances, of national independence and sovereignty, 
non-interference in internal affairs and the right of each people to decide 
their own destiny in complete independence. 
9. The illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa - an important factor 
which was aggravating international tension and seriously threatening 
international peace and security - was an act of aggression against the 
Namibian people and a challenge to the United Nations as the body directly 
responsible for Namibia until its independence. The continuation of that 
occupation had naturally met with resistance from the Namibian people. In 
face of the obstinate refusal by the racist regime to withdraw from the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 4 


territory despite their just demands, the Namibian people had been forced to 
step up the struggle for their inalienable right of self-determination and 
national independence. They would not give in to the attempts made by South 
Africa to undermine their national unity and territorial integrity. The 
General Assembly and the United Nations Council for Namibia whole-heartedly 
supported the struggle of the Namibian people, under the guidance of its one 
and only authentic representative, the South West Africa People's Organization 


(SWAPO). In the present year the Council would be commemorating a century of 
the heroic struggle by the Namibian people against illegal occupation during 
the week of solidarity with the Namibian people and its liberation movement, 
which was to begin on 29 October 1984. 


10. Namibia had been and was still a matter of constant concern for the 
international community. For eighteen years the United Nations had 
persistently stressed the responsibility of the international community 
towards the Namibian people and demanded the unconditional withdrawal of the 
South African racist regime from that territory. For example, the 
participants at the conference in support of the struggle of the Namibian 
people for independence, held in Paris, 1983, by the United Nations Council 
for Namibia, had adopted an historic declaration and programme of action. 
They had called attention to the crucial situation prevailing in Namibia and 
in the region by virtue of the policy of oppression and aggression pursued by 
the apartheid regime and had put forward ways of intensifying support from the 
international community for the struggle of the Namibian people. 
11. In similar fashion, at extraordinary plenary meetings held in Bangkok 
during May 1984, the United Nations Council for Namibia had adopted a 
declaration in which it expressed the opinion that the aguisition by the South 
African racist regime of the capability of manufacturing nuclear weapons could 
only worsen the situation, since South Africa would then be in a position to 
step up its acts of intimidation against the independent States in the region, 
while posing a threat to the whole of mankind. It had stressed, furthermore, 
the need for additional and immediate support for SWAPO, and pursuant to the 
resolutions of the General Assembly and to its own resolutions had urged all 
States, as well as the specialized agencies and other international bodies 
associated with the United Nations, to provide sustained and increased 
political, moral, material, military and financial support for SWAPO. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 5 


12. Western transnational corporations continued to give direct support to 
the apartheid regime in the form of investments, taxes and foreign exchange, 
to the detriment of the oppressed peoples of Namibia and South Africa. Deeply 
concerned by the plunder of Namibia's natural resources and anxious to see the 
implementation of Decree No. 1 for the protection of the country's natural 
resources, the United Nations Council for Namibia had contacted Governments 
and corporations and had organized hearings, seminars and, in August 1984, a 
symposium at Geneva, in order to stop the investments and operations of 
foreign interests in Namibia. The General Assembly had reaffirmed that South 
Africa and other foreign economic interests that were illegally exploiting 
Namibia's natural resources, the sacred heritage of the Namibian people, would 
be liable to pay reparations to the future Government of an independent 
Namibia. 
13. Several African delegations had already brought to the attention of the 
General Conference the alarming news of plans by certain Member States of the 
Agency to use Namibia as a dumping ground for nuclear wastes. Under the terms 
of its Statute, the Agency has the responsibility of keeping close watch on 
that plan and bringing it to the attention of the international community as 
well as taking all necessary measures to prevent such a plan, which would be 
contrary to the fundamental interests of the Namibian people, being put into 
effect. 
14. The rapid depletion of the territory's natural resources, in particular, 
uranium deposits, was a grave threat to the integrity and prosperity of an 
independent Namibia and a matter of deep concern for the Namibian people and 
the United Nations Council for Namibia. In that respect the General Assembly 
had declared that by their draining of the natural resources and continued 
repatriation of huge profits, the foreign financial and other interests 
currently at work in Namibia constituted a major obstacle to that country's 
independence. 
15. The issue of Namibia was still a deadlock, although the Security 
Council, in its resolution 435 (1978) , had adopted a plan for Namibian 
independence to which the two conflicting parties, namely South Africa and 
SWAPO, had subscribed. That deadlock was the fault of the racist regime of 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 6 


South Africa. Notwithstanding, the United Nations Council for Namibia, acting 


in close collaboration with the Namibian people, through SWAPO, remained 
committed to putting that plan for independence into effect. 


16. The continued bondage of the Namibian people confronted the United 
Nations with one of the most serious crises it had ever faced; it was a 
challenge to the very credibility and effectiveness of the United Nations and 
a challenge to the specialized agencies and other bodies of the United 
Nations, including the IAEA. The Council strongly believed that the United 
Nations system should adopt concerted measures to support the struggle of the 
Namibian people. 
17. The United Nations Council for Namibia wished to thank the Agency and 
those of its Members who had supported the Council's efforts in the discharge 
of its responsibilities. It appealed anew to the Agency and to Member States 
to take all necessary action to implement the General Assembly resolutions, 
which constituted solid ground for strengthening co-operation between the 
Agency and the Namibian peoples. The Agency had an important part to play in 
promoting and implementing technical assistance projects in Namibia before its 
independence, during the transition period and after independence. More 
especially the Agency should take more part in training activities for the 
benefit of the Namibian people under an overall assistance programme tailored 
to meet their needs. 
18. He noted with regret that in the section of the Annual Report for 1983 
(GC(XXVIII)/713) dealing with matters of interest to the Agency discussed by 
the United Nations General Assembly, there was no reference to the General 
Assembly's important resolution 38/36 on the question of Namibia, which was of 
great relevance to the Agency's activities. The General Assembly had 
reaffirmed, inter alia, that Namibia's natural resources were the birthright 
of the Namibian people, that it was alarmed at the rate at which the 
territory's natural resources, especially the uranium deposits, were being 
depleted, and had called on the specialized agencies and other United Nations 
bodies to do their utmost to speed up the implementation of the Nationhood 
Programme for Namibia and other projects benefiting Namibians. He was sure 
that the omission would be set right in the next Annual Report. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 7 


19. The United Nations Council for Namibia welcomed the efforts made by the 
Agency under Article II of the Statute to come to the aid of the Namibian 
people under the Nationhood Programme. That was only a beginning, and the 
Council for Namibia ventured to hope that the programme would be enlarged so 
as to meet the growing demands of the Namibian people. 
20. He wished to repeat the request addressed by the General Assembly to all 
the specialized agencies by urging the Agency to continue granting a waiver of 
assessment to his country for as long as it was represented by the United 
Nations Council for Namibia. 
21. Mr. ATTUMI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said he would first like to 
welcome the presence of the People's Republic of China in the Agency, which 
could not but benefit therefrom. His delegation wished to commend the Agency 
for the technical assistance and co-operation that it provided for developing 
countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which was thereby made 
available for social and economic development. In view of the relevance ot 
that programme, it was essential to ensure the input of financial resources to 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, the amount of which, 
furthermore, should be increased, especially since the UNDP input and 
voluntary contributions of Member States continue to drop, while the Agency's 
budget reflected zero real growth. 
22. His country attached great importance to the implementation of the 
Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme, in the form of the 
transfer of technology and knowhow, expert missions, fellowships, courses, 
study tours and seminars. For example, through the active co-operation of the 
Agency a scientific seminar had been held in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on the 
subject of the use of research reactors in basic and applied sciences. 
23. Like other developing countries, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya believed 
that it was important to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in order 
to counteract the monopoly of certain countries which were using a threat of 
"nuclear terror". His delegation was quite ready to co-operate in that 
respect with all States working for peace. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 8 


24. His delegation wished to denounce once again the attack that the Zionist 
entity had perpetrated on the Iraqi research reactor under Agency safeguards 
and used for exclusively peaceful purposes. He wondered how many more years 
that entity would continue to ignore the demands addressed to it by the 
international community. Having refused to place its facilities under 
safeguards, it was acting against the noble and humanitarian objectives of the 
Agency and no longer had any place in that organization. 
25. He drew attention to the ties between the Zionist entity and the South 
African racist entity - ties which were designed to lead to a nuclear 
capability that could be used to blackmail other countries and exploit their 
wealth. He joined other delegations that had condemned both the Zionist 
entity, which continued to occupy Palestine, and the South African racist 
entity, as well as all the attempts that they were making to acquire nuclear 
weapons. 
26. There was need to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute so as to ensure 
equitable geographical distribution within the Board of Governors and to 
redress the imbalance existing at present to the disadvantage of the regions 
of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia. 
27. Furthermore, his delegation believed that the Secretariat should take 
steps to ensure equitable representation of the developing countries within 
its staff, thereby conforming with the various resolutions adopted by the 
General Conference. The developing countries had advantages to offer that 
could make a valuable contribution to the Secretariat at the highest level. 
28. Mr. ONYANGO (Kenya) said that his country, which had supported the 
admission of the People's Republic of China to the Agency, restated its 
conviction that China would greatly contribute to the peaceful progress of 
nuclear science and technology. 
29. With the aid of the Agency, the Government of Kenya had recently enacted 
a law on radiation protection. He was glad to announce that regulations 
governing the transport, sale, use and storage of radioactive material had 
been drafted and would shortly enter into force. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR. 266 
page 9 


30. His country had enjoyed the benefit of several projects under the 
Agency's technical assistance programme; they related to the application of 
radioisotopes in quality control, the study of nutritional and other factors 
affecting herd fertility, an acaricide laboratory, nuclear science and 
technology information and documentation, radioisotope diagnosis, the study 
and evaluation of tropical diseases, as well as the nuclear science laboratory 
belonging to the University of Nairobi. Assistance had also been received 
from the Agency for non-destructive assay, in the form of fellowships and 
funds for purchasing equipment, and likewise in the field of nuclear medicine 
and associated programmes. 
31. His country had hosted a training course financed by the Agency on 
nuclear electronics and instrumentation. The report on the way the course had 
progressed was so encouraging that the Government of Kenya intended to repeat 
the experience. Believing that it was a good thing for the training of 
personnel from developing countries to be carried out in the Third World so 
that the students could work under conditions resembling their home countries, 
he urged the Agency to increase the number of courses organized in the region 
of Africa; his country would co-operate with the Agency to that end. 
32. As was clear from what had been said above, the Government of Kenya had 
worked with the Agency in developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
was particularly grateful for its assistance. The Director General was to be 
complimented on his achievements since his nomination, which it was hoped 
would continue with just as much success. Also, the reports submitted by the 
Board of Governors and the auditors on the Agency's finances were welcomed, 
and the smooth way in which use was made of Agency funds was appreciated. 
33. One of the crucial issues on the agenda for the twenty-eighth session of 
the General Conference was the military use of South Africa's nuclear capacity 
by the racist Government of that country. The struggle for self-determination 
of all the peoples of the Republic of Azania must continue. Kenya condemned 
the subjugation of peoples for reasons of race and would never accept the 
apartheid system. At its twenty-seventh session the General Conference had 
adopted resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408, requesting the Agency to conclude 
safeguards agreements with the racist regime of Pretoria. It was noted in the 
Board of Governors' report that South Africa had not heeded that resolution 
and had declined to discuss with the Agency the safeguarding of all its 
nuclear facilities. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 10 


34. Kenya was perturbed not only by the South African refusal to accept the 
principles of safeguards, but also by the fact that it was endeavouring to 
develop nuclear weapons with the aid of certain Member States. Africa had to 
remain a nuclear-weapon-free zone. The manufacture of nuclear weapons by 
South Africa constituted a threat both to the neighbouring States and Kenya 
itself. No country developed nuclear weapons for use against its own 
population. The South African weapons would not be used in the streets of 
Johannesburg or Pretoria to suppress the struggle for independence. South 
Africa was manufacturing them for use against other States and by virtue of 
that fact threatened the peace and community of the United Nations. That was 
why the General Conference, at its twenty-eighth session, should adopt a firm 
stand on the matter dealt with in resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/408, and take the 
action called for against South Africa. Kenya would support any action along 
those lines so as to halt the speedy development of nuclear weapons by the 
racist regime in Pretoria. 
35. His Government also felt that the Agency should look into the illegal 
exploitation by South Africa of the Namibian uranium resources with a view to 
recommending the General Assembly of the United Nations to take steps to end 
it. 
36. Kenya joined other Member States, more especially the States of Africa, 
the Middle East and South Asia, which had expressed feelings of 
under-representation in the Board of Governors, and urged an amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. The Agency seemed to be proceeding 
satisfactorily with the recruitment of staff from the developing countries and 
it was hoped that the trend would continue, especially at the policy-making 
levels. His delegation also noted that the performance of the personnel 
recently recruited at that high level was satisfactory. 
37. Mr. CARREIRA PICH (Portugal) welcomed the People's Republic of 
China as a Member of the Agency and was sure that its membership would greatly 
assist the Agency in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout 
the world. 
38. His delegation regarded the Agency's safeguards system as an essential 
means of ensuring non-proliferation. The fact that in 1983, as in previous 
years, the Agency had not detected any anomaly indicating the diversion of a 
significant amount of safeguarded material for non-peaceful purposes was very 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 11 


important and deserved to be mentioned. That achievement would not have been 
possible without the co-operation of Member States. Accordingly, those States 
which had not yet concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency should do so 
as soon as possible and nuclear-weapon States should place more of their 
facilities under safeguards. 


39. Notwithstanding the importance of an efficient safeguards system, every 
effort should be made to avoid additional costs. The use of new equipment and 
techniques might obviate the need for substantial increases in safeguards 
personnel. In view of the zero-growth constraint imposed upon the Agency's 
activities as a whole, care should be taken to ensure that increasing the 
safeguards budget was not detrimental to other activities, in particular 
technical assistance. 
40. With regard to the latter, his delegation acknowledged the importance of 
integrated programming and was aware of the emphasis given in recent years to 
multi-year programming and the development of regional programmes. The 
establishment of the Technical Co-operation Evaluation Unit would provide 
valuable assistance in the implementation of technical co-operation. 
41. His delegation also attached great importance to the Agency's Nuclear 
Safety Standards (NUSS) programme, which provided a framework for the 
definition of safety standards to be applied by Member States. 
42. He greatly appreciated the work done by the Director General and the 
Secretariat in producing the excellent reports before the Conference. The 
review of the Agency's activities, which covered the Agency's work over the 
previous 25 years, was an extremely satisfactory response to the request for 
such a document made at the previous General Conference. 
43. Portugal's nuclear programme was at present focused mainly on uranium 
exploration and exploitation, nuclear power plant siting surveys, manpower 
training and research and development. 
44. Portugal regarded nuclear energy as a means of reducing its dependence 
on imported oil. As in most countries, however, public fears and doubts about 
nuclear safety and waste disposal, combined with economic difficulties, 
presented obstacles to the introduction of nuclear power. The Agency could 
play an important role in helping his Government to overcome those obstacles. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 12 


Portugal's nuclear energy plan (PEN) for 1984 was now being considered by the 
Council of Ministers and would then be sent to Parliament for its 
consideration. If a decision in favour of nuclear power was made, the first 
Portuguese nuclear power plant could be in operation by 1997 or 1998. 


45. His delegation wished to thank the Agency's staff for their assistance 
with respect to the seminar on nuclear energy held in Lisbon in May 1984. 
Agency staff in charge of technical assistance in Portugal had also been 
extremely helpful and understanding and had enabled the Portuguese experts to 
develop and implement several useful projects. 
46. Finally, during the past two years Portugal had benefited greatly from 
its participation in the Board of Governors and was pleased to witness the 
atmosphere of co-operation in which the Board conducted its business. 
SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXVIII)/724 and 739) 


47. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco), speaking on behalf of the African Group, 
introduced the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/739. The 
text did not differ from the previous resolutions adopted on the subject under 
consideration, for it reaffirmed the stand taken during previous sessions of 
the General Conference and in the General Assembly of the United Nations. 
48. It was simply a matter of demanding that South Africa submit all its 
nuclear facilities to inspection by the Agency, calling upon Member States of 
the Agency which had not yet done so to end all nuclear co-operation with the 
South African regime, calling upon them to cease all purchases of Namibian 
uranium, and requesting the Agency to refrain from extending to South Africa, 
either directly or indirectly, any assistance in putting its nuclear projects 
into effect. 
49. Mr. ADEBARI (Nigeria) urged the General Conference to adopt the 
draft resolution on South Africa's nuclear capabilities contained in document 
GC(XXVIII)/739, which had been introduced by the delegate of Morocco. The 
regime in Pretoria was not willing to negotiate with anyone at all; it was 
well known that South Africa was in a position to manufacture nuclear weapons, 
a fact which represented a threat not only to Africa, but to the whole of the 
international community. The problem of South Africa had come up on numerous 
occasions for more than 20 years, and there was now urgent need to take 
decisions and resolute action on that problem. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 13 


50. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said his delegation had 
carefully studied the report submitted by the Director General 
(GC(XXVIII)/724) under item 9 of the agenda. It emerged from that report that 
the activity of the Joint Working Group of the IAEA and the Nuclear Energy 


Agency (NEA) of OECD had ended? nevertheless, his delegation urged the 
Secretariat to continue working closely with NEA under the co-operation 
agreement existing between the two organizations so as to ensure that Member 
States received the information which the Group had had in its possession up 
to that time. It was gratified to learn that negotiations had been resumed 
with regard to applying safeguards to South Africa's semi-commercial 
enrichment plant. 


51. The United States was disturbed by the fact that there were in that 
country nuclear facilities not subject to safeguards and had not hesitated to 
inform the South African Government of its concern. He therefore shared the 
anxiety of certain States, but did not believe for a moment that the problem 
could be settled by calling for sanctions against South Africa that would 
seriously limit its privileges and rights of membership. South Africa had 
not, as was required by Article XIX.B of the Statute as motivation for the 
suspension of privileges, "violated the provisions of this Statute or of any 
agreement entered into by it pursuant to this Statute". Sanctions affecting 
the privileges and rights of membership were simply not applicable under those 
circumstances. It was true that South Africa was in arrears in paying its 
financial contributions to the Agency, but the only sanction provided for in 
that case by Article XIX.A of the Statute was to deprive South Africa of a 
vote, which had already been done. It was also true that not all South 
Africa's peaceful nuclear facilities were under safeguards, but then were 
there not other Member States attending the present session of the General 
Conference which could not and did not wish to place some of their facilities 
under safeguards? Finally, it was true that the policy of apartheid aroused 
repugnance and had been condemned on many occasions by all the Member States 
of the Agency, including the United States of America. But his Government 
felt that any sanction affecting the participation of South Africa in the 
Agency's activities would not be an answer to the problem. A sanction of that 
kind would violate the legal provisions of the Statute, compromise the 
Agency's constructive work, perhaps result in the cessation of Agency 
safeguards activities in South Africa and gravely affect the principle of 
universality, which was one of the fundamental principles of the whole of the 
United Nations system. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 14 


52. His delegation could not therefore support the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXVIII)/739 and requested that a roll-call vote be 
taken on it. 
53. Mr. SINGH (India), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77, pointed 
out that during the past two years certain progress on the question of South 
Africa had been observed in the practice of the Agency, whose activities were 
now in line with the resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly. It 
was a matter of satisfaction that the representatives of South Africa were no 
longer able to take part in the technical working groups of the Agency. 
India, like a number of African Member States, such as Nigeria, had always 
believed that it was not a genuine excuse to claim in regard to the Joint 
Working Group of the IAEA and the Nuclear Energy Agency of OECD that it was 
not possible to exclude the representatives of South Africa. 
54. The countries belonging to the Group of 77 wished to draw particular 
attention to paragraph 4 of the draft resolution in document GC(XXVIII)/739, 
which called upon those Member States which had not already done so to stop 
all purchases of Namibian uranium. They were opposed to the principle of 
laissez-faire which certain friends of South Africa were preaching in the name 
of liberalism. 
55. India's policy had not changed since the United Nations had been in 
existence or since the Indian delegation had raised the matter of South Africa 
in the Security Council during the time of Mahatma Gandhi, who himself had 
lived in South Africa and been aware of the problems of the native 
population. On behalf of the Group of 77, he fully endorsed the draft 
resolution contained in GC(XXVIII)/739. 
56. Mr. SHASH (Egypt) said his delegation wholeheartedly supported the 
draft resolution on South Africa's nuclear capabilities. He had nothing to 
add to what had already been said on that subject by the delegates of Morocco, 
Nigeria and India, but simply wished to point out a small error which had 
crept in when the draft resolution was being reproduced. In operative 
paragraph 1, the number "Se/SeA", which was the number of a resolution 
mentioned in paragraph (b) of the preamble, should be added after "38/39A, P 
and GnM 
1/ See document GC(XXVIII)/739/Corr.l. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 15 


57. Mr. SIAMWIZA (Zambia) recalled that in a statement he had made the 
day before he had already asked the General Conference to take note of South 
Africa's disinclination to place all its nuclear facilities under safeguards. 
If South Africa refused the application of safeguards, it was certainly 
because it wished to develop nuclear weapons to defend its apartheid regime by 
striking fear into its neighbours. He was surprised to hear certain delegates 
say that adoption of the draft resolution was not a way of ending the 
apartheid regime. It looked as though those delegates were applying double 
standards, without concern for considerations of morality. He urged the 
General Conference to adopt the draft resolution, which had been introduced by 
the Chairman of the African Group. 
58. The PRESIDENT, noting that no other delegation wished to speak, 
pointed out that the delegate of the United States of America had requested, 
under Rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure, a roll-call vote on the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/739. He therefore put that draft 
resolution to the vote, with the correction proposed by the delegate of Egypt. 
59. Singapore, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
60. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, 


Bulgaria, Byelorussian SSR, China, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, 


Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Gabon, 
German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, 
Iran, Islamic Republic of, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, 
Korea, Republic of, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 


Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, 


Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, 


Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 


Ukrainian SSR, USSR, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of 


Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, and Zambia. 


Against: Belgium, Canada, Germany, Federal Republic of, Israel, 


Japan, Lichtenstein, Portugal, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United 


States of America. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 16 


Abstaining; Australia, Austria, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa 


Rica, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Guatemala, Holy See, 


Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, 


New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Spain and Sweden. 


61. There were 57 votes in favour, 10 against, with 23 abstentions. The 
draft resolution, with the correction proposed by Egypt, was adopted. 
62. Mr. BRENNAN (Ireland), speaking on behalf of the member countries 
of the European Economic Community, wished to explain why those countries had 
not been able to approve the text proposed in document GC(XXVIII)/739. 
Although they rejected and deplored the apartheid regime in South Africa, as 
they had repeatedly stated in the United Nations, they considered that 
observance of the principle of universality was essential for the viability of 
the United Nations system. There was at the very least a reasonable doubt as 
to whether paragraph 5 of the draft resolution affected the rights and 
privileges of South Africa's membership. 
63. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece) said that his country resolutely condemned 
the apartheid regime in South Africa and that he had been in favour of the 
draft resolution submitted by the African Group, whose feelings he shared 
entirely. His only objection to the draft resolution had been based on 
concern for upholding the principle of universality. 
64. Mr. MIYAZAWA (Japan), recalling that Japan had voted against the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXVIII)/739, said that Japan had either 
abstained or voted against on the occasion of the adoption of the United 
Nations resolutions referred to in the draft resolution. Moreover, the Agency 
was a technical international organization whose role was to promote the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. The Agency's universality should therefore be protected and any 
violation of the principle of universality should be eschewed. The Japanese 
delegation urged South Africa and other Member States of the Agency which had 
not yet done so to accede as soon as possible to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to place all their nuclear 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 17 


facilities under Agency safeguards. Finally, he wished to restate quite 
clearly that Japan could find no excuse for the racial policy in South 
Africa. His country's position on that point remained unchanged. 


65. Mr. SUAREZ de PUGA y VILLBGAS (Spain) recalled that Spain had 
always condemned the apartheid policy of South Africa. Nevertheless, it had 
never supported draft resolutions in international organizations calling for a 
halt to all co-operation with South Africa. His delegation felt that total 
isolation of a country would be counter-productive and contrary to the 
Agency's technical status. For that reason Spain had abstained during the 
vote on the draft resolution. 
66. Mr. ADEBARI (Nigeria) expressed his deep appreciation to all those 
who had voted in favour of the draft resolution. He thanked, in particular, 
the Moroccan delegate in his capacity as Chairman of the African Group and the 
Indian delegate in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of 77. Finally, he 
wished to express his appreciation to the Egyptian delegation for having 
proposed a timely correction to the draft resolution. The so-called friends 
of South Africa who had voted against the draft resolution would do well to 
reflect on the consequences of their action. 
67. Mr. de CASTELLO-BRANCO (Portugal) said that his country - like 
others - abhorred the regime of apartheid. Nevertheless, he had always 
believed that technical organizations should not allow themselves to be 
tainted by political issues. It could certainly be said that apartheid was 
more than a political issue, that it was also a moral issue bound up with a 
respect for human rights, but if the organizations of the United Nations were 
to adopt measures against all States where human rights were not respected, 
the United Nations system would not take long to collapse. 
CONSEQUENCES OF THE ISRAELI MILITARY ATTACK ON THE IRAQI NUCLEAR RESEARCH 
REACTOR AND THE STANDING THREAT TO REPEAT THIS ATTACK FOR: (a) THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF NUCLEAR ENERGY FOR PEACEFUL PURPOSES, AND (b) THE ROLE AND 
ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY 


(GC(XXVIII)/719, 720, 722 and 741) 


68. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that Rule 63 of the 
Rules of Procedure laid down that no proposal might be discussed or put to the 
vote unless its text had been distributed to all delegations not later than 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 18 


the day preceding the meeting. He requested the application of the Rule so as 
to enable all delegations to study the complex issue before them in the 
requisite manner. Consideration of the item in question should be postponed 
until the afternoon meeting. 


69. Mr. AL-ZAHAWI (Iraq) said that at the time of the consultations on 
that point, which had been conducted under the auspices of the President, he 
had been given to understand that Rule 63 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference would not be applied strictly in the present case. He 
regarded the request by the United States delegate as a move to gain time and 
deplored it. Nevertheless, he was prepared to accept any ruling made by the 
President and would not object if it was decided to postpone consideration of 
the item until the afternoon meeting. 
70. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) rejected the proposal by 
the United States delegation for postponement of consideration of the item 
until the afternoon. He believed that the time had come to consider that item 
of the agenda, in view of the collaboration of Israel and South Africa for the 
purpose of oppressing Third World countries. He asked the General Conference 
to begin consideration of item 10 of the agenda. 
71. Mr. AL-MINAYES (Kuwait) supported the comments made by the 
delegate of Iraq. 
72. The PRESIDENT noted that the delegate of the United States had 
requested postponement of consideration of item 10 until the afternoon 
meeting. He pointed out that the text of the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXVIII)/741 had been submitted the previous evening. He therefore 
asked the United States delegate whether he insisted upon his request, whether 
he would withdraw it, or whether he wished it to be put to the vote. 
73. Mr KENNEDY (United States of America), maintaining his request, 
repeated that it accorded with the Rule and that delegations, including his 
own, needed more time to consider a draft resolution of such complexity. That 
was the least that participants in the Conference session could expect. 
74. Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) felt it was true that some delegations 
had not yet had time to consult their Governments or to receive instructions 
with regard to their stand on the matter. He therefore urged delegations 
pressing for immediate consideration of the matter to agree to the discussion 
being postponed until the afternoon. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 19 


75. Mr. AL-ZAHAWI (Iraq) said he would willingly defer to whatever the 
President proposed, but that he was not doing so in response to the request of 
the United States delegate. 
76. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that, in a spirit of 
co-operation, he would agree to a ruling by the President that the item be 
discussed that afternoon. 
77. The PRESIDENT proposed that consideration of the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXVIII)/741 be postponed until the afternoon meeting. 
78. It was so decided. 
PROTECTION OF NUCLEAR INSTALLATIONS DEVOTED TO PEACEFUL PURPOSES AGAINST ARMED 
ATTACKS (GC(XXVIII)/721, 737, 740 and 742) 


79. Mr. BELTRAMINO (Argentina) pointed out, with regard to the draft 
resolution and proposed amendment contained, respectively, in documents 
GC(XXVIII)/737 and GC(XXVIII)/740, that consultations were in progress between 
the delegations concerned. He requested postponement of the discussion of 
those documents until the afternoon meeting. 
80. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) endorsed the view that 
consideration of item 11 of the agenda should be postponed until the next 
meeting. 
81. It was so decided. 
THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON THE PHYSICAL PROTECTION OF NUCLEAR MATERIAL 
(GC(XXVIII)/731 and Add.1 and 2) 


82. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), introducing the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/731, welcomed the progress 
reported by the Director General with regard to the signing and ratification 
of the International Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
2/ 


Material-^ . He strongly believed it was important for all countries to 
accede to the Convention. That was why the delegation of the United States, 
supported by many others, was submitting the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXVIII)/731, which he hoped would be adopted by consensus. 


2/ INFCIRC/274/Rev.l. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 20 


83. As far as its contents were concerned, the draft resolution was 
identical to the one which had been submitted and adopted the year before. 
Adoption of it would draw the attention of the international community to the 
Convention and thereby help it to gain the widest adherence. It was important 
to note that the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material was 
the first multilateral agreement in the field to which it related. Its entry 
into force would be an important step towards intensifying international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Over the last few years 
the need for the protection of nuclear material had become increasingly clear, 
and he was sure that the Convention afforded an appropriate legal mechanism 
for that purpose. The delegates to the General Conference were urged to adopt 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/731. 
84. Mr. SINGH (India) pointed out that, when the item in question had 
been considered at the twenty-seventh session of the General Conference, his 
delegation had expressed misgivings with regard to the draft resolution which 
had been submitted and adopted at that time. He pointed out further that in 
the Committee of the Whole there had been at that time a proposal to adopt the 
draft resolution by acclamation but that certain delegations had opposed it. 
85. It was well known that India had not signed the International Convention 
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material as it contained certain points 
which could only be considered discriminatory in nature. As an example, one 
could quote the last line of the preamble to the Convention: "Recognizing the 
importance of effective physical protection of nuclear material used for 
military purposes, and understanding that such material is and will continue 
to be accorded stringent physical protection". It was not easy for India to 
accept that paragraph, which would result in nuclear-weapon States lying 
outside the scope of the Convention. His delegation also had difficulties 
with regard to Article 2, Article 1(c) and Article 4. 
86. He further recalled that, during discussion of the draft of the 
Convention, India, Argentina and Brazil among others had stressed the fact 
that the Convention would have to cover, without differentiation, all 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.266 
page 21 


transported nuclear material whether for military or for civil use. In actual 
fact, nuclear materials intended for civil purposes were very insignificant 
compared with those intended for military use, and transport of the latter was 
fraught with just as much risk as that of material for civil use. 


87. In view of such discrimination, India was not in a position to accede to 
the Convention. The United States delegate had spoken of progress, but it 
emerged from the information provided by the Director General that the number 
of signatories of the Convention had hardly increased at all. Furthermore, a 
large number of countries which had signed it had serious misgivings about 
it. For all those reasons he failed to understand the point of the new draft 
resolution. 
88. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said his country attached 
great importance to the physical protection of nuclear material. He was not, 
however, in a position to support the Convention as long as it contained 
discriminatory provisions, some of which had been mentioned by the delegate of 
India. 
89. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to 
approve the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/731. 
90. It was so decided. 
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
February 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSIONS 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SEVENTH 
PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna/ 
on Friday, 28 September 1984, at 3.30 p.m. 


President: Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
10 Consequences of the Israeli military 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research 
reactor and the standing threat to 
repeat this attack for: 
(a) the development of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes} and 
(b) the role and activities of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency 1-85 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 15 October 1984. 
**/ GC (XXVIII)/731. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 


85-504 


0190e 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 2 


CONSEQUENCES OF THE ISRAELI MILITARY ATTACK ON THE IRAQI NUCLEAR RESEARCH 
REACTOR AND THE STANDING THREAT TO REPEAT THIS ATTACK FOR: (a) THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF NUCLEAR ENERGY FOR PEACEFUL PURPOSES; AND (b) THE ROLE AND ACTIVITIES OF 
THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY (GC(XXVIII)/719, 720, 722, 741 
and Add.1, 745) 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that the previous year, in resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/409, the General Conference had requested the Director General 
to re-examine and report to the Board of Governors with respect to Israel on 
the Agency's research contracts, purchase of equipment and materials, and the 
holding of meetings outside Agency headquarters and to prepare and submit at 
the twenty-eighth regular session of the General Conference a report on the 
consequences of an armed attack on peaceful nuclear installations and the 
threats thereof for the Agency safeguards system and the peaceful applications 
of atomic energy. The Conference had further requested the Director General 
to report to it at its twenty-eighth regular session on the implementation of 
that resolution. The report of the Director General in response to that 
request was contained in document GC(XXVIII)/719. 
2. A draft resolution had been submitted jointly by Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Malaysia, Morocco, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Zambia 
in document GC(XXVIII)/741 and Add.1, and an amendment to that draft 
resolution proposed by the United States was set out in document 
GC(XXVIII)/745. 
3. Mr. BIN-DA'AR (United Arab Emirates), introducing the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/741, said that, since Israel had 
failed to comply with the provisions of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, his 
delegation had originally intended to submit to the General Conference a 
proposal demanding the immediate implementation of that resolution and, in 
particular, of operative paragraph 3 thereof. However, following negotiations 
between various delegations and an understanding reached within the 
Group of 77 as a result of discussions, the Arab group of States had accepted 
a compromise in the form of the draft resolution presented in document 
GC(XXVIII)/741, which he stressed was the minimum acceptable and which he 
hoped all countries would approve. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 3 


4. Mr. AL-ZAHAWI (Iraq) pointed out that the Director General's report 
contained in document GC(XXVIII)/719 refuted the claim that the inclusion in 
the agenda of the item concerning the consequences of the Israeli military 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research reactor was an instance of politicization 
of the Agency's work. 
5. The question before the Conference was whether Israel had satisfied the 
requirements of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, especially operative 
paragraphs 2 and 3. 
6. In order to give the Conference a clear understanding of the nature of 
the Israeli statements in the context of the Israeli threats and to throw some 
light on the arguments on which the policy of pre-emptive attack was based, he 
wished to recall some of the statements made by the Israeli authorities after 
the events of 7 June 1981. 
7. In its communique of 8 June 1981 the Israeli Government had alleged that 
the Osirak nuclear reactor had been intended for the production of bombs whose 
target was to have been Israel and that the Israeli Government had therefore 
decided to act without further delay to ensure the safety of its people. 
8. The communique had further claimed that no foreign expert had been hurt 
during the attack and that two European Governments were helping Iraq to 
manufacture nuclear weapons. It had asserted that Israel would on no account 
permit an enemy to develop weapons of mass destruction which would be used 
against the people of Israel and that it would defend its citizens in good 
time and with all the means at its disposal. 
9. According to the "New York Times" of 10 June, the then Prime Minister of 
Israel, Menachem Begin, had announced that Israel would use all the means at 
its disposal to thwart attempts by its enemies to develop weapons of mass 
destruction) rejecting the French statement that the reactor had been intended 
merely for research and the generation of electricity, he had threatened that 
if the Iraqis tried again to build a reactor with which they could produce 
atomic weapons, Israel would destroy that reactor, too. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 4 


10. On 11 June the same newspaper had quoted the Israeli Chief of Staff as 
declaring that his country would know how to act the next time as well, and 
that such action would not necessarily be taken in Iraq but quite possibly 
elsewhere. According to the "Christian Science Monitor" of 12 June, Israeli 
analysts had insisted that the supervision called for by the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was no longer adequate. 
Professor Yair Evron of Tel Aviv University's Centre for Strategic Studies had 
been reported as saying that the Agency's safeguards inspectors were thinking 
in terms of large weapons inventories whereas even one bomb would have created 
a new situation in the Middle East and that in the future there would have to 
be a far more elaborate system of international supervision, agreements by the 
big Powers on limitations and much more intervention by them. 
11. Appearing on the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) news programme "Face 
the Nation", as had been reported on 15 June in the "New York Times", the 
Israeli Prime Minister had expressed the hope that the bombing attack would 
induce France and Italy to refrain in future from co-operating with Iraq in 
the building of reactors. In answer to a question about the precedent which 
Israel's action might have set for other countries whose enemies were on the 
verge of acquiring nuclear weaponry, he had said that every country would now 
decided for itself. 
12. On 22 June, after the unanimous adoption by the United Nations Security 
Council of the resolution condemning Israel for its attack, the Israeli 
Cabinet had criticized the Council's action as expressing a double standard 
and had again alleged that Iraq had built a reactor in order to prepare 
secretly, under false pretensions and deceit, atomic bombs to be thrown in 
time on the centres of the Jewish population in the State of Israel. It had 
regretted that its ally, the United States, had even conducted talks with Iraq 
with a view to formulating an agreed resolution. 
13. It was worth noting that on 17 June the "Washington Post" had refuted 
many of Israel's arguments justifying the attack. First of all, Iraq had not 
refused to allow the IAEA to inspect the reactor: except at the beginning of 
the Iran-Iraq war, the Agency inspectors had been given access to the 
facility, the most recent inspection having taken place in January 1981 and 
another having been scheduled for the month of June during which the attack 
had occurred. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 5 


14. Secondly, the claim that a Baghdad newspaper had quoted President Saddam 
Hussein as saying that the nuclear reactor had been intended for use against 
Israel had subsequently been denied by the Israeli Government itself. 
15. Thirdly, the Israeli Prime Minister had admitted as erroneous his earlier 
assertion about the existence and destruction of a secret underground chamber 
40 metres below the reactor. French nuclear experts had denied that such a 
chamber for making bombs existed. 
16. Fourthly, Israel's chief of military intelligence had confirmed on 
16 June that no information to the effect that Iraq was preparing to make a 
bomb had been conveyed to Israel by the United States, as had previously been 
claimed. 
17. Fifthly, the Iraqi reactor would not have become critical in early July 
or early September but, according to French nuclear experts, by the end of the 
year at the earliest. 
18. It was also not true that no foreign experts had been hurt; a French 
technician had been killed during the Israeli attack. 
19. As to more recent threats made by Israeli officials, a statement by the 
Israeli Minister for Scientific Development had been published in "Nucleonics 
Week" on 25 April 1983 according to which Israel felt compelled to disrupt any 
Arab project when it became clear that the intention was to produce nuclear 
weapons. 
20. Although that Minister was no longer in office, the Israeli Cabinet now 
had a more dangerous man, Minister without Portfolio Sharon, who had declared 
in a major policy statement issued on 15 December 1981 that the third element 
in Israel's defence policy for the 1980s was its determination to prevent 
"confrontation States" from gaining access to nuclear weapons and that it 
would therefore have to prevent such a threat at its inception. 
21. The same person had further declared, according to the 11-24 issue 
(October 1982) of "Afrique-Asie", that Israel's security interests were not 
limited to the Arab countries in the Middle East, the Mediterranean and the 
Red Sea but should in the 1980s extend to countries such as Turkey, Iran and 
Pakistan and to regions such as the Persian Gulf and northern and central 
Africa. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 6 


22. Turning to the Israeli statements reproduced in Annex 4 to document 
GC(XXVIII)/719, he emphasized that their true meaning and implications must be 
judged in the light of the earlier Israeli statements which he had referred 
to. Although the Director General of the Israel Atomic Energy Commission was 
not a policy-maker in matters of military strategy and operations, his letter 
was nonetheless highly revealing. The statement that Israel supported 
international efforts to arrive at an early arrangement directed to the 
purpose of regulating the status of nuclear facilities clearly indicated that 
Israel did not recognize the existing arrangements. 
23. Furthermore, the assertion that Israel had no policy of attacking nuclear 
facilities, and certainly had no intention of attacking nuclear facilities 
dedicated to peaceful purposes anywhere, was meaningless because Israel had 
nevertheless attacked the Iraqi nuclear facility on the pretext that it was 
not dedicated to peaceful purposes. 
24. He was amazed at the comments of the Governor from Belgium reproduced in 
Annex 2 to document GC(XXVIII)/719 (paragraph 100) because the letter from the 
Resident Representative of Israel in Annex 4 to the same document specifically 
did not contain an undertaking not to carry out any further attacks on 
civilian nuclear facilities, especially if the latter were under Agency 
safeguards, and not to jeopardize the credibility of the Agency's safeguards. 
The Israeli Prime Minister's statement reproduced in that letter did not in 
fact acknowledge that any such thing as safeguards existed at all. 
25. Yet United States Assistant Secretary of State Mr. Newell had informed 
the Director General that his Government was convinced that the Israeli 
Government, through Prime Minister Shamir's public statement of 2 May, had 
fully satisfied the requirements of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, and had 
urged the Agency to lay that issue to rest before irreparable demage was done 
to the Agency's legitimate mission. 
26. It was most unfortunate to find that the United States Government was 
again trying to absolve Israel from all blame, as it always did, and was even 
doing its best to make others follow its line. If the Agency were to adopt 
the United States' view of the Israeli statements, it would become the 
laughing stock of the international community, especially when the full 
content and true meaning of those Israeli statements became known. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 7 


27. A cursory reading of the first paragraph of the Israeli Prime Minister's 
statement, as quoted in Annex 4 to document GC(XXVTII)/719, might suggest that 
it was totally irrelevant to the question of the Israeli attack and the 
subsequent threats to repeat that attack. However, it did not appear so in 
the light of a report on that statement published by "Nucleonics Week" of 
10 May 1984: 
"In a May 2 speech in Tel Aviv, Shamir said that 'Israel, which is poor 


in natural resources and sources of energy ... has an interest in 


building nuclear power plants.' However, he added, some regimes violate 


agreement and rules of behaviour without fear of retribution. 


Accordingly, the Prime Minister advocated co-ordinated and unified action 


by democratic countries which 'are capable of punishing the various 


international pirates'." 


28. That showed the real thrust of the Israeli statements and fully revealed 
Israel's doctrine of attacking nuclear facilities wherever and whenever it saw 
fit. Par from being a withdrawal of the earlier Israeli threat it was an 
affirmation of the Begin doctrine of pre-emptive attack and an open invitation 
to "democratic countries" - including, no doubt, "democratic" and "capable" 
South Africa - to join Israel in punishing the various "international pirates". 
29. The Israeli statements were in fact a deliberate attempt to mislead the 
Members of the Agency so that the culprit might be rehabilitated, his crime 
forgotten and he be allowed the freedom to recruit others to join him in 
committing similar acts in the future. 
30. The Israelis might find satisfaction in having convinced those countries 
which called themselves democratic that the invitation to join Israel in the 
act which they had condemned constituted a withdrawal of the threat to repeat 
such an act. 
31. For that deliberate attempt to deceive the Agency and to call upon others 
to join in acts of aggression which the Agency had already condemned, Israel 
deserved to be suspended from exercising the privileges and rights of 
membership. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 8 


32. The protection afforded by the United States to the perpetrator of such 
acts was an open invitation to others to find a superpower which would defend 
them, regardless of whether they were right or wrong, so that they could 
commit their acts of piracy with total impunity under the pretext of 
safeguarding the Agency's mission from irreparable damage. 
33. The United States' threat to the Agency if the latter did not share its 
view of the consequences of the Israeli attack was a challenge to the 
principle of sovereign equality of Member States in the Agency. That 
country's readiness to withdraw from the Agency demonstrated how much real 
concern it had for the so-called principle of universality which it had 
invoked so often. 
34. In conclusion, he requested that a roll-call vote be taken on the draft 
resolution, which was the result of intensive consultations between the 
various regional groups, and urged all delegations which were truly concerned 
about the fate of the Agency, the future of safeguards and NPT and the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy to vote in favour of it. 
35. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) deeply regretted having to 
speak on the item under discussion, since his delegation felt that there was 
no justification for its inclusion in the agenda of the Conference. The draft 
resolution before the Conference was divisive and contained so many serious 
flaws that it would be virtually impossible to amend it adequately. 
36. One aspect, however, was of such importance to the Agency's work that it 
must be discussed. His country had repeatedly stated the view that the 
Agency's safeguards system was vital to the security of all nations and should 
be embraced by all States. In accordance with that view, his delegation had 
proposed in document GC(XXVIII)/745, an amendment to operative paragraph 6 of 
the draft resolution set forth in document GC(XXVIII)/741. The United States 
regularly urged Israel to accept safeguards on all its nuclear activities in 
the same way that it urged all States to do so. A resolution calling on only 
one State to accept safeguards was illogical. It should call on all States to 
do so. A number of Agency Member States had not entered into arrangements 
with the Agency for the application of safeguards to all their peaceful 
nuclear facilities. That situation should be rectified. All States should 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 9 


adopt safeguards on all their peaceful nuclear activities, and that was the 
goal of the proposed amendment. Such action would widen support for the 
safeguards system and enhance public and international confidence, which was 
essential if the full potential of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was to 
be fulfilled. 


37. Mr. SINGH (India) said that the proposed amendment to operative 
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution was not a rational one. The question at 
issue was not a simple, technical, non-political matter, but an act of 
aggression which had been discussed by the United Nations Security Council and 
General Assembly, by the Board of Governors and at three sessions of the 
General Conference, and for which Iraq had so far received no satisfaction 
through the Agency. The purpose of the amendment was to remove the mention of 
Israel from paragraph 6 and to substitute all Member States which had not 
accepted Agency safeguards on all their peaceful nuclear facilities. That was 
illogical, however, since it was Israel which had attacked Iraq's peaceful 
nuclear research reactor in 1981, whereas the rest of those States had 
committed no such act of aggression. He requested that the meeting be 
suspended so as to allow the Group of 77 to consider the implications of the 
amendment proposed by the United States. 
The meeting was suspended at 4.20 p.m. and resumed at 5.45 p.m. 


38. The CHAIRMAN said that the amendment proposed in document 
GC(XXVIII)/745 had been withdrawn by the delegation of the United States of 
America, pursuant to Rule 65 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. 
39. Mr. JIANG (China) said that on 7 June 1981 Israeli military aircraft 
had wantonly attacked an Iraqi nuclear research reactor. That act of 
aggression had aroused the indignation of people throughout the world. Both 
the United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council had passed 
resolutions in which Israel's act had been strongly condemned and Israel had 
been enjoined to compensate for the losses suffered. Also, the General 
Conference had adopted resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381, in preambular paragraph (i) 
of which it had been pointed out that Israel's military aggression against a 
safeguarded nuclear research facility had caused considerable damage to the 
safeguards regime and could seriously jeopardize the development of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 10 


40. The Chinese Government and people, who had alway condemned Israel's 
policy of aggression, had expressed their violent indignation at the 
bombardment of Iraq's peaceful nuclear facility. The attack had not only 
inflicted enormous losses on Iraq, but had also created a highly undesirable 
precedent for further attacks on nuclear installations devoted to peaceful 
purposes. The pretext put forward by Israel for the attack was that the Iraqi 
facility had threatened Israel's security, a statement that was entirely 
without foundation. It was known to all that the Iraqi nuclear research 
reactor had been under Agency safeguards. Thus, if a country could attack a 
nuclear facility devoted to peaceful purposes merely on the pretext that the 
facility endangered its security, it might be concluded that any country could 
attack similar installations of other countries on the same pretext. That 
view was entirely unacceptable, and the Chinese delegation therefore supported 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXVIII)/741. 
41. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the United States 
delegation had invoked Rule 63 of the Rules of Procedure at the previous 
Plenary meeting-^ in order to delay discussion of the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXVIII)/741 but had itself put forward a draft amendment to that 
resolution (document GC(XXVIII)/745) only very shortly before it was to be 
discussed. However, the Syrian delegation did not intend to invoke Rule 63 
against the United States' proposal, which it saw mainly as an attempt to 
evade the issue underlying the draft resolution in document GC(XXVIII)/741 and 
to prevent the draft resolution from being discussed and adopted. 
42. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his country had 
always condemned military attacks on peaceful nuclear facilities. For that 
reason, despite the war imposed by Iraq, the Islamic Republic of Iran had 
supported the previous General Conference resolutions concerning the Israeli 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research reactor. The draft resolution under 
discussion had some merit but did not constitute an appropriate or effective 
response to Israel's attack on a peaceful nuclear installation. The Islamic 
Republic of Iran's position was that Israel should be suspended from the 
rights and privileges of Agency membership so that such attacks would never be 
repeated in the future. Nevertheless, in order to demonstrate its support for 
the principles embodied in the draft resolution in document GC(XXVIII)/741, 
the Islamic Republic of Iran was prepared to support it. 
1/ GC(XXVIII)/OR.266, para. 68. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 11 


43. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said that the draft resolution before the 
Conference constituted a singling out of and discrimination against Israel and 
that no proper consideration had been given to Israel's verbal and written 
statements on the matter. In order to prevent any possible misunderstanding, 
he wished once again to reiterate the main points of his Government's policy. 
44. First, Israel had no policy of attacking nuclear facilities and had no 
intention of attacking nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes 
anywhere. It held that nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes 
should be inviolable from military attack and it supported international 
efforts to reach agreement as soon as possible with a view to regulating the 
status of nuclear facilities and enhancing the role of the IAEA in ensuring 
that nuclear energy was a credible and safe means of achieving peaceful 
development. Secondly, Israel viewed positively the activities of 
international organizations established by the international community for 
such purposes. Within that context, Israel considered the conclusions of the 
Director General's report in document GC(XXVIII)/719 to be relevant. Thirdly, 
Israel welcomed the efforts currently being made by international 
organizations to work out arrangements for world-wide application whereby 
nuclear facilities would be protected from military attack. Israel would 
accept the conclusions of those negotiations, including the definition of 
nuclear facilities as being for peaceful purposes. 
45. Operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution before the Conference was 
both political and discriminatory in nature. It went beyond the scope of the 
Agency's mandate and was incompatible with its Statute, since the Agency was 
based on the principle of sovereign equality of all Members, as embodied in 
Article IV.C of the Statute. Therefore, any decision against Israel as 
proposed in the draft resolution - which would violate the principle of 
sovereign equality of Member States and run counter to the principle of 
universality - would be a political act with no legal justification. 
46. The Statute did not make membership of the IAEA conditional upon a 
State's agreement to place its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. If 
such a requirement existed, many Member States represented at the Conference 
would be in violation of it. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 12 


47. He reminded the Conference that Israel was a democratic country with 
freedom of speech. The only statements to which his Government was bound were 
those made officially, for example in the General Conference. He noted that 
the delegation of Iraq had made no mention of the statement and clarification 
provided by Israel in the Conference. Furthermore, although the Iraqi 
representative had stated that his country was a peaceful one which did not 
violate any conventions or agreements, it had been proved that Iraq had used 
chemical weapons against Iran in violation of formal undertakings. 
48. In conclusion, he urged all delegations to reject the draft resolution. 
49. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that the war between 
his country and Iraq would be fought at the battlefront and that the 
delegations of Israel and the United States would not be permitted to use such 
issues to undermine the stand made by Agency Member States against Israel. 
The principle of the universality of the Agency had been raised, but that 
principle must be called into question if certain countries wantonly attacked 
the peaceful nuclear facilities of others. 
50. The Israeli response to resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 did not represent 
the minimum necessary. Israel claimed, in a letter reproduced in document 
GC(XXVIII)/719, that it had no policy of attacking nuclear facilities and no 
intention of attacking nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes 
anywhere. If that were so, how was the attack on the Iraqi research reactor 
to be interpreted? One could conclude either that a policy of not attacking 
nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes existed but had been entirely 
ignored or that such a policy did not exist. The latter conclusion seemed 
more logical, however, as the very existence of the regime in question was 
based on a policy of aggression involving the occupation of Jerusalem and 
Palestine. In his view, therefore, the only solution was to treat Israel as a 
cancerous growth which should be removed by expulsion from the international 
community. 
51. The PRESIDENT recalled that the delegate of Iraq had requested a 
roll-call vote on the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/741. 
52. Venezuela, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 13 


53. The result of the vote was as followst 
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Cuba, 
Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
Egypt, Gabon, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, 
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Republic 
of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, 
Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, 
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab 
Emirates, Vietnam, Yugoslavia, Zambia. 


Against: Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, France, Federal Republic of 


Germany, Guatemala, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, 


Luxembourg, Monaco, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland, United States of 


America, Uruguay. 


Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Denmark, 


Ecuador, Finland, Greece, Holy See, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, 


Netherlands, New Zealand, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Spain, Sweden, 


United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 


Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela. 


54. There were 53 votes in favour and 17 against, with 23 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 
55. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), explaining why his 
delegation had voted against the draft resolution, said that the statements by 
the Government of Israel circulated in document GC(XXVIII)/720 and reiterated 
during the general debate were fully responsive to the call contained in 
operative paragraph 2 of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409. In particular the 
language which the Government of Israel had used with regard to "nuclear 
facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes" was virtually identical with that 
approved by the General Conference in resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407. He 
therefore took the view that attempts to pursue extraneous and illegal ends 
through resolutions such as that contained in document GC(XXVIII)/741 were 
motivated by considerations which were irrelevant and detrimental to the 
Agency. He feared that the adoption of the resolution would cause the 
divisive and destructive debate which had been going on for three successive 
years to be continued at the next session of the Conference. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 14 


56. Furthermore, the resolution contained a number of inaccuracies and 
omissions. For example, operative paragraph 1 did not reflect the view of 
some Member States that Israel's statements in document GC(XXVIII)/720 
were fully responsive to the relevant requirements of resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/409. Operative paragraph 2 was not sufficiently precise on a 
subject which had been the matter of lengthy debates and ought at least to 
have referred to nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes. Operative 
paragraph 3 suffered from the same defect, in addition to singling out Israel 
in a matter which should be broadly applicable. 
57. Operative paragraph 4 was totally objectionable, since it requested the 
Director General to undertake a task which, in his delegation's opinion, had 
already been fulfilled. In connection with that paragraph it was his 
unequivocal understanding that it did not imply any limitations whatsoever, 
either at present or in the future, on Israel's rights and privileges as a 
Member. His delegation also clearly understood the request that the General 
Conference consider the implementation of paragraph 3 of resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/409 to imply nothing more than that the question would be 
discussed and that the outcome of any debate which might ensue would in no way 
be prejudiced by such consideration. 
58. His delegation saw no reason why Israel should be singled out in 
operative paragraph 6. It was not the only State which had not placed all its 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards, and his country once again urged 
all States which had not taken that step to do so in order to foster new 
confidence in the Agency. 
59. While the United States acknowledged the right mentioned in operative 
paragraph 7, it equally believed that it was in the interest of all States to 
become parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and 
to undertake to place all their peaceful nuclear activities under safeguards. 
60. His delegation attached great importance to the role and proper 
functioning of the United Nations and its related agencies, especially the 
technical agencies, as was evidenced by his country's active participation and 
large contributions. The Agency should return to its original objective as 
defined by Article II of the Statute, to which the resolution was not relevant. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 15 


61. Mr. SINGH (India) said it was gratifying that there had been a 
majority of more than two thirds in favour of the resolution. It was 
important to put the resolution adopted into its historical perspective. 
Israel's attack on the Iraqi nuclear research reactor had taken place 
on 7 June 1981. On 12 June 1981, the Board of Governors had adopted a 
resolution recommending that the General Conference consider all the 
implications of the attack, including the suspension of Israel from the 
exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. On 19 June 1981, the 
United Nations Security Council had passed its resolution 487 strongly 
condemning the attack as a clear violation of the United Nations Charter and 
as being contrary to the norms of international conduct. Both the Group of 77 
and the Agency as a whole were obliged to respect those resolutions. In that 
connection, the voting pattern of some permanent Members of the Security 
Council with regard to the resolution just adopted was inconsistent with the 
way they had voted on Security Council resolution 487 in 1981. While those 
countries had been prepared at that time to deal with an act of aggression, 
they had now shown themselves unwilling to remove the threat of that 
aggression. 
62. In September 1981, the General Conference had at its twenty-fifth session 
adopted resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381, by which it had decided to consider at its 
twenty-sixth session the suspension of Israel from the exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership if by that time it had not complied with 
the provisions of Security Council resolution 487. At the twenty-sixth 
session, therefore, the question under consideration had been whether Israel 
had complied with Security Council resolution 487. The answer had been that 
it had not, and the Conference had voted on a resolution calling for the 
suspension of Israel from the exercise of the privileges and rights of 
membership for persistent violation of the Statute and the purposes and 
principles of the United Nations Charter. That resolution had not been 
adopted, but the credentials of the Israeli delegation had been rejected at 
that session. 
63. At its twenty-seventh session, the General Conference in 1983 had adopted 
resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, under operative paragraph 3 of which it had 
decided to withhold Agency research contracts to Israel, to discontinue the 
purchase of equipment and materials from Israel and to refrain from holding 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 16 


seminars and scientific meetings in Israel if it had not withdrawn its threat 
to attack and destroy nuclear facilities in Iraq and other countries by the 


twenty-eighth session of the General Conference. However, it now transpired 
that there was reluctance on the part of some to mention the question of the 
suspension of Israel's rights and privileges of membership or to discuss the 
implementation of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409. 


64. It had been said that Israel had already given appropriate assurances and 
should be deemed to have withdrawn its threat. However, the statements made 
by the Israeli delegation and the declarations and letters issued by Israel on 
the subject contained no word of regret for their past actions, made no 
mention of either safeguards or Iraq and gave no indication that Israel 
intended to respect safeguards in any part of the world. The Group of 77 with 
just a few exceptions - considered that nothing had been stated which 
could be construed as meaning anything other than that Israel itself intended 
to determine which facilities in the Middle East were peaceful and which were 
not. In other words, the statements made by Israel did not constitute a 
complete or proper response to resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409. It was clear 
that Israel had failed to satisfy the conditions laid down in operative 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of that resolution. Following negotiations in the Group 
of 77, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq had been persuaded to give Israel 
another chance to comply with the relevant provisions. The resolution just 
adopted called on the Director General to intervene personally with the 
Israeli authorities to that end. The Group of 77 was grateful to the General 
Conference for its patience, but noted that the discussion of the question at 
the next session would depend on the success of the Director General's efforts. 


65. Mr. CAMPBELL (Australia) said that the resolution overcame an 
immediate danger to the Agency and to the important principle of 
universality. His delegation had abstained from voting, however, because of 
serious deficiencies in the resolution; in particular, operative paragraph 4 
of the resolution referred to operative paragraph 3 of resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/409, the provisions of which his delegation opposed. He hoped 
that at its following session the General Conference would consider the 
matter, as it would pursuant to operative paragraph 4, but only with a view to 
concluding the topic in a way which best served the interests of the Agency, 
which could be served only by strict adherence to the Statute. He hoped that 
action during the next year would allow the matter to be removed from the 
agenda of the Conference. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 17 


66. Mr. GONZALEZ MORALES (Guatemala) said that it was unfortunate that 
the Conference was again in the position of having to vote on a resolution 
which was concerned with political questions. The Agency was a technical body 
and the appropriate forum for political matters was elsewhere. 
67. Mr. THABAULT (France) said that, while the resolution adopted was a 
considerable improvement on the initial proposal, it had still been 
unacceptable to his delegation. France had consistently condemned the attack 
on the Iraqi research reactor and deplored the effects of the attack on Iraq's 
economic development and energy programme. However, the value of the 
statements made by the Israeli Prime Minister and the Chairman of the Israel 
Atomic Energy Commission and of the letter addressed to the Director General 
by the Resident Representative of Israel should not be underestimated. They 
were a step in the right direction and, even if some delegations considered 
them to be insufficient, at least it was no longer possible to speak of 
Israel's standing threat. Any sanctions taken against Israel would therefore 
have no basis in the Agency's Statute. 
68. Furthermore, the placing of peaceful nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards should not be invoked as a threat or a punishment to any nation. 
The safeguards system could be extended only through persuasion, not 
compulsion. His delegation opposed any measure which impinged upon the rights 
of any Member State, including Israel, and had therefore voted against the 
resolution. 
69. Mr. CEIRANO (Holy See), explaining why his delegation had abstained 
from voting on the draft resolution, stressed that the Holy See wholeheartedly 
supported the promotion of peaceful relations among all States and 
therefore condemned any act of aggression committed by one country against 
another. 
70. His delegation supported all efforts to maintain the effectiveness of the 
Agency's Statute. Consequently, it endorsed the principle of universality as 
well as the right of the General Conference to adopt decisions designed to 
implement the provisions of the Statute and to enable the Agency both to 
foster the peaceful use of nuclear energy throughout the world and to provide 
the necessary safeguards against any abuse. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 18 


71. His delegation considered that the United Nations General Assembly was 
the correct forum for any question of a primarily political nature and that 
the resources available to the Agency should be concentrated on technical 
co-operation. His delegation nonetheless recognized that it was not always 
easy to separate political and technical matters. The Holy See had abstained 
from voting on the draft resolution because it shared the intentions of all 
those - whether they had voted for or against the resolution - who were in 
favour of improving relations between all Members of the Agency, thereby 
removing any feeling of distrust between them and eliminating the cause for 
future damaging incidents. 
72. Mr. DHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) said that it was the responsibility of 
the nuclear community, which included the Agency, to assure the rest of the 
world that it was employing nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposes and 
that peaceful nuclear programmes could not be used to develop the capability 
to destroy mankind. That goal would be achieved only if all nuclear 
facilities were subject to Agency safeguards. While respecting the principle 
of universality, his delegation would vote for any resolution which demanded 
that nuclear facilities in any Member State be placed under safeguards. Such 
a demand should not be considered a punishment. 
73. Mr. MATSUMURA (Japan), explaining his vote against the draft 
resolution, said his delegation regarded the Agency as an international 
organization of a technical character whose function was to promote the 
world-wide peaceful uses of atomic energy and to ensure global 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Its universality must be protected and 
any infringement of the principle of universality avoided. It was for that 
reason that Japan had voted against resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 while 
condemning the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear facilities. In that 
connection, he stressed the need for the conclusion of an international 
convention prohibiting attacks on peaceful nuclear facilities. 
74. Mr. NOE (Italy) said that his country had not voted against the 
draft resolution but had abstained on the clear understanding that the wording 
of operative paragraph 4 did not imply the automatic adoption in future of any 
measures which could affect the rights and privileges of a Member State; Italy 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 19 


firmly supported the universality of the Agency's membership and was opposed 
to any interpretation which ran counter to that principle. Moreover, 
operative paragraphs 2 and 3 were somewhat puzzling. All Member States should 
place their peaceful nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 


75. Mr. CONSTENLA UMANA (Costa Rica) said he wished first of all to 
refer to the statement by the Chairman of the Group of 77. The Chairman of 
the Latin American Group had announced to the Group of 77 that there was no 
consensus on the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/741; that 
had reflected a unanimous decision of the Latin American Group. The 
Guatemalan delegation, which was a member of the Group of 77, had voted 
against the resolution as had the delegation of Costa Rica. Consequently, he 
failed to understand why the Chairman of the Group of 77 had given the 
impression that there had been unanimity of feeling within the Group of 77 
concerning the matter. 
76. His delegation deplored the fact that the Agency had been chosen time and 
again as the forum for discussing a political question. Also, it could not 
accept any infringement of the principle of universality of membership. 
77. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) observed that his Government condemned 
aggression in any form. However, he had abstained from voting because the 
subject at issue had been dealt with in the appropriate forums and because the 
Agency, as an essentially technical body, ought to concentrate on technical 
activities and avoid political matters. In any case, he believed that the 
requirements of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 had been complied with and hoped 
that the topic would not be considered further. 
78. Mr. SULLIVAN (Canada) said that his country condemned the Israeli 
attack on the Iraqi research reactor and would greatly welcome Israel's 
placing all its nuclear programmes under Agency safeguards in the same way 
that it would welcome similar action by all countries which had not yet done 
so. 
79. The very substantial efforts made by several delegations to find an 
acceptable compromise text as an alternative to the resolution adopted by the 
Conference deserved recognition. However, the text of the resolution as 
adopted did not even mention the statements made by the Government of Israel 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 20 


in order to allay the concerns of the Government of Iraq. Moreover, the 
regulatory aspects of the Agency's mandate were highly technical and 
specific. Even in an extreme case - for example, where the diversion of 
nuclear material had been detected - the primary task of the Agency would be 
one of raising the alarm and not of policing. The intention behind operative 
paragraph 4 of the resolution was clearly to push the Agency into an 
enforcement role which it had neither the mandate nor the capacity to play. 


80. The resolution passed by the Conference was also defective in that it 
sought to have the General Conference interpret by itself not only the 
Agency's Statute but also the United Nations Charter. For those reasons, his 
delegation had voted against the resolution. 
81. Mr. PI BIASE (Uruguay) said that political discussions should not be 
a part of the work of technical international organizations, which should also 
abide by the principle of universality. His delegation's vote against the 
resolution did not, however, mean that it did not condemn Israel's attack on 
the Iraqi research reactor. 
82. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said that his delegation had abstained from 
voting on the resolution because such political matters should be discussed in 
other forums. The Agency was a technical organization and, like all 
international oganizations, should be guided by the principle of 
universality. He hoped that extraneous political matters would cease to 
appear on the agendas for future sessions of the General Conference. 
83. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that the Israeli delegation had referred to 
compliance with international agreements even though Israel's own record in 
the territories occupied by it was one of persistent violation of the Fourth 
Geneva Convention, to which it was a party. 
84. Also, the Israeli representative had invoked the principle of sovereign 
equality of all Member States, yet nothing could represent a more flagrant 
violation of that principle than Israel's attack on Iraq's research reactor, 
by which Israel had placed itself above all other Agency Members. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.267 
page 21 


85. With regard to the statement by the United States delegate, it seemed 
that the Agency faced not only a standing threat by Israel to attack peaceful 
nuclear facilities but also a standing threat by the United States to withdraw 
from the Agency if the organization took any action against Israel. He wished 
to remind the United States delegation that Security Council resolution 487 
called upon Israel to refrain from further attacks on peaceful nuclear 
facilities and threats thereof and urgently to place its nuclear facilities 
under IAEA safeguards. 
The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m. 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
February 1985* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION: 24-28 SEPTEMBER 1984 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 28 September 1984, at 9.25 p.m. 


President: Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* * 


11 Protection of nuclear installations devoted 
to peaceful purposes against armed attacks 1 22 


22 Examination of delegates' credentials 
23 -35 


23 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 36 -40 


- 
Oral report by the Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole on the following items: 41 76 
The Agency's accounts for 1983 
55 


The Agency's programme for 1985-86 and 


budget for 1985 56 59 
The financing of safeguards 60 
Assessment of Members' contributions to 


the Regular Budget 61 
Scale of assessment of Members' contri


butions for 1985 62 
The financing of technical assistance 63 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 64 - 73 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 74 - 75 
Review of. the Agency's activities 76 


23 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
(resumed) 77 - 91 


24


 Report on voluntary contributions pledged to 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1985


 92 


- Closing of the session 
93 - 104 
*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 6 November 1984. 


**/ GC(XXVIII)/730. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXVIII)/INF/223/Rev.4. 
85-510 



GC(XXVIII)/0R.268 
page 2 


PROTECTION OF NUCLEAR INSTALLATIONS DEVOTED TO PEACEFUL PURPOSES AGAINST ARMED 
ATTACKS (GC(XXVIII)/721, 737, 740 and 742) 


1. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the present item had been placed on 
the agenda pursuant to resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407, adopted by the General 
Conference the previous year. He recalled that in that resolution the General 
Conference, inter alia, had requested the Director General to keep the 
Conference informed of developments in the area of the protection of nuclear 
installations devoted to peaceful purposes against armed attacks through the 
adoption of international rules prohibiting such attacks. A report by the 
Director General pursuant to that request was contained in document 
GC(XXVIII)/721. 
2. The General Conference also had before it under that item two draft resolutions. 
The first, which was contained in document GC(XXVIII)/737, had been 
submitted by Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, 
Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela; an amendment had been proposed to it by Belgium, 
Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands and New Zealand, and was to be found in 
document GC(XXVIII)/740. The second draft resolution had been submitted by the 
Islamic Republic of Iran and was contained in document GC(XXVIII)/742. 
3. The President informed the General Conference that the Argentine delegation 
had made it known to him that consultations had been held with the delegations 
proposing an amendment to the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXVIII)/737 with a view to arriving at a text which would receive general 
acceptance. 
4. Mr. BELTRAMINO (Argentina) explained that the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXVIII)/737 was clearly intended to take note of the 
measures adopted by both the Conference on Disarmament and the General Assembly 
of the United Nations on a matter which, in the opinion of the countries submitting 
the draft resolution, was of vital importance to all States and to the 
Agency, and to induce them at the same time to strive further to arrive at 
binding international rules in that area. The sponsors had taken into account 
in the draft resolution the particular competence of the Conference on 
Disarmament in Geneva and,since the matter dealt with was a delicate one, the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 3 


draft had been modelled on resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407, which had been 
adopted by a large majority at the General Conference session of the previous 
year. That was why the sponsors had refrained from including in the text vague 
concepts which departed in one way or another from the original proposal. They 
appreciated the endeavours of certain delegations to avoid modifying the draft 
and they had responded to those endeavours in the manner that had just been 
explained. 


5. The amendment contained in document GC(XXVIll)/740 made reference to the 
Agency's safeguards system, which Argentina considered appropriate and which 
as a whole operated reasonably efficiently and satisfactorily. However, that 
reference to the safeguards system not only limited the aim of the draft resolution, 
but also compromised very gravely the application of the prohibition 
on armed attacks. According to that amendment, installations under safeguards 
would be specially protected, while others would be considerably less so. 
That was not logical. One should strive to ensure total protection of the 
population against the catastrophic dangers to which an armed attack on 
a nuclear installation could lead. The fact that a facility was or was not 
under safeguards made no difference at all to the radiation hazards that would 
result therefrom. The formula proposed by the sponsors was general enough to 
apply to all installations,and it aimed at complete protection of the population 
which might be affected. In practice, the consequences of the proposed 
amendment might be so serious that the sponsors of the draft resolution, 
following consultations, preferred to withdraw their original proposal, only 
regretting that the point of it had not been adequately grasped. 
6. Mr. BRENNAN (Ireland), speaking on behalf of Belgium, Denmark, the 
Netherlands, New Zealand and his own country, took note of the Argentine 
delegation's statement regarding withdrawal of the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXVIII)/737. Nevertheless, in view of what had just been said, 
he wished to explain why the countries mentioned had decided to submit the 
draft amendment referring to the Agency's safeguards system, contained in 
document GC(XXVIII)/740, for approval by the General Conference. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 4 


7. Firstly, the safeguards system provided a very important and objective 
criterion - and the word "objective" had to be stressed - for it permitted 
verification that a nuclear facility was in fact being put to peaceful use. 
That was a factor that should not be overlooked. 
8. Secondly, the safeguards system was a central element in the Agency's 
mandate and tasks. It was enshrined in the Statute,and the draft resolution 
before the General Conference ought to take that fact into account. It was 
therefore appropriate to record that nuclear installations which had been 
placed under international safeguards should be declared protected from armed 
attack under international law. 
9. With regard to the comments made by the previous speaker, it was in no 
way intended by the sponsors of the amendment to draw any distinction between 
peaceful nuclear installations. The proposal did not in any way detract from 
the status of any particular peaceful nuclear facility. All peaceful nuclear 
installations would be declared protected. 
10. Finally, the sponsors of the draft amendment did not wish to pre-empt in 
any fashion the deliberations of other fora on the matter of adopting international 
rules prohibiting armed attacks against all peaceful nuclear 
installations. They recognized that the competence rested with those other 
fora; hence their draft amendment had been very brief and couched in the most 
general terms possible. 
11. The PRESIDENT invited the delegate of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
to introduce the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/742. 
12. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran), first thanking the Director 
General for the report that had been submitted to the General Conference 
pursuant to resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407, explained that his country had always 
attached great importance to the protection of nuclear facilities devoted to 
peaceful uses against armed attacks. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 5 


13. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIIl)/742 reflected in 
effect the consensus among all Member States of the Agency that any armed 
attacks against peaceful nuclear installations should not only be discouraged 
but also explicitly prohibited. Furthermore, operative paragraph 1 responded 
to the concern of Member States who would prefer the Agency to deal with its 
problems within the framework of its Statute. 
14. He was convinced that the adoption of the draft resolution submitted by 
his country would by and large ensure that the dangerous violations of the 
past did not occur again in the future. He called on other delegations 
to support the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/742 and 
requested a roll-call vote on the issue. 
15. Mr. BIN-DAAER (United Arab Emirates) proposed two changes in the 
form of the draft resolution submitted by the Islamic Republic of Iran; the 
words "the gravity of" in paragraph (d) of the preamble should be replaced by 
"the grave", and the words "would call for" replaced by "would guarantee" in 
the third line of the first operative paragraph. 
16. Mr. CAMPBELL (Australia) said he wished to table a procedural motion 
and to make an appeal to the General Conference. Item 11, which was of 
considerable importance and extreme complexity, dealt with important matters 
of principle for all Member States. The first draft resolution (GC(XXVIII)/737) 
introduced by Argentina and the proposal for its amendment (GC(XXVIII)/740) submitted 
on serious grounds by Belgium and other countries had both been withdrawn, 
since their sponsors had realized that it was difficult, at a late 
stage in the Conference session, to make headway with consultations and 
arrive at conclusions in a logical and fully responsible manner. 
17. That left the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/742, which 
had been introduced by the Islamic Republic of Iran and to which a proposal for 
amendment had been submitted by the representative of the United Arab Emirates. 
That draft resolution would certainly raise as many difficulties as the first 
one and the draft amendment contained in document GC(XXVIII)/740. The matter 
was a very difficult and complex one and, because of that circumstance, the 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 6 


General Conference would need just as much time to study the draft resolution 
submitted by the Islamic Republic of Iran and the proposal to amend it as for 
examining the first draft resolution and the proposal to amend it, which had 
just been withdrawn on that account. He therefore suggested that in accordance 
with Rule 59 and Rule 62(c) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference 
the debate on item 11 of the agenda should be adjourned and all documents 
relating thereto withdrawn. 


18. The PRESIDENT pointed out that when a delegate requested adjournment 
of the discussion of an item under Rule 59 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference, in addition to the proposer of the motion two delegates 
could speak in favour of and two against the motion, after which the motion 
should be immediately put to the vote. 
19. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said he could not entirely agree 
with the delegate of Australia on his motion for adjournment of consideration 
of the draft resolution presented by the Isalmic Republic of Iran. He did not 
think that the matter was a very complicated one requiring a great deal of 
time for study and discussion. 
20. Examination of the draft resolution submitted by the Islamic Republic of 
Iran showed that it was very simple and did not contain any ideas that were 
not in accordance with the Agency's objectives of maintaining peace and avoiding 
a possible catastrophe for mankind. The draft resolution was not directed at 
any delegation, nor at the past. It dealt with the future and was based on a 
very clear idea - namely, that any aggressor should be punished in accordance 
with the laws of the Agency. Hence he saw no reason to adjourn the discussion. 
21. The PRESIDENT, noting that no other delegation wished to speak, put 
the Australian motion to the vote. 
22. The motion was adopted by 37 votes to 14, with 23 abstentions. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.268 
page 7 


EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXVIII)/743) 


23. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Committee had met the day 
before as a credentials committee to examine the credentials of delegates as 
provided for in Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. 
The Committee's report was set out in document GC(XXVIII)/743. Paragraphs 2-12 
of the report described the manner in which the Committee had approached its 
task and reported the opinions expressed during the discussion. Since the 
appearance of that report, the delegates of Brazil and Argentina had submitted 
credentials which satisfied the requirements of Rule 27. Paragraph 13 of the 
report contained a draft resolution recommended for adoption by the General 
Conference. 
24. He then asked whether delegates wished to comment on the report and on 
the draft resolution contained in it. 
25. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking on behalf of a group of 
countries - Algeria, Cuba, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, 
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates and Viet Nam 
- expressed reservations with regard to acceptance of the credentials of the 
Israeli delegate, which they believed should be rejected on the following 
grounds: the Security Council of the United Nations did not recognize Jerusalem 
as the capital of Israel; Israel had annexed the Golan Heights, which belonged 
to the southern part of Syria, and that annexation had been repudiated and was 
considered illegal by the United Nations organizations; and Israel was also 
occupying other Arab territories, including territories belonging to Palestine, 
the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon. 
26. The PRESIDENT assured the delegate of the Syrian Arab Republic that 
the reservations he had expressed on behalf of a group of countries would be 
reflected in the record of the meeting. 
27. Mr. SHASH (Egypt) reaffirmed his country's well-known position with 
regard to the credentials of the Israeli delegate; Egypt did not recognize 
the annexation of Jerusalem by Israel, which it considered a violation of 
international law and the conventions of the United Nations. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 8 


28. Mr. D.A. SINGH (Malaysia) associated himself fully with the statement 
by the delegate of the Syrian Arab Republic with regard to the credentials of 
the Israeli delegation. 
29. Mr. SOEPRAPTO (Indonesia) said that his delegation did not recognize 
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and did not agree to Israel representing 
the people of the illegally occupied Arab territories. For that reason he, 
too, wished to express reservations with regard to the credentials of the 
Israeli delegate. 
30. Mr. YU (People's Republic of China) said that he endorsed the reservations 
that had been expressed regarding the Israeli delegate's credentials. 
31. Mr. S.K. SINGH (India) said that his delegation supported the reservations 
expressed by a number of delegations, on behalf of whom the delegate of 
the Syrian Arab Republic had spoken, for the reasons that the latter had so 
clearly expressed. The problems involved related to both the political aspects 
and the technical aspects of the Agency as a technical organization. India's 
views on the Palestine problem, the problem of Jerusalem and the problem of the 
Golan Heights were well known, and it was because of those problems that his 
delegation wished its reservations to be duly reflected in the record of the 
meeting. 
32. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh) associated himself with those representatives 
of Arab countries and other States who had spoken before him expressing reservations 
with regard to the credentials of the Israeli delegate. 
33. Mr. PEIC (Yugoslavia) joined the delegates from Africa, Asia and 
other regions who had expressed reservations regarding the Israeli delegate's 
credentials. 
34. The PRESIDENT asked the General Conference whether it now wished to 
adopt the draft resolution recommended by the General Committee in paragraph 13 
of its report (GC(XXVIII)/743) on the examination of delegates' credentials, 
note being taken of the reservations expressed by delegations, which would be 
fully reflected in the record. 
35. It was so decided. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.268 
page 9 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXVIII)/716 and 732) 


36. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that 11 Members had to be 
elected to the Board from the geographical areas specified in paragraph 2 of 
document GC(XXVIII)/732 to ensure that the Board would be constituted in 
accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute. 
37. He further recalled that consultations had taken place within the eight 
geographical groups and that to facilitate the election an informal note on 
the results of those consultations had been circulated to delegations. 
38. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Egyptian delegation 
and a member of the Irish delegation acted as tellers. 
39. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members to the Board of 
Governors. 
40. The PRESIDENT said that the counting of votes would take some time 
and therefore suggested that the remaining business under item 23 be deferred 
until the tellers had reported to him. 
ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


41. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, presented 
the Committee's report on items 13 to 21 of the agenda. 
42. With regard to item 13 (The Agency's accounts for 1983), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in Part I of document GC(XXVIII)/714. 
43. With respect to item 14 (The Agency's programme for 1985-86 and budget 
for 1985), the Committee recommended adoption of draft resolution A as set out 
in document GC(XXVIIl)/715/Mod.1, and draft resolutions B and C contained in 
Annex III to Part I of document GC(XXVIII)/715. 
44. Under the same item, the Committee had discussed the draft resolution 
entitled "The Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage" set 
forth in document GC(XXVIII)/736, and recommended to the Conference that it 
adopt the draft resolution. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 10 


45. Also under that item, the Committee had discussed the draft resolution 
entitled "Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the International Atomic 
Energy Agency's technical co-operation" which was set forth in document 
GC(XXVIII)/733, and recommended to the Conference that it adopt the draft 
resolution. 
46. With regard to item 15 (The financing of safeguards), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXVIII)/725. 
47. Under item 16 (Assessment of Members' contributions to the Regular Budget), 
the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXVIII)/726. 
48. As to item 17 (Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1985), 
the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXVIII)/727. 
49. Regarding item 18 (The financing of technical assistance), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in GC(XXVIII)/734. 
50. With reference to item 19 (Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat), the 
Committee recommended to the General Conference that it adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXVIII)/735. 
51. Under item 20 (Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXVIII)/728. At the same time, some of the Committee members 
had expressed the wish for a review of Article VI as a whole. 
52. Finally, under item 21 (Review of the Agency's activities), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXVIII)/738. 
53. The PRESIDENT suggested that the draft resolutions relating to the 
items of the agenda that had been referred to the Committee of the Whole could 
now be considered by the Conference with a view to their adoption. 
54. It was so agreed. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 11 


The Agency's accounts for 1983 


55. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/714 was adopted. 
The Agency's programme for 1985-86 and budget for 1985 


56. Draft resolution A contained in document GC(XXVIII)/715/Mod.1 and draft 
resolutions B and C contained in Annex III to Part I of document GC(XXVIII)/715 
were adopted. 
57. Mr. DARTOIS (Belgium) noted that the budget for 1985 had just been adopted. 
That budget, as opposed to the budgets for previous years, provided for zero real 
growth, which the Belgian Government regarded as essential for international 
organizations. Nevertheless, his country could not join the consensus on the 
section of the budget dealing with safeguards and, in the event of a vote on it, 
would have had to abstain. That reservation was an indication of his delegation's 
disapproval of that section of the budget, which was continuing to grow 
in an unjustifiable manner. Belgium, whose attachment to non-proliferation was 
unquestionable, believed that the application of safeguards should be reviewed. 
Draft resolution on the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damage (GC(XXVIII)/736) 


58. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/736 was adopted. 
Draft resolution on the Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the 
International Atomic Energy Agency's technical co-operation (GC(XXVIII)/733) 


59. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/733 was adopted. 
The financing of safeguards 


60. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/725 was adopted. 
Assessment of Members' contributions to the Regular Budget 


61. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/726 was adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1985 


62. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/727 was adopted. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 12 


The financing of technical assistance 


63. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/734 was adopted. 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


64. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/735 was adopted. 
65. Mr. S.K. SINGH (India), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 as well 
as for his own country, pointed out that, with regard to the draft resolution 
on the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat which had just been adopted under 
item 19, Secretariat staff included the staff of the Department of Safeguards. 
In a statement made at a meeting of the Board of Governors on 20 September 1984, 
the Deputy Director General for Safeguards, recalling that certain Member States 
had deplored the fact that the fraction of proposed new inspectors from developing 
countries was not higher, had stated that he was proposing 29 persons for 
approval, ten of them from developing countries. It had been surprising to 
learn that, according to the Deputy Director General's own words, six of the ten 
came from developing countries belonging to the Group of 77, while the other 
four were from developing countries which did not belong to it. That meant that 
for the Agency's Secretariat there were two categories of developing countries those 
which were members of the Group of 77 and those which were not. 
66. The Governor from the Philippines and several other Governors, himself 
included, had queried that classification. They had been told that the Agency 
was applying what was called the UNDP system, by which countries benefiting from 
technical assistance programmes or ones to which indicative planning figures 
(IPFs) were assigned were classed as developing. The Secretariat had stated 
subsequently that it considered all members of the Group of 77 and certain 
other States, such as Turkey, Bulgaria and Portugal, to be developing countries. 
67. On looking into the matter it had been found that, for its part, UNDP had 
been applying a relatively flexible system which had varied over time. In 
some years it had assigned IPFs even to countries like Poland. Turkey, Bulgaria, 
Portugal and Poland were all countries with very friendly relations with the 
Group of 77. It was not acceptable, however, for the Secretariat to decide 
unilaterally, and without being duly authorized by the Board of Governors or the 
General Conference, which countries should be regarded as developing. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 13 


68. The item under consideration was not a matter of development aid or technical 
assistance, but of the staffing of the Secretariat and the recruitment 
of personnel for safeguards. There was therefore good reason to be a little 
bewildered and concerned. The assistance provided by UNDP to Member States 
was not necessarily based on their being classed as developing countries. 
UNDP, which was very careful in that connection, had never claimed that the 
beneficiaries of its technical assistance were necessarily or exclusively 
developing countries. He therefore felt compelled to point out the error made 
in the statement which the Deputy Director General for Safeguards had read out 
to the Board of Governors on 20 September 1984. 
69. The Group of 77 was composed of countries appearing in lists A and C of 
the annex to General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX), by which UNCTAD had been established. 
Those lists had been altered from time to time by decisions of the Trade and 
Development Board which the General Assembly of the United Nations invariably endorsed. 
The important point about those lists was the seal of approval that the 
General Assembly had placed upon them. Two countries which appeared in 
lists A and C, China and Israel, were not members of the Group of 77. Conversely, 
Cyprus, Malta and Romania, which were members of the Group of 77, did 
not appear in those lists. Portugal, Bulgaria and Turkey were not members of 
the Group of 77, nor were they included in lists A and C. 
70. Lest the Agency's Division of Personnel should become even more confused 
by what was going on in the United Nations system, it was to be noted that the 
United Nations Statistical Office followed a system of classification which 
was different from both that of UNDP and that of the United Nations General 
Assembly. According to the Statistical Office classification, all countries 
were considered developing with the exception of (i) developed market economy 
countries (United States of America, Canada, EEC countries, EFTA countries, 
Spain, Yugoslavia, Israel, Japan, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa); 
(ii) the socialist countries of Eastern Europe (Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, 
the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania and the Soviet Union); 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 14 


and (iii) the socialist countries of Asia (China, the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, Mongolia and Viet Nam). Thus, certain countries - such as 
Yugoslavia, Romania and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea - which were 
members of the Group of 77 and were recognized as such in the resolutions of 
the General Assembly could not be regarded as developing under the system of 
the United Nations Statistical Office. 


71. There seemed to be an infinite variety of systems applied by the international 
organizations. The World Bank, for its definition of developing 
countries, considered merely the per capita GNP of States and regarded countries 
such as China, Mongolia, Turkey, Portugal, Greece and Israel, which were not 
members of the Group of 77, as developing countries. Conversely, the World 
Bank did not include any country of Eastern Europe, not even Bulgaria, in that 
category. Similarly, although China and Mongolia were developing countries 
from the Bank's point of view, the same did not apply to the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea. 
72. There was clearly need for the Agency to show caution in that matter. He 
wished to recall once more that the Department of Safeguards was not dealing 
with technical assistance or any other kind of economic aid; the matter under 
consideration was the delicate one of staffing. The only definition of developing 
countries that one could agree to see followed by the Agency was the system 
that had been decided on by the General Assembly of the United Nations in 
resolution 1995 (XIX), as amended from time to time. 


73. As the matter was a rather technical one and a considerable amount of 
research had been done on it so as to clarify the situation for all concerned, 
he requested that his statement be reproduced in extenso in the record of the 
meeting. 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


74. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference that a vote had been 
requested on the draft resolution in document GC(XXVIII)/744, and invited the 
General Conference to vote on it by show of hands. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 15 


75. There were 66 votes in favour and 3 against, with 11 abstentions. The 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/744 was adopted. 
Review of the Agency's activities 


76. 
The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXVIII)/738 was adopted. 
The meeting was suspended at 11.20 p.m. and resumed at midnight 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXVIII)/716 and 732) (resumed) 


77. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of the 
voting. 
78. The result of election of three Members from the area of Latin America 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 10 
Valid votes: 257 
Required majority: 43 
Votes obtained: 
Argentina 86 
Ecuador 86 
Peru 85 


79. Having obtained the required majority, Argentina, Ecuador and Peru were 
elected to the Board. 
80. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Western Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 15 
Valid votes: 163 
Required majority: 41 
Votes obtained: 
Greece 83 
Norway 80 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 16 


81. Having obtained the required majority, Greece and Norway were elected to 
the Board. 
82. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Eastern Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions; 7 
Valid votes; 82 
Required majority; 42 
Votes obtained; 
German Democratic Republic 82 

83. Having obtained the required majority, the German Democratic Republic was 
elected to the Board. 
84. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was as 
follows; 
Abstentions: 13 
Valid votes; 165 
Required majority; 42 
Votes obtained: 
Ivory Coast 82 
Morocco 83 


85. Having obtained the required majority, the Ivory Coast and Morocco were 
elected to the Board. 
86. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia was as follows; 
Abstentions; 3 
Valid votes; 86 
Required majority: 44 
Votes obtained; 
Islamic Republic of Iran 29 
Jordan 57 



GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 17 


87. Having obtained the required majority, Jordan was elected to the Board. 
88. The result of the election of one Member from the area of South-East Asia 
and the Pacific was as follows: 
Abstentions: 5 


Valid votes: 84 


Required majority: 43 


Votes obtained: 


Indonesia 83 
Malaysia 1 


89. Having obtained the required majority, Indone sia was elected to the Board 
90. The result of the e lection of one Membi er from the i areas of Africa or the 
Middle East and South As ia or South-East As ia and the Pac] Lfic was as foil .ows: 
Abstentions: 7 


Valid votes: 82 


Required majority: 42 


Votes obtained: 


Indonesia 1 
Malaysia 81 


91. Having obtained the required majority, Malaysia was elected to the Board. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1985 (GC(XXVIII)/729/Rev.4) 


92. The PRESIDENT said that document GC(XXVIII)/729/Rev.4 contained 
information on the voluntary contributions for 1985 pledged by 10 p.m. on 
27 September 1984. By that time the total amount of contributions pledged by 
the Agency's Member States had been US $12 661 726. Since then, Cyprus, 
Albania and Guatemala had announced pledges of $2600, $2600 and $5000 respectively. 
Thus, the aggregate amount so far pledged was US $12 671 926. 

GC(XXVIII)/OR.268 
page 18 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


93. Mr. RODRIGUEZ VARGAS (Colombia), speaking on behalf of the countries 
of Latin America, expressed his appreciation to the President for the skill 
with which he had guided the Conference during its twenty-eighth session, there 
testifying to the interest and competence with which Latin America handled 
matters relating to the Agency's mandate. Also, he thanked the Director 
General and the Secretariat for their support and the Government of Austria 
for its hospitality. 


94. Mr. SULLIVAN (Canada), speaking on behalf of the area of North 
America, paid tribute to the President for the way in which he had guided the 
Conference's work in spite of the difficulties encountered. He also thanked 
the Director General and the Secretariat. 
95. Mr. OSZTROVSZKY (Hungary) commended the President, on behalf of the 
countries of Eastern Europe, for the patience with which he had guided the 
work of the General Conference. Thanks to him, major problems and difficulties 
had been overcome, as a result of which the Agency would be better able, in 
years to come, to carry out its work for peace. Also, he thanked the host 
country and the Secretariat. 
96. Mr. S.K. SINGH (India), speaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Middle East and South Asia, commended the Director General and the Secretariat 
on their efficient work. He thanked the President for his patience and 
sincerity, which were a credit to Latin America. 
97. Mr. SOEPRAPTO (Indonesia) complimented the President, on behalf of 
the area of South East Asia and the Pacific, for his skill in conducting the 
deliberations of the General Conference. He expressed appreciation to the 
Director General and the Secretariat for the smooth way in which the session 
had proceeded. 
98. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco), on behalf of the African group, praised the 
President for the way in which he had brought the discussions to a happy 
conclusion. He thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for their 
unflagging efforts and the Austrian Government for its warm hospitality. 

GC(XXVIII)/0R.268 
page 19 


99. Mr. MIYAZAWA (Japan), speaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Far East, associated himself with the previous speakers in complimenting the 
President on the way in which he had discharged his functions, and thanked 
the Director General, the Secretariat, the host country and the city of Vienna. 
100. Mr. NOE (Italy), speaking on behalf of the countries of Western 
Europe, said that credit for the success of the twenty-eighth session of the 
General Conference was due to the President. Also, he thanked the Director 
General and the Agency's staff. 
101. The PRESIDENT said that the discussions during the twenty-eighth 
session had been evidence of the interest of countries in the Agency's activities 
and the progress achieved throughout the world in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Delegations had demonstrated their will to work for the common 
good and, given the present critical situation in international organizations, 
had shown themselves to be aware of the importance of effective multilateral 
co-operation. 
102. He thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for their administrative 
support of the meetings and expressed his appreciation to the city of 
Vienna for its welcome. 
103. In conclusion, he emphasized the importance of contributing in every way 
possible to the continuation of dialogue and the search for consensus aimed at 
enabling the Agency to discharge its noble functions in the interest of mankind. 
He invited all present to observe one minute of silence for prayer or 
meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


104. The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-eighth session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 12.35 a.m. 



