GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
February 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 198S 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 23 September 1985, at 10.20 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. MORELLI PANDO (Peru) 
President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 
Opening of the session 1 6 
Election of the President 7 27 
1 Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 28 31 
Procedural remarks by the Chairman 32 33 
2 Message from the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations 34 45 
3 Statement by the Director General 46 124 
5 Voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1986 125 126 
6 Appointment of the Director General 127 133 
7 General debate and annual report 
for 1984 
Statement by the delegate of: 
United States of America 134 - 174 

*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 26 September 1985. 
**/ GC(XXIX)/746 and Add.1. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-210 


0345e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the twenty-ninth regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed the delegates, observers, 
representatives of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and those 
of other intergovernmental organisations and, in particular, the considerable 
number of ministers who were representing their countries. Their presence 
underlined the importance attached by Member States to the work, of the 
Agency. He thanked the Austrian authorities, who had once again made 
available the Hofburg Palace for the Agency's General Conference. 
4. Since the preceding session of the Conference, held in September 1984, 
the Agency's Secretariat had, under the wise guidance of the Director General, 
pursued the programmes which the Conference had endorsed, and in the course of 
the week delegates would have the opportunity to examine what the Secretariat 
had achieved and consider a range of other important matters of interest to 
Member States. 
5. He wished to express his country's gratitude to Member States for 
having elected its delegate President of the Conference for its twenty-eighth 
session. 
6. Reiterating his faith in the high purposes of the Agency, he said that 
some of the mechanisms it had established, especially safeguards, were among 
the most valuable factors promoting confidence in the maintenance of world 
peace. But great stress also had to be laid on the Agency's responsibility 
for promoting development in all its Member nations, within the framework of a 
more just world order, as had often been pointed out at the preceding sessions 
of the Conference and elsewhere. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 3 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


7. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
8. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), speaking on behalf of the Africa regional 
group, said that he had great pleasure in proposing Mr. Manouan, delegate of 
C6te d'Ivoire, as President of the General Conference at its twenty-ninth 
regular session. Mr. Manouan's long and distinguished record in his country's 
diplomatic service, his profound knowledge of international affairs and his 
experience as Governor from Cdte d'Ivoire on the Agency's Board of Governors 
made him eminently suited to the post. 
9. Mr. MORDEN (Canada), speaking on behalf of the North America 
regional group, seconded the nomination of Mr. Manouan. 
10. Mr. ORTIZ NAVARRO (Chile), on behalf of the Latin America regional 
group, Mr. PATRICIO (Portugal), on behalf of the Western Europe regional 
group, Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia), on behalf of the Eastern Europe regional 
group, Mr. HIREMATH (India), on behalf of the Middle East and South Asia 
regional group, Mr. SADLEIR (Australia), on behalf of the South East Asia and 
the Pacific regional group, and Mr. MURATA (Japan), on behalf of the Far East 
regional group, supported the nomination. 
11. Mr. Manouan (Cote d'Ivoire) was elected President of the General 
Conference for its twenty-ninth regular session by acclamation. 
12. The TEMPORARY PRESDIENT congratulated Mr. Manouan on his election. 
Mr. Manouan (Cote d'Ivoire) took the Chair. 


13. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for the honour they had 
accorded his country by electing him as President of the General Conference 
for its twenty-ninth regular session. He particularly wished to thank the 
representatives of the Africa regional group for nominating him. His 
unanimous election could be seen as a tribute to the positive view taken by 
the President of C6te d'Ivoire, who believed that progress, particularly in 
the nuclear field, should contribute to the peace and well-being of all 
peoples, rather than to the creation of instruments of destruction. 

GC(XXIX)/0R.269 
page A 


14. The advance of science and technology since the time of the Renaissance 
had led to tremendous developments in terms of production, but unfortunately 
had not entirely freed humanity from poverty, malnutrition and famine. They 
had, nevertheless, produced great hopes: man was now convinced that through 
them he was more a master of his destiny and in a position to rid humanity of 
the suffering, injustice and inequality with which it was stricken. 
15. Unfortunately, the hopes born of progress had been joined by anxiety 
over its darker aspects. The emergence of atomic weapons had given man the 
power to bring about his own extinction. But life was a supreme value and the 
right to live governed all other human rights; hence It had ever to be at the 
forefront. It was mankind's bounden duty to abolish forever the horrific 
prospect of total annihilation and to respond positively to the hopes 
engendered by scientific and technological achievement. 
16. The Agency, within the scope of its competence, was happily going ahead 
with this task. Its system of safeguards had, over the years, gained in 
effectiveness and credibility. Member States were now confident that nuclear 
activities under safeguards served only peaceful ends. 
17. During the first ten years of the Agency's existence, 34 safeguards 
agreements had been concluded in connection with reactors in 27 States. By 
31 December 1984 there had been 163 agreements with 95 States in force. 
18. The Soviet Union's voluntary acceptance of safeguards was a perfect 
example of how the safeguards system could contribute to world confidence, 
upon which peaceful co-existence and a reduction of international tension were 
founded. It was the most advanced and reliable means of supervision in the 
nuclear field and could serve as a basis for the implementation of a treaty on 
nuclear disarmament. 
19. The Agency had contributed to expanding worldwide electricity 
production by its work in the design, technology and operation of research 
reactors, nuclear power planning, infrastructure evaluation and development, 
geology, exploration and exploitation of resources, ore extraction and 
processing techniques, nuclear engineering and spent fuel management. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 5 


20. Electricity produced by nuclear energy, non-existent at the time of the 
Agency's creation, had represented 13% of world electricity production 
in 1984. Such growth would not have been possible without a concomitant 
extension of the Agency's activities in the fields of nuclear safety and the 
treatment and storage of nuclear wastes. 
21. Of great importance for developing countries were the Agency's 
activities concerning the application of radioisotopes and radiation in the 
areas of food and agriculture and the biological and physical sciences. 
22. In the realm of food and agriculture, those activities had led to the 
creation of some 200 new plant varieties, improved fertilizers, optimization 
of nutrition and subsequent growth in animal productivity, and food 
preservation, together with more effective pesticides for eradicating such 
insect pests as the medfly, the tsetse fly and various lepidoptera which 
destroyed crops. 
23. In the biological sciences there had been, thanks to the Agency, a 
tremendous development in the use of radionuclides and radiation in clinical 
medicine and medical research. The Agency had conducted a programme on 
calibrating thyroid absorption measurements, had initiated and developed a 
programme to support medical radioisotope laboratories, and another on the 
sterilization by irradiation of pharmaceutical products; it had designed and 
carried out programmes which had led to improvements in cancer radiotherapy 
procedures and to the development of powerful vaccines for use in combating 
parasitic diseases which were widespread in developing countries. 
2A. For the laboratories of the radiotherapy centres in those countries the 
Agency had set up a postal intercomparison service in order to improve 
cobalt-60 dosimetric measurements. It had helped to establish 45 secondary 
standard calibration laboratories for dosimetry, 30 of which were in 
developing countries. 


25. In the area of physical sciences the Agency had played a major role in 
the development and introduction of isotopic hydrology techniques in a large 
number of developing countries, under projects for studying groundwater, and 
had assisted in the establishment of more than 20 laboratories for isotopic 
studies of the environment. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 6 


26. Its efforts to promote the industrial use of radioisotopes and 
radiation in Member States had contributed to the adoption of nuclear control 
systems and of large radiation sources within industry, and to the use of 
nuclear analytical techniques in ore prospecting. 
27. He expressed his appreciation to all those within the Agency's 
administration who had participated in its achievements, and expressed his 
hope that the decisions taken at the twenty-ninth regular session of the 
General Conference would open a new page in the Agency's activities and help 
to place the achievements of science and technology more and more at the 
service of mankind. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


28. The PRESIDENT proposed that, in conformity with Rule 34 of the 
Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, the delegates of the following 
Member States be elected as Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: 
Belgium, Cuba, India, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics and the United States of America. 
29. He proposed, pursuant to Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, Mr. Scheel, 
the delegate of the German Democratic Republic, as Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole and, under Rule 40, the delegates of the following Member States 
as additional members of the General Committee: Canada, Denmark, Netherlands, 
Paraguay and the Syrian Arab Republic. 
30. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
31. The General Committee was thus duly appointed. 
PROCEDURAL REMARKS BY THE CHAIRMAN 


32. The PRESIDENT suggested that, as in previous years, pending the 
report of the General Committee on the agenda, the Conference take up 
items92, 3, 5, 6 and 7 of the provisional agenda. Those were formal items, or 
items such as confirmation of the appointment of the Director General and the 
general debate, which were specified in the Statute. 
33. It was so agreed. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 7 


MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


34. Mr. ALLAF (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations) said that only a short time after the signing of the United Nations 
Charter, forty years previously, one objective of which was "to save 
succeeding generations from the scourge of war", the world had first witnessed 
the horror of nuclear devastation. Since that time, it had existed in the 
shadow of a possible nuclear war. The United Nations, almost from the moment 
of its inception, had had to search for ways to make such a war less likely. 
35. For much of that time, the international community had also sought to 
exploit the benefits offered by the atom. Thirty years previously, the 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy had been held 
in Geneva under the auspices of the United Nations. In a real sense, that 
conference, with its thousands of governmental delegates and representatives 
of science, technology, and industry, and the hundreds of scientific papers 
presenting information never before published, had marked the beginning of 
international nuclear co-operation and exchange 
36. That first International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy had represented a high point in the expectations of the benefits 
nuclear energy would bring. After twenty years it had become clear that the 
initial expectations about the use of nuclear energy, especially in power 
production, had been unduly optimistic. Lower energy demands, declining oil 
prices, environmental concerns, and the growing cost, over the previous ten 
years, of nuclear installations as well as the capital needed for investment, 
had led to a drastic reversal of the upward trend of nuclear power production. 
Nevertheless, it was necessary to continue research and development 
on non-fossil sources of energy so that, when demand increased again and 
existing resources became scarcer, alternative sources would be available 
under favourable and safe conditions. 
37. The work done by the International Atomic Energy Agency in helping, 
especially the developing countries, to prepare for that day by elaborating 
means of forecasting electricity demand, by rendering assistance in planning 
and by training personnel, was highly commendable. The Agency's work on 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 8 


spent fuel management, and on waste management in general, was also of direct 
relevance to the application of nuclear energy for power production, in both 
developing and industrialized countries. 


38. Among the many other beneficial uses of nuclear energy actively promoted 
by the Agency were various applications of radioisotopes in agriculture, 
the life sciences and the physical sciences. Particularly promising for the 
future was the work, in insect and pest control, with its relevance to 
agricultural production in developing countries, and the use of isotopes in 
hydrology, which could have an important impact on the development of water 
resources in areas suffering from drought. 
39. The Agency also had a major contribution to make to the preparations 
for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). That 
conference could be expected to give fresh impetus to co-operation in the 
nuclear field. 
40. The International Atomic Energy Agency carried out a unique task as an 
international organization developing and applying a system of verification to 
ensure that nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes served only 
those purposes. The importance of that task had been highlighted recently in 
Geneva at the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. That conference had again stressed the 
great concern felt by the international community at the spread of nuclear 
weapons and at the failure of the nuclear Powers to restrict and reduce their 
nuclear arsenals. 
41. Although of great significance as a deterrent to the spread of nuclear 
weapons, the Non-Proliferation Treaty was only one of a variety of measures, 
including bilateral and multilateral arrangements, which together made up a 
world-wide non-proliferation regime that relied largely on the Agency's 
safeguards for its effective functioning. The experience gained in the 
application of the Agency's safeguards was also very important as a possible 
precedent for verifying compliance with the future disarmament measures that 
were so urgently needed. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 9 

42. The International Atonic Energy Agency had been created for functional 
and technical purposes. However, It could not be expected that the Agency, as 
a body with a world-wide membership in which the viewpoints of States of all 
political and geographic backgrounds were heard, would be entirely isolated 
from controversies that were of great concern within the international 
community. Nevertheless, such political controversies should not be allowed 
to hamper the execution of the organisation's mandatory activities. It was 
very important that all concerned should collaborate to that end. 
Praiseworthy efforts had in fact been made to settle the issues that had' been 
the subject of so much discussion in the Agency's governing bodies. 
43. The Agency's functions were of direct importance both to the safer 
world that could be ensured by limiting the military applications of nuclear 
energy and to the more prosperous and healthy world that the peaceful 
utilization of the power of the atom could produce. 
44. The Agency's responsibilities were certain to increase in range and 
gravity as the nuclear age developed still further. The International Atomic 
Energy Agency was able to contribute a great deal to ensuring that the nuclear 
age would be known as the time when humanity met successfully its greatest 
challenge by removing the terrible threat inherent in the existence of nuclear 
weapons. 
45. He wished the General Conference every success and personally 
congratulated Mr. Manouan on his election to the post of President of the 
General Conference. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


46. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that an important function of the 
General Conference was to serve as a meeting place where the governmental part 
of the world's nuclear community could discuss the status of peaceful nuclear 
technology and its international implications, and he hoped that the four 
booklets which had been issued in time for the Conference - on nuclear power, 
radioactive waste management, nuclear safety and secondary standard dosimetry 
laboratories - would constitute useful material for that discussion. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 10 


47. Constitutional tasks of the General Conference were to consider the 
annual report, which gave a systematic and comprehensive account of Agency 
activities, and to approve the Agency's budget. Although the budget was the 
result of a long process of contacts with Member Governments, its discussion 
and approval by the policy-making organ in which all Members could take part 
was important to ensure that the Agency's activities remained responsive to 
both continuing and new needs of the membership. 
48. There was no doubt that the Agency's principal activities continued to 
relate to matters of special interest to Member Governments. The safeguards 
system helped to give assurance that nuclear programmes remained peaceful, and 
it provided valuable experience in the field of on-site inspection. Nuclear 
power, which the Agency sought to promote, remained one of the few realistic 
power options for the foreseeable future and one indeed which met some of the 
pressing environmental concerns of the day. Nuclear techniques were being 
used alongside conventional techniques to tackle urgent problems of crop 
production, soil, water and fertilizer use, and food preservation. 
Governments' consistent support for those broad fields of work did not, 
however, obviate the need for comments on the various activities within them, 
or the need to ask whether there were new activities which ought to be 
undertaken or old ones that could be phased out. For instance, should the 
Agency assume a role in the broader field of energy, as some national atomic 
energy commissions had done, and should the Agency be more active in the field 
of public information for promoting nuclear energy? However such questions 
were answered, the overriding criterion for the selection of tasks should be: 
was the activity a service which Members needed? As the many facets of the 
Agency's programme were examined, it was necessary to ask in all cases: were 
meetings on particular subjects needed; were publications of use; were 
missions of real benefit; and was assistance responding to the most urgent 
needs? 
49. Turning first to the role of nuclear power and the Agency's activities 
for promoting it, he noted that a part of those activities consisted in the 
compilation and dissemination of data. The booklet "Nuclear Power, Status and 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 11 


Trends" before the Conference was a product of that activity. Although the 
Agency Mas by no means alone in compiling and analysing nuclear power data, he 
considered it a natural and useful function for an institution in constant 
touch with Governments throughout the world. The data compiled also provided 
Governments and the Agency with a factual basis for discussing the role of 
nuclear power. 


50. For various well-known reasons, energy production in general - and 
nuclear power in particular - had expanded less rapidly in the last decade 
than had earlier been foreseen. During 1984, however, despite the 
unfavourable situation prevailing, the total installed nuclear capacity in the 
world had increased by 17%, with 34 new nuclear power units being connected to 
the grids in thirteen countries. In both absolute and relative terms that was 
the largest annual increase since the beginning of the large-scale 
introduction of nuclear power in the early 1970s. 
51. There was no reason to gloat over the fact that most of the so-called 
alternative sources of energy had not turned out to be the panaceas 
anticipated by the opponents of nuclear power. A wide variety of sources of 
energy was indeed desirable, and research and experimentation were important. 
The fact was, however, that while some of that work had yielded and continued 
to yield valuable results, it was still likely that, for the foreseeable 
future, only conservation, coal and nuclear power could have a substantial 
impact on the world's energy situation. 
52. He pointed out, first, that although conservation was producing 
magnificent results and could continue to do so, the trend in electricity 
consumption was one of marked increase. Given the large differences between 
the levels of electricity use in different countries, that trend could be 
expected to continue. Secondly, the economic viability of nuclear power 
remained excellent and compared favourably with fossil-fuel plants in terms of 
reliability and generation costs. A study published by the Commission of the 
European Communities in November 1984 gave the additional cost of electricity 
produced from coal by comparison with the cost of electricity of nuclear 
origin as 51% for Belgium, 74% for the Federal Republic of Germany and 88% for 
France, to take only a few examples. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 1? 


53. Secondly, some recent developments relating, for example, to new types 
of nuclear fuel and longer cycles of operation, had contributed to malting the 
economic picture even more positive than it had been a few years earlier. 
Plant availability had improved remark-ably, attaining the 70-801 range in 
several countries, and the world-wide average load factor, which for many 
years had stayed at around 64%, had increased to 69% in the last year. If the 
life expectancy of nuclear plants was pushed up to some 40 years - as was 
currently thought by many to be reasonable as a result of better "health care" 
for facilities - economic viability would also further improve. 
54. Thirdly, the environmental advantages of nuclear power were 
significant, and were bound to become recognised more and more. When a new 
source of electricity had to be chosen to meet increasing needs - and that was 
a choice that in many countries tended to be delayed for financial or 
political reasons - the excellent environmental record of nuclear power could 
not be ignored. 
55. Although, fortunately, modern technology made it possible to reduce the 
pollution from coal plants, even those reduced levels gave rise to concern, 
and the production of carbon dioxide, with its ominous greenhouse effect, 
could never be prevented when fossil fuels were used. Recent commitments to 
reduce levels of sulphur dioxide, made under the Convention on the Prevention 
of Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution, highlighted the environmental 
problems of the fossil fuels, not least in the power generating industry. 
While nuclear power had long had to bear substantial costs to ensure that no 
environmentally dangerous radiation was released, fossil fuels were now facing 
that necessity, which would undoubtedly have an impact on their costs. 
56. While increased attention to operation, maintenance and the training of 
personnel was currently yielding valuable dividends in terms of availability 
and economy, it would be wrong to ignore the longer-term question of what 
could be gained by the use of more advanced nuclear technologies than those 
represented in the common types of power reactor at present. It was evident 
that the glut in the market for uranium and enriched uranium had caused the 
interest in breeder technology to become less urgent. It should not, however, 
be forgotten that uranium resources, like oil, were finite, and be noted that 

GC(XXIX)/0R.269 
page 13 


the world's experience of breeder technology - which could make uranium 
resources go a very long way - had been further expanding during the current 
year: Superphenix had gone critical and India was inaugurating a new test 
breeder reactor near Madras. 


57. The past year had also seen some further developments in the discussion 
on small and medium power reactors (SMPRs) which would be suitable for 
developing countries with small electric power grids, and he pointed out that 
the Scientific Afternoon during the Conference would be devoted to that type 
of reactor. The first phase of the SMPR Project Initiation Study had been 
completed. Sixteen suppliers had provided information on some 23 plant 
designs in the SMPR range - plants with an electrical output below 600 MW(e) several 
of which were technically mature enough to be offered for export 
within two to three years. The situation of ten years earlier, when interest 
from the supply side had been meagre, had thus changed dramatically. 
58. Some seventeen responses had been received from potential buyers in the 
developing world. They had shown some hesitancy about introducing SMPRs 
without assurances about their economics. Such assurances, however, could be 
obtained only through further site-specific studies and, ultimately, through a 
comprehensive feasibility study which would require the active involvement of 
both potential buyers and suppliers. The Secretariat would be willing to 
co-ordinate such studies in the second phase of the SMPR project. A special 
meeting was being held in connection with the Scientific Afternoon to discuss 
specific plans and to identify the countries to which those studies were to 
relate. 
59. It was clear that the whole question of financing nuclear power plants 
had become a major constraint, not only for developing countries but for some 
industrialized countries as well. The total capital cost, including interest 
incurred during construction, for a nuclear plant in the 600-900 MW(e) range 
would be of the order of $1.5 to $2 billion. 
60. While the Agency was well equipped to calculate the relative economic 
and other advantages of different sources of energy, it had no influence except 
for unbiased economic calculations of the type he had mentioned - over 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 14 


financing institutions. Its relations with the World Bank, for instance, 
although excellent, were confined to co-operation on energy planning schemes 
in various countries. That did not mean, however, that the Agency was 
uninterested in the question of financing or could not devote more attention 
to it. He noted that a seminar on "Cost and Financing of Nuclear Power 
Programmes in Developing Countries" had very recently been arranged in 
Vienna. The Seminar had featured a report on a financing approach currently 
contemplated that consisted in the establishment of a joint enterprise between 
the exporting plant supplier and the local utility. In that way the plant 
would be paid for with income from electricity sales during the first fifteen 
years; at the same time, the supplier would remain involved in the management 
of the plant and would have a strong interest in its reliability and 
availability remaining high. The nuclear community would doubtless be 
intrigued to see whether the scheme became reality and, if so, how it worked 
out. 


61. The Nuclear Safety Review for 1984 - the printed edition of which had 
been timed to come out for the Conference - gave a broad account of safety 
activities, including the Agency's. He wished, however, first to offer a few 
reflections on the subject and to highlight some services which had been 
introduced by the Agency in the past few years. 
62. Not infrequently conversations with people from the nuclear community 
revealed both puzzlement and some bitterness that even small abnormal events 
relating to nuclear power evoked public concern and attracted the attention of 
the media, while large accidents in other industries might pass relatively 
unnoticed. Sometimes that was ascribed to a bias in the media. In any case, 
it was felt to be unfair that different standards were applied. Despite the 
very large numbers of casualties which had resulted from catastrophic 
accidents in aviation and in the chemical industry in recent times, no one had 
called for a halt in those industries, and a dam catastrophe in the previous 
summer had not caused any general questioning of whether dams for hydropower 
were sufficiently safe. A nuclear accident involving even a few casualties 
would certainly have led to world-wide questioning of the safety of nuclear 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 15 


power. One might well ask. why that was so, what could be done about it and 
how long the civilian nuclear industry, which had a better safety record than 
any other energy industry, would have to put up with such an attitude. 


63. It seemed that, paradoxically, the very rareness of accidents in 
civilian nuclear plants was a reason for sensitivity about the industry. Fear 
was bred by the unknown, and people's imaginations were allowed full play. 
The film "The China Syndrome" was an example. Also, associations with nuclear 
bombs spilt over into some people's thoughts on civilian nuclear matters. 
What, then, was the solution? 
64. Despite the fact that the Three Mile Island (TOT) accident had been 
providing the world with very important information, including a more 
realistic view of the possible course and consequences of a core melt, no more 
accidents like TOT were wanted, since that accident had been enormously costly 
both to the plant's owners and in the sense that it had decreased confidence 
in nuclear power. Instead, unknown factors must gradually be clarified 
through research, such as the international severe fuel damage research 
programme, and confidence in the reliability of nuclear power must be created 
through cautious and careful operation of nuclear plants around the world. 
65. The years of successful operation that had now passed without any 
serious accident were without doubt gradually having a positive impact on the 
image of nuclear power. Increased attention to management, training and 
operation was paying off not only with better reliability and economy, but 
also with greater public confidence. Apart from the dissemination of 
objective information, no recipe could be offered other than continuously 
paying meticulous attention to the safe operation of nuclear plants. There 
were many ways in which that could be done, and the Agency continued to be 
engaged in several of them. Although they had not shown an interest in 
drawing up binding international rules on safety. Member States, building on 
their collective knowledge and experience, had worked out recommendations and 
guidelines under the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 16 


66. The Incident Reporting System (IRS) had now expanded to cover Most 
Member States with nuclear power plants in operation, and he welcomed the fact 
that it had recently been joined by the United States. The system not only 
served Members by compiling and disseminating facts about incidents, but had 
also begun to share recommendations and lessons learnt from the incidents. 
67. In order to advise operating organizations and regulatory authorities 
at their request on the safe operation of their nuclear facilities, the IAEA 
Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) service had been Initiated in 1982. 
Its present objective was to facilitate the exchange of know-how among 
international experts and personnel at the site. So far five such missions 
had been undertaken. Moreover, guidelines were under development and should 
be ready during 198S; their aim was to provide uniform objectives and criteria 
for the reviews and to ensure comparable coverage of all major Items relevant 
to operational safety. 
68. Another activity that seemed to meet very clear needs in Member States 
was that of the Radiation Protection Advisory Teams (RAPATs), which the IAEA 
had launched in the previous year. The service had been set up In the 
knowledge that significant radiation incidents had occurred in non-power 
applications of nuclear energy. On request, the teams would review national 
radiation protection programmes covering all nuclear applications and would 
advise on the preparation of legislation on radiation protection, on measures 
needed, for example, for the safe transport of radioactive material or oa the 
establishment and proper functioning of monitoring programmes. Pour RAPAT 
missions had already taken place and another three were scheduled to take 
place before the end of the year. 
69. The importance of the accurate measurement of ionizing radiation in all 
applications of radiation and for radiation protection purposes was growing as 
the number of sources increased. Through its network of secondary standard 
dosimetry laboratories (SSDLs), the Agency helped to ensure the quality of 
measurements in developing countries. The SSDL network was described in 
detail in a special booklet before delegations. However, neither OSARTs nor 
RAPATs could relieve a state of its full responsibility for nuclear safety in 
power plants or elswhere, and they remained advisory services. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 17 


70. A new development in the current year had been the establishment of the 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG). Thirteen experts from 
nuclear safety licensing authorities, the nuclear industry and safety research 
and development bodies had convened; they had already selected three main 
issues for the exchange of views and recommendations: Incident feedback., the 
human element and source terms. They had thus pieced the emphasis on 
practical, operational problems. Given the calibre of that group and its 
approach, he Mas confident that It Mould be. of great use. It Mas to hold its 
second meeting during the next month. 
71. Before leaving the subject of nuclear safety, he wished to report that 
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material had been 
ratified by fourteen States, four more since he had reported in the previous 
year. Although he Mas aware that parliamentary procedures often took time, 
he appealed to Member States to speed up their adherence procedures so that 
the Convention could come Into force; for that, 21 ratifications Mere needed. 
72. With regard to the management of spent fuel and the ultimate disposal 
of radioactive waste, he said that responsibility for those activites, like 
responsibility for operational nuclear safety, naturally rested with the 
Governments permitting the activity which produced the waste. A valuable 
exchange of experience had, however, taken place through the IAEA, and 
guidelines and codes of practice building on the collective experience of the 
nuclear community had been elaborated. A status report on the management of 
radioactive waste, summarizing both the activities of the IAEA and those of 
Its Member States in that area, had been issued by the IAEA before the 
Conference. The question which had so far remained largely unanswered, 
however, was whether it was feasible to extend international collaboration to 
the physical storage of spent fuel and waste disposal. The strong interest 
that had been demonstrated by supplier nations - for both commercial and 
non-proliferation reasons - in providing enrichment and reprocessing services 
was in stark contrast to the absence of almost any interest in the provision 
of long-term spent fuel storage and waste disposal services. The unease with 
which public opinion in many countries had considered the question of waste 
disposal was of course the reason why so many Governments had not been willing 
to contemplate the disposal of waste other than that generated by their own 
industry. 

GC(XXIX)/0R.269 
page 18 


73. Although the IAEA study of a few years earlier on regional fuel cycle 
centres had not evoked any positive response, it might well be that practical 
co-operation of one sort or another would commend itself when conditions were 
favourable. A modest beginning might take the form of international 
co-operation in the management of spent fuel, as bad been suggested by an IAEA 
expert working group in 1982. Although even that had not yet materialized, he 
submitted that certain factors were making co-operation on both spent fuel 
management and waste disposal more attractive. 
74. There were - and it was clear that there would continue to be countries 
with very small nuclear porgrammes and countries without 
geologically ideal disposal sites. Should such countries be deprived of 
nuclear power or be obliged to spend disproportionate sums on disposal sites 
which did not offer the advantages of large-scale operations? The host 
country of the IAEA, owning at present only one mothballed power reactor would 
need assistance from another country with waste disposal. It seemed that at 
least two countries would be prepared to offer such assistance. Obliging as 
such offers might seem, it would presumably present only limited practical 
problems to any country with extensive nuclear activities to accept the waste 
from a small number of foreign power plants. 
75. The Agency's host country was not the only country which bad expressed 
interest in an international waste repository. The report of the Commission 
of the European Communities to which he had referred earlier argued that a 
regional approach to the problem of waste disposal would prevent costly 
storage projects from being undertaken prematurely and on an individual basis 
and that such a solution would seem to be indispensable in the case of 
countries that had limited nuclear programmes. 
76. Whereas only a few years earlier national planning of off-site spent 
fuel installations and waste disposal plants had not generally advanced very 
far, both concepts and techniques could now be much more clearly visualized. 
Indeed, in some cases off-site installations for the storage of spent fuel had 
already been set up. Earlier, an international dimension to such facilities 
was probably more than could be contemplated. It did not now seem 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 19 


unreasonable to urge planners to consider what economic and other advantages 
might be derived from designing capacities which would allow for the storage 
of some foreign spent fuel or for the disposal of some foreign waste. 


77. Another important factor might be the buyers* market that existed for 
nuclear power stations. The supplier who could make an offer for ultimate 
waste disposal to a country with a small number of reactors might well find 
that he had a selling point. The more confident he felt about waste disposal, 
and the more advanced the plans for his own system were, the less difficult it 
should be to make such an offer. 
78. A further consideration of international relevance was that, the more 
the great environmental questions of the day were examined, the more it had to 
be admitted that international concern about them was justified. That was 
obviously true of releases by individual countries into the common atmosphere 
and Into territorial waters which formed part of the hydrological cycle of the 
earth. Some international interest was also justified in the disposal by 
individual countries of highly radioactive waste. It was not a matter of 
indifference how individual countries approached the question, and large, 
well-organised, well-located and well-equipped sites would seem preferable to 
a host of smaller sites. 
79. Pursuant to its responsibilities under the London Dumping Convention, 
the Secretariat had prepared a revision of the Agency's "definition" of 
high-level wastes unsuitable for sea disposal and "recommendations" for other 
radioactive wastes. Considerable effort had been devoted to that task, in 
which the Agency had worked in close co-operation with other United Nations 
agencies and intergovernmental organizations. 
80. In response to proposals by some States Party to the London Dumping 
Convention, a group of experts nominated by the Agency and the International 
Council of Scientific Unions had reviewed the question of whether there was a 
scientific basis for amending the annexes to the London Convention relating to 
radioactive wastes. During the present week the Contracting Parties to the 
Convention would consider the report of that group which, while not 
conclusive, did not indicate a strong need to amend the annexes at present. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 20 


81. Technical co-operation and assistance might, of course, be seen as a 
service to Member countries with a view to facilitating the transfer of 
nuclear technology. But it did not take place exclusively in one direction: 
increasingly, experts and resources were also being provided by the developing 
countries. Total available resources for the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme had almost doubled between 1980 and 1984, to the amount 
of $36 million in 1984. Extrabudgetary sources had continued to provide some 
25% of the total funds received. It was most encouraging that a consensus on 
a 12 per cent annual increase in the target for the contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for the three-year period 1987-1989 
had been reached during the previous week, in the Board of Governors. 
82. Following a Board review of technical co-operation policies, since 1983 
the number of regional projects had doubled and the number of interregional 
projects had tripled. In addition, "pre-project assistance" had been 
introduced in order to publicise better the services and assistance of the 
Agency available for developing countries. That was particularly important 
for the least-developed countries. Another novelty was "dynamic 
programming**, which had made it possible to release funds to carry out 
footnote a/ projects which would otherwise not be funded and to increase the 
funds available for general fellowships. More emphasis was being placed on 
technical co-operation among developing countries, for example, through 
regional co-operation agreements, such as the RCA and ARCAL programmes; the 
former had provided more than a dozen years of useful experience in Asia and 
the latter was being set up in Latin America. 
83. So far, the Secretariat had been able to cope with the growth in the 
programme by means of reorganization, computerization and dedication on the 
part of staff. However, a point of diminishing returns was being reached, 
where present staff resources were becoming overburdened. 
84. The Agency's technical co-operation activities in food and agriculture 
were placing emphasis on Africa, thereby contributing to the United Nations 
system's efforts to face the emergency in Africa and to link relief assistance 
to a process of sustainable development; in fact, more than 40X of the 
Agency's technical co-operation projects in food and agriculture were in 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 21 


Africa. At the request of a number of States, a mission had recently visited 
Africa and had recommended regional assistance in the area of animal 
production and health, and a second mission was to study the potential for 
food irradiation there. A planned co-ordinated research programme would aim 
at improving basic African food crops such as yams and cassava. A 
large-scale demonstration project in Nigeria had successfully shown the 
feasibility of using the sterile-insect technique to control a species of 


tsetse and could serve as a model for other African countries. 


85. Isotope techniques were being promoted in seven African countries as a 
tool in the assessment and development of water resources. Based mainly on 
groundwater, which was essentially the only source of water in arid regions, 
the data collected could be used to identify areas where replenishment was 
occurring. All of those efforts required closer co-operation with other 
agencies in the United Nations system to ensure that radioisotope and 
radiation techniques were being applied in projects that would have a real 
impact in the process of rehabilitation or development. 
86. He was pleased to report that the new laboratory wing at Seibersdorf, 
which was being funded jointly by the Agency and FAO and which was to house 
the plant breeding and plant nutrition units, would be completed in the next 
year. Unfortunately, plans for a new building to allow an expansion in 
training at Seibersdorf had had to be put off for lack of funds. 
87. In connection with the work, of the Committee on the Assurances of 
Supply (CAS), he said that it was natural that countries deciding to rely upon 
nuclear power for part of their electricity supply would feel an urgent need 
for assurance that the import of fuel, spare parts and relevant technologies 
would continue undisturbed. It was equally understandable that suppliers who 
had been given non-proliferation undertakings would wish to remain convinced 
of the determination of importers not to make any military use of their 
programmes or of imported equipment or material. CAS had been the forum for 
discussions on those two sides of the nuclear trade issue since 1980. 
88. Since CAS had begun its work, more suppliers had entered the nuclear 
market, giving a wider choice to importers. The buyers' market that had 

GC<XXIX)/OR.269 
page 22 


evolved in the field of enrichment, the somewhat smaller interest in 
reprocessing and the growing awareness among suppliers of the need to maintain 
or restore a record of reliability had all tended to lessen the incentives for 
importing countries to seek, expensive independence for their fuel cycle. 


89. It was possible that that slight improvement in the atmosphere had 
brought some benefit. In any case, CAS had reached positive conclusions in 
its consideration of several practical measures to facilitate international 
co-operation. Among those he would Include measures for alleviating technical 
and administrative problems in international shipments, emergency and back-up 
mechanisms, and mechanisms for the revision of intergovernmental co-operation 
agreements in the nuclear field. By means of intensive consultations 
conducted by the CAS Bureau, the differences in views on the general 
principles of international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy had 
been narrowed down, and a consolidated and simplified paper would be taken up 
by CAS during the next month. 
90. The safeguards system operated by the Agency had been the subject of an 
unusual amount of comment during the present year, which had no doubt been 
stimulated by the Third NPT Review Conference. By the publication of several 
booklets and the production of a short film, the Agency itself was trying to 
promote a correct understanding of the system. Such an understanding must 
have regard to both the possibilities and the limitations of safeguards. 
91. It needed to be understood, for instance, that although safeguards were 
of crucial significance, the most important barrier to the acquisition of 
nuclear weapons by further States was the conviction of those States that they 
did not need such weapons or that such weapons would detract from rather than 
contribute to their security. Since total confidence on the part of the rest 
of the world in the non-nuclear-weapon status of a country was of fundamental 
importance, however, the commitment to such a status through binding treaty 
obligations and also on-site verification by an impartial organisation became 
important. 
92. Essentially, safeguards were a service to States which sought to create 
the maximum confidence in the peaceful operation of their nuclear 
activities. Only an impartial international organization could offer such a 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 23 


service. It was up to Member States to decide whether they wanted to avail 
themselves of the service and the advantages it might bring in the State's 
relations with the outside world. The service was not imposed on anybody. 
But, when it was rendered, it must be so thorough and so reliable that it 
created the confidence desired. It could not be a paper tiger, since it would 
then be worse than useless and might for a time give rise to false confidence. 


93. The Agency therefore had the responsibility for operating the system in 
such a manner that it continued to deserve the confidence of the world. 
While the Secretariat would certainly avoid making excessive requests for the 
funding of safeguards, and would seek, to improve efficiency to the utmost, it 
would be failing in its responsibility if it did not maintain and even seek to 
consolidate and improve the credibility of the system yet further. Zero 
growth could not be enforced like a strait-jacket in an area in which the 
Agency was bound by its Statute and by international agreements to carry out 
certain activities and in which the extent and scope of the activities must 
necessarily depend primarily on the growth of nuclear programmes around the 
world. Measured against what was at stake in safeguards operations, the sums 
involved by way of contributions from Member Governments were relatively small 
and should be shared in a generous spirit. Those operations were of value to 
all States in the world, including those which for various reasons did not 
accept safeguards on all their nuclear activities. The nuclear industry 
itself had also generally come to support safeguards fully. It recognized 
that the system provided useful checks on national accounting systems and that 
it gave the public of each country an assurance with international status that 
nuclear plants were of an exclusively peaceful nature. 
94. Commenting upon some specific events relating to safeguards in the past 
year, he said that the agreement between the Soviet Union and the Agency for 
the application of safeguards in the Soviet Union had been approved by the 
Board of Governors in February and had entered into force on 10 June. Two 
facilities had subsequently been selected for safeguards implementation: one 
nuclear power station and one research reactor. The first inspections had 
been carried out in August. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 24 


95. The hexapartite agreement on the safeguarding of centrifuge enrichment 
plants had been concluded in February 1984, and several Facility Attachments 
had been agreed upon. Two of them, that for the Almelo plant in the 
Netherlands and that for the Ningyo enrichment plant in Japan, had entered 
into force. 
96. The situation concerning safeguards in South Africa had been set out in 
detail in a separate report which was before the Conference. However, he 
wished to bring the Conference up to date in respect of safeguards for the 
semi-commercial enrichment plant in that country. The Agency and South 
Africa had held further discussions on the topic in 1985. A major part of 
the design information had been received in Vienna, and technical discussions 
had been held since then both in Vienna and in South Africa, when Agency 
representatives had visited the plant. The visit had taken place in August, 
and the Agency was preparing a safeguards approach for the plant. On the 
broader question of full-scope safeguards there was no progress to report. 
97. The Third NPT Review Conference had just ended. While it was for 
individual Parties to the Treaty to assess the Review Conference as they 
thought fit, he believed the Conference would wish him to report on the 
salient features of the conclusions of the Review Conference specifically 
concerning the Agency, even though the time available for analysis since 
adoption of the Declaration of the Conference had been very short. 
98. The main issue before the Conference had, understandably and properly, 
been nuclear disarmament and the achievement of measures leading towards it. 
That was not an area where the Agency had direct responsibilities, and he 
wished merely to state his own conviction of its crucial importance. In 
addition, however, the Review Conference, as reflected in its Final 
Declaration, had also laid emphasis on Article III of NPT, which dealt with 
safeguards, and Article IV, which dealt with the rights of all parties to the 
fullest exchange of material, equipment and technology. The Review Conference 
had made a number of specific comments about the Agency's responsibilities and 
achievements in relation to those two Articles, including recommendations for 
action. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 25 


99. As to Agency safeguards, the Review Conference had stated its view 
that, together with the non-proliferation commitments laid down in MPT, 
safeguards not only were central to International peace and security but were 
also essential for peaceful nuclear commerce and co-operation. The Review 
Conference had welcomed the voluntary safeguards agreements negotiated so far 
with four nuclear-weapon States. It had also recommended that further 
consideration should be given to the extension of safeguards to additional, 
and eventually all, peaceful nuclear facilities in the nuclear-weapon States 
as and when the Agency's resources permitted it. The fact that the Agency, in 
its safeguards activities, had not detected any diversion of safeguarded 
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive purposes had been 
noted with satisfaction, as had the fact that safeguards had not hampered the 
economic, scientific or technological development of Parties to the Treaty, or 
international peaceful nuclear co-operation. The Review Conference had urged 
that that situation be maintained. 
100. The Review Conference had emphasized the importance of improving the 
efficiency and effectiveness of safeguards and had made certain specific 
recommendations In that regard. It had called upon Parties to the Treaty to 
continue their political, technical and financial support for safeguards, and 
had underlined the need for the Agency to be provided with the necessary 
resources to ensure the continued effective discharge of its safeguards 
responsibilities. 
101. With regard to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Review 
Conference had reaffirmed the inalienable right of all Parties to the Treaty 
to develop research Into nuclear energy, and the production and use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, without discrimination. It had also reaffirmed 
the undertaking of all Parties to facilitate the fullest possible exchange of 
equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It had encouraged co-operation, bilateral 
and multilateral, to assist the further development of the application of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, with due consideration for the 
developing areas of the world, and bearing in mind the needs of the least 
developed countries. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 26 


102. The recent progress in the Agency's Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS) had been commended, and the Review Conference had called for the 
early completion of the work of CAS and implementation of its recommendations. 
103. The importance of the Agency as the principal agent for technology 
transfer among the international organisations had been noted, and the Review 
Conference had recorded its appreciation of the wide range of the Agency's 
technical assistance and co-operation both in the power and non-power sectors, 
whereby considerable emphasis had been placed by some parties on power 
applications. Specific recommendations had been made for strengthening the 
Agency's activities aimed at assisting developing countries in such areas as 
nuclear development strategies, nuclear planning systems and siting and 
construction and operation of nuclear power projects, with the necessary 
resources being made available to the Agency for such activities. 
104. The availability of finance for nuclear power projects had been 
identified as a major difficulty, and the Review Conference had requested the 
Agency to initiate an expert group study on mechanisms to assist developing 
countries in the promotion of their nuclear power programmes, including the 
establishment of a financial assistance fund. In that context, he mentioned 
that the Agency's recent seminar on the financing of nuclear power programmes 
in developing countries, to which he had referred earlier, had been attended 
by many Member States, both developing and industrialized, and by several 
financial institutions, including the World Bank.. 
105. The Review Conference had also expressed its satisfaction at the 
progress made in the preparations for the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNB) and its conviction that the Conference would fully realize its 
goals. 
106. He was confident that the Conference would agree that the Secretariat 
should study the various specific recommendations of the Review Conference 
relating to the Agency's activities and to the improvement and strengthening 
of its capabilities and effectiveness in both safeguards and technical 
co-operation, and should in due course bring forward such proposals as might 
be appropriate to the Agency's policy-making organs. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 27 


107. The MPT Review Conference had also concerned itself with the guestion 
of how to protect nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes from 
armed attack, and the threat of such attack.. Regrettably, that was no academic 
subject, but one with which the IAEA had been concerned on several occasions, 
both as a general question and as a specific one. 
108. In discussing the general question, the Review Conference had 
recognized that an armed attack on a safeguarded nuclear facility or the 
threat of an attack, would create a situation in which the Security Council 
would have to act immediately. It had also considered that such attacks could 
involve grave dangers arising from the release of radioactivity and could 
jeopardise the development of peaceful nuclear energy. It had acknowledged 
that the matter had been under consideration by the Conference on Disarmament 
and had urged all States to co-operate with a view to its speedy resolution. 
109. Furthermore, the Review Conference had encouraged Parties to the Treaty 
to be ready to provide immediate peaceful assistance to any Party to the 
Treaty, if it so requested, whose safeguarded nuclear facilities had been 
subject to armed attack. 
110. The general question had been discussed by the General Conference both 
in 1983 and 1984, and resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407, adopted in 1983, had 
declared that all armed attacks against nuclear installations devoted to 
peaceful purposes should be explicitly prohibited and had requested the 
Director General to keep the General Conference informed of developments in 
that area. He was able to report in that regard merely that the question 
continued to be discussed at the Disarmament Conference in Geneva and that the 
NPT Review Conference had considered it, with the conclusions that he had 
mentioned. 
111. Some of those conclusions were similar to those advanced in his report 
to the General Conference of 30 August 1984 (document GC(XXVIII)/719), namely 
that "it is evident that an armed attack or the threat thereof on a peaceful 
nuclear installation could have serious consequences for the peaceful 
applications of atomic energy, for international nuclear collaboration and for 
Agency safeguards", and that "international action to ensure the security of 
peaceful nuclear installations would be of great value". 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 28 


112. He hoped that there would be a growing commitment to the principle that 
nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes, wherever located, must not be 
the subject of attack, or the threat of attack, and that it would be accepted 
that the safeguards regime of the Agency constituted evidence of the peaceful 
operation of a facility. 
113. In 1984 the General Conference had adopted resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 concerning the consequences of the Israeli Military attack 
on the Iraqi nuclear research reactor. It had requested the Director General, 
inter alia, "to seek personally from the Government of Israel a commitment not 
to carry out any further attacks on nuclear facilities in Iraq or on similar 
facilities in other countries, devoted to peaceful purposes, in disregard of 
the Agency*8 safeguards system", and to report to the General Conference. The 
Conference had also called on all Member States to assist and support the 
Director General's efforts in that regard. 
114. He wished to report to the Conference only that he had had numerous 
contacts with the Government of Israel in pursuance of the mandate given to 
him and that he had called on a number of Member States to assist and support 
him in his efforts in that regard. While those efforts had been inconclusive, 
he knew from the many discussions he bad had that there was a widespread wish 
for the IAEA to put the matter behind it and to renew confidence in the fact 
that peaceful nuclear installations could be constructed and operated without 
fear of an armed attack - in Iraq and other countries in the Middle East or, 
indeed, anywhere else. He hoped that the efforts made in the past year would 
at least contribute to that, and he expressed his appreciation to all the 
Governments, Governors and Resident Representatives who had been so helpful 
with that difficult matter. 
115. Turning to the programme budget and staffing, he said that, in applying 
safeguards, in promoting nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, in issuing 
international safety standards and sending advisory missions, the Agency 
essentially provided services to the Member States. To be of maximum use, 
areas of work should be selected for the Agency such that its Members stood to 
gain most by international co-operation. In preparing the programme and 
budget in the future, it would be necessary to have the advice and comments of 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 29 


Member States attending the General Conference and the views of the many 
representatives and experts with whom the Secretariat was in touch in its 
daily work.. 


116. In order to make increases in the programme while maintaining zero real 
growth in the Regular Budget for 1986, which amounted to US $98.7 million, 
savings had had to be made. In particular, administrative costs had been 
reduced and the cost of the adoption of a new working language had been 
absorbed through economies realised elsewhere. At the same time, efforts had 
been made to improve internal management through closer monitoring of 
programme and budgetary performance. 
117. In the new format of the programme budget, the accent was being placed 
on what was to be delivered and done rather than on the allocation of money to 
specific Secretariat units. The intention was to pursue and strengthen that 
delivery-oriented approach in the programme for 1987-88. A longer-term 
framework, was also to be established for the actions planned for that period 
by the identification of longer-term objectives at the project level. A great 
effort would be made to identify carefully the problems which should be given 
high priority during the next few years in Member States. He expected that 
the Agency's Scientific Advisory Committee would play an important role in 
that connection. Lastly, a closer link should be established between the 
techical co-operation programmes and the other Agency programme activities. 
That should help technical divisions to give greater attention to all aspects 
of the planning and implementation of technical co-operation projects. It 
might also help to orient some of the content of the other technical 
programmes towards those subjects in which the needs of developing countries 
were greatest. 
118. The Secretariat also intended to prepare budget estimates for both 
years of the 1987-88 biennium. It had had many years of experience in 
formulating the programme content in detail for a two-year period. That 
should enable it to prepare estimates of the budgetary resources required for 
both years with the same degree of detail and realism. The process of 
informal consultation could then cover both the two-year programme and the 
budgets for those two years. However, formal approval by the Board of 

GC(XXIJO/OR.269 
page 30 


Governors and by the General Conference would, as at present, be limited to 
the annual budget and manning table for the one year ahead. 


119. To take on a larger programme without corresponding staff increases was 
only possible with a dedicated, industrious and loyal staff. The IAEA was 
fortunate in having such a staff. In the recruitment of new staff, particular 
attention had been paid to General Conference resolutions which urged him to 
take steps to increase substantially the number of staff members drawn from 
developing areas, particularly at the senior and policy-making levels. 
120. At the same time, in respect of each individual case of recruitment, he 
was aware that the interests of the membership were best served not by 
selection according to geography, but by selection of the most competent of 
the candidates who had presented themselves. At the levels singled out in the 
General Conference resolutions, i.e. the upper ones, a great deal had been 
done to implement the resolutions. Overall, progress had been modest, and an 
active recruitment policy, the continuation of the training course and the 
assistance and understanding of Member States would be needed. 
121. In conclusion, he wished to revert to the main theme of his statement, 
that of the service that the organization was to render. International 
organisations had generally been the subject of a good deal of criticism from 
both Governments and the public in the past few years. Some of that was 
directed at debates that seemed never to lead to accommodation or a solution. 
Some of it was aimed at secretariats perceived to be large, well-remunerated 
and unproductive. Much of the criticism was based on misunderstandings, and 
information was required to dispel it. It would be a mistake on the part of 
both Governments and secretariats, however, to ignore the impatience that 
underlay the criticism. The United Nations and most of the organizations of 
the United Nations family had come into being in the wake of the Second World 
War; the public all over the world had supported them and had expected them to 
facilitate co-operation and prevent conflict. There was no doubt that they 
often did that and that such institutionalized co-operation contributed to the 
gradual weaving of an international social fabric. Their potential should be 
both well and fully used, however, lest the public lose hope and withdraw Its 
support. It was the common task of Governments and secretariats to ensure 
that the organizations were constructively used. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 31 


122. The Statute of the IAEA had foreseen several far-reaching functions 
that had not yet become reality. The larger part of the Agency's work, 
consisted in being an instrument for the exchange of experience, for the 
elaboration of common guidelines for the transfer of knowledge and technology 
and for the harmonization of action. Those were down-to-earth, practical 
activities. He believed that the general public would approve of them and 
would feel that taxes used for those purposes were being well used. He 
believed that it would also agree that the IAEA was needed as an international 
forum if the harmonization of divergent policy interests was to be achieved, 
although perhaps it would at times feel impatient at the slow pace of 
progress. Moreover, he believed that the public would feel, as he did, that 
safegaurds represented a spearhead into a world of increased mutual 
confidence, an instrument that Governments might use more extensively, for 
example for building confidence in the peaceful confinement and use of the 
growing quantities of plutonium. 
123. All concerned had a duty to consider whether they were responding 
effectively to the trust and hope that the public had placed in them and 
whether even better use of the Agency could not be made in order to contribute 
to the peaceful use of the atom. 
124. Finally, he expressed his gratitude to the Agency's host country, 
Austria, and to the City of Vienna, for the hospitality and support they had 
shown the organization. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 
1986 


125. The PRESIDENT said that in 1982 the Board of Governors had agreed 
to continue - for the years 1984, 198S and 1986 - the practice of recommending 
indicative planning figures as an aid in fixing targets for voluntary 
contributions to the Fund. The figure for 1986 had been set at 
US $30 million, and in the draft resolution relating to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund in Annex III to document GC(XXIX)/750 the 
Board of Governors now recommended that figure as the target for voluntary 
contributions to the Fund for the following year. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 32 


126. Since early pledging would considerably facilitate the work of the 
Secretariat in planning technical assistance programes, he urged all 
delegations which were in a position to do so to notify the Secretariat during 
the current session of the voluntary contributions to be made by their 
Governments to the Fund in 1986. He hoped that by the end of the session he 
would be able to report that a large percentage of the target figure for 1986 
had been pledged. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL (GC(XXIX)/747) 


127. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, as stated in document 
GC(XXIX)/747, the Board, acting in accordance with Article VILA of the 
Statute, had appointed Mr. Hans Blix to serve as Director General of the 
Agency for a term of four years beginning 1 December 1985. Under the same 
Article, the Board requested the Conference to approve the appointment and 
accordingly recommended adoption of the draft resolution set out in document 
GC(XXIX)/747. 
128. The draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/747 was adopted by 
acclamation. 
At the invitation of the President. Mr. Blix entered the meeting. 


129. The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Blix that the Conference had approved 
his appointment to the post of Director General for a further term. He (the 
President) was pleased to be the first to congratulate Mr. Blix on his 
appointment and invited him to take the oath of office. 
130. Mr. BLIX took the following oath: 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and 
conscience the functions entrusted to me as Director General of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, to discharge these functions and to 
regulate my conduct with the interest of the Agency only in view, and 
not to seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of my 
duties from any Government or other authority external to the Agency." 
131. The DIRECTOR GENERAL, having taken the oath, thanked Member States 

for the confidence which they had shown in electing him for a second term. 
During the preceding four years the Agency had continued directly and 
effectively to serve the interests of its Member States. In those four years 



GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 33 


nuclear power had again consolidated its position, thanks, to a large extent, 
to international co-operation in safety and waste management. There had been 
fast developments in vital programmes such as technical assistance and 
co-operation. The safeguards regime had grown and continued to serve Member 
States by verifying the peaceful nature of nuclear facilities and thereby 
creating confidence. Moreover, China's decision to join the Agency, together 
with the voluntary-offer safeguards agreement concluded between the Agency and 
the USSR, had emphasized the universality of the Agency and of its safeguards 
system. In conclusion, he pledged his wholehearted and loyal commitment,' and 
also that of his staff, to further improving and expanding the Agency's 
service to Member States in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in 
preventing its military uses. 


132. Mr. BOGGS (United States of America), speaking on behalf of the 
North America regional group, congratulated the Director General on his 
re-appointment. He looked forward to Mr. Blix's capable and dedicated 
leadership of the Agency for another four years. The organization was 
fortunate in having as its head a person of outstanding intellect and personal 
competence, coupled with concrete practical experience. 
133. Mr. ORTIZ NAVARRO (Chile), on behalf of the Latin America regional 
group, Mr. AAMODT (Norway), on behalf of the Western Europe regional group, 
Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia), on behalf of the Eastern Europe regional group, 
Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), on behalf of the Africa regional group, Mr. HIREMATH 
(India), on behalf of the Middle East and South Asia regional group, 
Mr. SADLEIR (Australia), on behalf of the South East Asia and the Pacific 
regional group, Mr. MURATA (Japan), on behalf of the Far East regional group, 
Mr. ZHOU (China), Mr. BELTRAMIMO (Argentina), on behalf of the Group of 77, 
and Mr. MOLITOR (Luxembourg), on behalf of the European Economic Community and 
Spain and Portugal, joined in congratulating the Director General on his 
re-appo1ntmen t. 



GC(XXIX)/0R.269 
page 34 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 


134. Mr. BOGGS (United States of America) read out the following 
message to the General Conference from President Reagan: 


"At a time when international discord has become all too familiar 
in our world, I wish to acknowledge, on behalf of the American people, 
the outstanding role of the men and women working in and with the IAEA 
in support of international co-operation and understanding. They serve 
the cause of international peace, and we are grateful for their 
dedication. 


"By its very nature, the IAEA provides a meeting place for people 
from all corners of the globe, from all backgrounds and cultures. The 
IAEA affords us the opportunity to seek, to merge our diverse perspectives 
into solutions for our common problems so that we may deal 
effectively with the pressing need to ensure a healthy and productive 
life for all our people. IAEA programs such as those to promote 
international energy resources through peaceful nuclear development, to 
preserve food supplies through food irradiation and to promote medical 
applications of nuclear energy are central components of the efforts to 
improve the quality of human life everywhere. 


"The assurance that activities under IAEA safeguards are confined 
to peaceful non-explosive purposes is vital to international 
co-operation. The role of the IAEA in efforts to prevent the further 
spread of nuclear weapons is critical to the security of us all. The 
United States is proud to be a part of the work of the IAEA and we look 
forward to continued co-operation and progress with other IAEA Members 
in all of the Agency's important programs. 


"I extend to each of you my best wishes for a constructive and 
successful General Conference." 


135. He congratulated the Director General on his re-election to another 
term as leader of the Agency and was sure that his next term of office would 


be as distinguished and productive as had been his first. 


136. His delegation believed 1985 was a most significant year in the history 
of nuclear energy, and that the present General Conference was of great 


importance to the future of the Agency. Three important milestones in the 


development and use of nuclear energy had been reached in 1985. Three 


anniversaries were being observed which were reminders of the obligations of 


the General Conference and gave focus to its deliberations. The events which 


those anniversaries celebrated could help in answering the questions of how 


well all the noble promises made to the world when the Agnecy was formed had 



GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 35 


been fulfilled. Those questions were: how had the Agency dealt with the 
power of the atom; how well had the Agency met its obligation to assure that 
the harnessed atom would be used for the benefit of mankind; and, most 
importantly, how well had the Agency fulfilled its even stronger obligation to 
assure that that power would never be misused? 


137. The first anniversary observed in 1985 must never be forgotten. The 
world's first nuclear explosions had occurred 40 years before, and, as a 
result of them, the United States had solemnly pledged that it would do all in 
its power to work with other nations to assure that nuclear energy would never 
again be used for other than peaceful purposes. The primary goal of the 
United States at that time had been, and had remained, to assure that the 
world would never again witness the use of nuclear weapons. 
138. It was his belief that those objectives were also central to the work 
of the Agency and that it was essential for all Member States to work together 
to prevent nuclear proliferation. 
139. The second anniversary celebrated another, more benign aspect of 
nuclear energy, in which all could take pride and which demonstrated the 
effectiveness of the collective determination to make the benefits of nuclear 
energy widely available to the world. A series of United Nations Conferences 
on the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy had begun 30 years previously in 1955, 
only two years after President Eisenhower had made his "Atoms for Peace" 
address to the United Nations. 
140. Those conferences, which had resulted in the formulation of an 
ambitious goal to promote the widespread use of peaceful nuclear energy 
throughout the world, had been marked by an unprecedented and idealistic 
enthusiasm and willingness to share peaceful nuclear technology. The work of 
the Agency was the legacy of those initial conferences. The next United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) would soon convene in 
continuation of this tradition of co-operative endeavour. That conference 
would show the same enthusiasm and willingness that had characterized the 
earlier meetings, and the participating countries would again exert their best 
efforts to promote peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 36 


141. The third event that was to be noted in 1985 was the 15th anniversary 
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear weapons (MPT). The Third 
KPT Review Conference had just concluded its work, in Geneva. NPT was the most 
widely adhered to arms control treaty in history and was a clear demonstration 
of the strong determination by the overwhelming majority of nations to assure 
that the world would remain free from the threat of nuclear weapons, while at 
the same time providing the blessings of nuclear energy to all that had 
demonstrated their devotion to the principles of peaceful use. Bach of those 
anniversaries was pertinent to the 1985 General Conference in that the Agency 
was an organization whose purposes and activities were premised on the need to 
protect the world from any misuse of the power of the atom as well as on the 
desire to make its benefits widely available. 
142. Safe and effective use of nuclear energy was necessary for the 
strength, stability and security of the world's energy supply systems, and 
nuclear power must be allowed to play its essential role in helping to provide 
the energy needed to continue social and economic progress. In order to 
accomplish this, public acceptance of nuclear power, through a credible and 
effective safeguards programme that guarded against misuse, was necessary. 
143. With reference to the vital role that nuclear power could and must 
play, the status of nuclear power In the United States was such that some 
observers were very pessimistic, arguing that the time of nuclear-fuelled 
power plants in the United States was past. The fact that there had been no 
nuclear power plants planned in recent years was quoted as evidence that 
nuclear power had failed in its promise and that the United States no longer 
had the will to continue developing and utilising nuclear energy technology or 
to continue playing a major role in nuclear power construction. 
144. It had to be admitted that planning for new nuclear plants in the 
United States, and in many other countries as well, had slowed dramatically in 
recent years. There had been no new United States nuclear plants licensed for 
construction since 1978, and over 100 had been cancelled since 1972. The 
United States, as the nation with the world's first and still the world's 
largest nuclear power programme, with over 92 nuclear power plants on line and 
almost one third of the installed nuclear generating capacity in the world, 
was obviously concerned about the lack, of new orders for nuclear power plants. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 37 


145. Nevertheless, there were good reasons for being optimistic about the 
long-range future of nuclear electricity generation in the United States. 
Given the proper conditions, the nuclear industry would again resume its 
vigorous growth. 
146. Kis country's optimism was reflected in its national energy policy, 
which was simple and straightforward. It was intended to provide an adequate 
supply of energy at reasonable cost, which meant that there must be sufficient 
energy to meet near- and long-term needs and to avoid undue dependence on any 
single source of supply. 
147. An important element of the strategy by which the United States 
intended to attain that goal was to promote a balanced and mixed energy supply 
system. Since coal and uranium were the two principal indigenous energy 
resources, both would be needed to meet the growing demand for electricity. 
At the present time, nuclear power accounted for some IS per cent of the 
United States total electricity and its contribution would grow. 
148. Another reason for optimism lay in recognising one of the major causes 
for the cancellation of existing orders for nuclear power plants and for the 
lack of new orders within the country. Overestimation of the rate of demand 
growth had made many proposed large base load plants uneconomical in the near 
term. That had affected all utility construction - although more than 
100 nuclear plants had been cancelled since 1972, during the same period over 
70 coal-fuelled power plants had also been cancelled. 
149. As was the case in any economy, the appropriate response to a condition 
of oversupply was to reduce or eliminate expansion of supply that could not be 
justified on economic grounds. Such was the case with respect to electricity 
in the United States, which had planned for a growth in the electricity demand 
that had simply not occurred as rapidly as had been expected. 
150. The United States economy had regained its strength and, as growth in 
electricity demand again justified the expenditure, new orders would be placed 
for large central generating units. He believed that a resumption of nuclear 
plant orders would be seen, and that nuclear power would maintain its role in 
the total energy supply system of the United States. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 38 


151. Another reason for the current lack of new orders for plants in his 
country was simply that the time required to build a nuclear power plant was 
far too long. Delays in construction had caused capital costs to rise far 
beyond those contempleted. There were many grounds for the lengthy 
construction times in the United States. For example, public concerns about 
safety and the environment had led to time-consuming and very expensive 
hearings, in spite of the demonstrated safety of nuclear power. 
152. The United States was also overcoming a major problem in the 
construction of nuclear power plants there, namely the burdensome and 
over-long licensing procedure that a new nuclear power plant was required to 
undergo. It was encouraging that the United States Department of Energy had 
recently introduced legislation which would streamline the licensing process 
for new nuclear plants. 
153. Other reasons for optimism about the long-range nuclear programme in 
the United States were that although no new plants had been ordered in recent 
years, the nuclear industry was not standing still. New and exciting 
developments were under way in both the private sector and in work by the 
United States Department of Energy, of which the following few would serve as 
examples. 
154. The nuclear industry was working with the Department of Energy in the 
development of advanced light-water reactors that represented the accumulation 
of over 30 years* experience with this technology. Those advanced designs 
would be more economical, would provide greater tolerance to abnormal events, 
and would provide a firm base for the next generation of that proven nuclear 
reactor design. 
155. His country, however, was not just working on improvements to lightwater 
reactors; it was also engaged, often in co-operation with other 
countries, in research programmes to develop new nuclear designs that included 
advanced high-temperature gas reactors, liquid metal converters, and advanced 
breeder reactors. Smaller reactors which could be more easily and cheaply 
built and installed were being investigated. That was an area of great 
potential importance to the countries of the developing world. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 39 


156. Promising work, was being done by the United States Department of Energy 
in the vital support services area and in improvements in aspects of the fuel 
cycle, which would result in lower-cost and more reliable nuclear supply. An 
important example of that type of effort was uranium enrichment. His country 
was gratified that so many of its nuclear trading partners had recently chosen 
to convert the uranium enrichment contracts with the Department of Energy to a 
new form designed to enable the future advances in technology that resulted in 
lowered costs and greater efficiency to be shared by all parties. 
157. Current enrichment processes were being conducted in gaseous diffusion 
plants. The United States had recently completed its initial evaluation of 
two advanced enrichment processes that had significant advantages over the 
current technology. One was the gas centrifuge process and the other was the 
"Atomic Vapour Laser Isotope Separation" system, known as AVLIS. Based on the 
tests of both systems, and the long-term economics involved, the Department of 
Energy had selected the AVLIS system for further development, demonstration 
and deployment. 
158. Yet another area in which the United States and other nations could 
benefit was the work being done to solve the problems of nuclear waste 
disposal. His country was devoting a great deal of attention to this subject 
and had worked with many Member States in a joint effort to solve the problems 
outstanding in waste management. 
159. It was to be stated, in summary, that the picture he had drawn of the 
United States efforts was not one of a country that had lost confidence in 
nuclear power. 
160. All such efforts, which were conducted by the United States Government, 
by private companies, and in co-operation with the United States overseas 
friends, would result in new technologies being developed and introduced, at 
lower cost and higher efficiency. They would benefit not only the United 
States but also other countries of the world needing nuclear energy. 
161. The United States Administration under President Reagan was dedicated 
to the ideal that the United States would continue to be a reliable and 
cost-effective nuclear supplier to countries that shared its commitments to 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 40 


162. It would continue to be in the forefront of development and supply of 
nuclear power to meet the energy needs of the world. 
163. The United States was also vitally concerned about the contributions 
that could be made by the many non-power uses of nuclear energy to help meet 
some of the world's most basic needs. 
164. In that connection, the Agency's Importance and the United States 
commitment to the Agency's vital programmes was to be noted. Over the five 
years up to 1985, the total United States voluntary contribution to the Agency 
had been in excess of US $43 million. 
165. Between 1980 and 1984, the United States had funded over 111 projects 
involving over 300 man-months of effort by experts and more than US $4.5 million 
of equipment. It had also provided for the attendance of nuclear power 
courses run for the Agency by the Argonne National Laboratory by more than 
700 foreign students from 55 different Member States. In addition, the United 
States had placed 283 fellows in various nuclear-related educational 
programmes within the country. 
166. In order to solve some of the age-old problems of hunger and disease, 
it was necessary that the unique benefits of nuclear energy be made more 
widely available than they were at the present moment. Thus, the Agency had 
two objectives that had always to be kept in mind. The solutions to the 
world's problems that nuclear energy could provide must continue to be 
developed and applied, and, if those goals were to be reached, it must be 
demonstrated to the world that the atom could be controlled. 
167. The International Atomic Energy Agency was, by its stated purpose and 
its structure, organized in such a way as to achieve those objectives, and had 
programmes and resources dedicated to those ends. It was designed to 
accomplish its objectives, which were to make sure that the many benefits from 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy were made widely available and that nuclear 
energy was used solely for peaceful purposes. Those two objectives were 
inextricably linked; without one, the other could not be achieved. 
168. The situation, therefore, was that there was a demonstrated world-wide 
need for nuclear energy, and an organization capable of helping to meet that 

GC(XX1X)/0R.269 
page 41 


need. If the benefits of nuclear energy were not made widely available, it 
would not be because there was no organization capable of doing the job, but 
rather because of a lack of will and responsibility on the part of all Member 
States. 


169. If that tragedy was to be averted, Member States must work together in 
order to continue the success achieved to date and to eliminate the sometimes 
devisive arguments that diluted the progress that had been made. That was, 
again, a matter of deep concern. 
170. Efforts to deny membership or limit the rights of participation were 
among the most divisive of those arguments. They could only serve to reduce 
the Agency's effectiveness. Another Issue that had, at times, placed 
obstacles in the way of the Agency were efforts to enhance the resources 
available to one aspect of its work at the expense of another. That approach 
could only cast doubt on the Agency's ability to fulfil its dual purpose. 
171. The 198S General Conference should devote its collective wisdom and 
effort to improving its effectiveness in carrying out its work, rather than in 
discord and acrimony. The United States, for its part, would do everything in 
its power to that end and encouraged others to join it. 
172. The Member States of the Agency had so much to offer the world in the 
field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy that it would verge on the 
irresponsible if other issues were allowed to intrude. The world needed 
energy and would need more in the future. The economic and social progress 
which all Member States sought depended on an adequate and secure energy 
supply, hence nuclear power was essential if the world energy system was to 
achieve security and stability. 
173. Each year at the General Conference, the past year's activities were 
reviewed in the light of the overall goals and mandates of the Agency. In his 
opinion, that was an excellent approach which should be continued, and it was 
all the more important in 1985, which was an opportunity for all to reflect 
upon the past and contemplate the future. The successes of the past should 
be reviewed, and the hard work and dedication of those that had made them 
possible should be noted. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.269 
page 42 


174. lb was, however, even more important that Member States should 
re-examine how their total responsibility was being fulfilled and should 
rededicate themselves to continuing and improving the Agency so as to achieve 
the lofty goals which all had set themselves. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
International Atomic Energy Agency March 1986* 
GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTIETH 
PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 23 September 1985, at 3 p.m. 


President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


7 
General debate and annual report 
for 1984 (continued) 1-96 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Japan 1 -- 18 
India 19 -- 34 
Union of Soviet Socialist 


Republics 35 -- 56 
German Democratic Republic 57 -- 75 
Finland 76 -- 95 


*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 14 November 1985. 
**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-987 
0392e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.270 


page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (continued) 


1. Mr. TAKEUCHI (Japan) said that his country would do its utmost to 
support the Director General's efforts over the next four years to ensure that 
the Agency played a more decisive role in the world. In that regard, he noted 
with satisfaction that the application of nuclear energy had made steady 
progress in spite of the stagnation of the world economy. Nuclear power 
production had reached 220 GW by the end of 1984, which was an increase of 
17%. According to the Annual Report for 1984, that rate was the highest 
recorded since the beginning of the 1970s, and in 1984 nuclear power plants 
had accounted for about 13% of the world's total electricity. 
2. However, it was also reported that nuclear power programmes had 
levelled off, that new orders for plants were scarce and that orders had been 
cancelled, owing to excessive capacity, a slower increase in demand and 
difficulties involved in financing construction. Nevertheless, nuclear power 
generation was now considered a proven technology since it had gained the 
experience of 3470 reactor years of operation, and improvements in 
availability and operability had been achieved. It was to be hoped, 
therefore, that the role of nuclear energy would become more firmly 
established as an energy source through the efforts of the Agency, its Member 
States and the nuclear industry. 
3. It was gratifying to see that the applications of radiation and 
radioisotopes in medicine had made great headway and that the interest in 


irradiation for the preservation of foodstuffs had been revived. 


4. Japan had been actively engaged in nuclear research and the development 
and application of nuclear energy, which it regarded as a major alternative to 
oil. There were 32 nuclear power plants in operation in Japan, including one 
used for research and development, with a total generating capacity of 23.8 
GW, or about 23% of the total production of electricity. Twelve other power 
plants, including a 280 MW prototype fast breeder reactor, with a total 
generating capacity of 11.1 GW, were under construction, while another six 
with a total capacity of 6.3 GW were being designed. During the preceding 
year nuclear power generation in Japan had attained the highest availability 
factor since its commencement, namely 74%, and the Japanese technology had 
steadily improved. His country was determined to make nuclear energy in the 
future more reliable, safer and more economically advantageous. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 3 


5. In promoting nuclear power generation, Japan had sought to make maximum 
use of the potential energy of uranium. For that purpose, extensive efforts 
had been devoted to developing, for the use of plutonium, an advanced thermal 
reactor, a fast breeder reactor and the technology for recycling plutonium in 
light-water reactors. 
6. The creation of a national nuclear fuel cycle and the promotion of 
radioactive waste management at present enjoyed high priority in Japan. 
Preparations for the construction of a commercial uranium enrichment plant, a 
large-scale reprocessing plant and a final storage facility for low-level 
radioactive wastes were being made by private industry with the support of the 
Government. Japan was also engaged in research and development in the area of 
nuclear fusion technology, which would contribute not only to solving future 
energy problems but also to advances in science and technology as a whole. In 
April 1985, the Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute had inaugurated the 
Torus-60 facility and started experiments in it. 
7. An essential part in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was 
implementing nuclear non-proliferation policies. However, measures required 
to ensure non-proliferation should not unduly hamper the development of those 
peaceful uses. From that point of view, he hoped that discussions would 
continue on the compatibility of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy with 
non-proliferation and that further fruitful talks on the subject would be held 
within the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS). The Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (NPT) played an important role in that regard. In 1985 countries such 
as Brunei, the Seychelles, Guinea and Bhutan had acceded to NPT. The 
countries which had not yet done so were urged to join the 130 States which 
were parties to the Treaty in order to strengthen its universality. It was 
desirable, in particular, that countries that had remained outside NPT but 
which were operating or constructing nuclear facilities without accepting 
Agency safeguards should accede to NPT at the earliest possible date; they 
should accept full-scope safeguards in order to allay the concerns of the 
international community. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 4 


8. In that context, he wished to emphasize the importance of reducing the 
inequality that prevailed between the nuclear-weapon and the 
non-nuclear-weapon States so as to make NPT more meaningful; Japan had already 
appealed to all nuclear-weapon States to accept voluntary safeguards on all 
their peaceful nuclear facilities, and was happy to note the positive response 
from the Soviet Union. In general, his country was anxious to see all 
facilities devoted to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy placed under Agency 
safeguards as early as possible. 
9. He noted with pleasure that the Third Review Conference of the Parties 
to NPT had ended successfully and that its final declaration reaffirming the 
usefulness of the Treaty and the need to strengthen the non-proliferation 
regime had been adopted by consensus. A landmark had thereby been reached and 
he called upon all countries to continue such efforts. It was worth recalling 
that the Conference had commended the Agency for its contribution to promoting 
the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
10. In 1984 the Agency's safeguards system had continued to serve 
effectively the cause of nuclear non-proliferation. The agreement between the 
USSR and the Agency for the application of safeguards in that country had 
entered into force in June 1985, and the first inspection had taken place in 
August. Furthermore, China, another nuclear-weapon State, had also decided to 
accept voluntarily Agency safeguards as the outcome of its negotiations with 
Japan. Those were encouraging developments. 
11. The Agency's safeguards system should adapt itself to the growing use 
of nuclear energy in the world. In view of current developments in using 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and progress in safeguards technology, 
the Agency's safeguards should be implemented with due consideration for 
improved safeguards evaluation and the cost-effectiveness of implementation. 
Japan urged the Secretariat to strive further to meet those objectives and 
hoped that the discussions of the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGSI) would soon result in new safeguards approaches with 
allowance for the specific features of each national nuclear fuel cycle. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 5 


12. As for the application of Agency safeguards to the uranium enrichment 
pilot plant in Japan, the relevant authorities had decided on the entry into 
force of its Facility Attachment, which entailed a new safeguards approach 
based on the outcome of the Hexapartite Safeguards Project. Moreover, Japan 
had been co-operating with the Agency in improving the implementation of 
safeguards through meetings such as those of the Japan/IAEA Joint Committee on 
Safeguards and through Japan's support programme for Agency safeguards. That 
support would be strengthened. 
13. Nuclear safety was another essential aspect of the promotion of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. His country had always been aware of that 
fact and had done its utmost in that domain. The result had been high 
availability factors and low scram rates for the Japanese nuclear power 
plants. Those achievements were of great economic advantage. Furthermore, 
nuclear safety was increasingly of common international interest as the use of 
nuclear energy spread through the world. 
14. The Agency's nuclear safety programmes were extremely valuable, 
particularly those relating to the nuclear safety standards (NUSS), including 
safe transport regulations; the exchange of information on incidents in 
nuclear power plants and missions by operational safety review teams (OSART) 
and radiation protection advisory teams (RAPAT). A great number of experts 
had participated in the NUSS programme, devising very comprehensive standards 
and guides to cover various topics from the siting to the operation of nuclear 
power plants. That programme would be completed by the end of 1985. He 
expressed his appreciation for the efforts made by those experts and the 
Secretariat, and hoped that the documents would be fully applied and further 
improved as nuclear power generation progressed. 
15. The Agency's programmes on technical co-operation with developing 
countries should be put into effect in such a way as to enable those countries 
to share the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as the common 
heritage of mankind. The steady growth of technical co-operation activities 
in response to requests from the developing countries indicated that Member 
States appreciated their importance, especially when one bore in mind the 
economic stagnation of many of those States. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 6 


16. Aware of the value of the Agency's technical co-operation activities, 
Japan had consistently paid the whole of its share of the voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. Although his 
Government was still faced by a stringent financial situation, it would do all 
it could to continue that practice. It would likewise continue to make 
experts available, to receive fellows and host study tours, to hold training 
courses and to donate equipment, and he hoped that the Agency would make full 
use of those offers. Among the Agency's technical co-operation programmes 
with developing countries, he noted with satisfaction the progress made under 
the various projects falling within the framework of the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development and Training related to Nuclear Science 
and Technology (RCA). In November 1984, an electron beam facility had been 
started up at the Indonesian Nuclear Research Centre with Japan's assistance. 
In the very near future, medical irradiation equipment was to be provided 
through the Agency for Malaysia, where various training courses would be 
organized; it was hoped that an active transfer of technology would thus be 
achieved. It would be desirable for those facilities to operate as regional 
centres serving as a model for the Agency's technical co-operation 
programmes. Since the training of manpower was the very basis of development 
in any country, Japan considered assistance in that field to be vital for 
implementing technical co-operation programmes, and would therefore continue 
to offer its assistance. Lastly, Japan intended to step up the exchange of 
nuclear scientists with its neighbours. 
17. The Agency's programme budget for 1986 was based on zero real growth, 
as it had been in 1985. Japan was well aware of the value of the Agency's 
activities, but one had also to bear in mind that an international 
organization's budget was dependent on the economic situation in Member 
States. Hence the Agency's budget was bound to reflect the financial 
difficulties of Member States' budgets. He urged the Secretariat to pursue 
its efforts to define programme priorities, as well as to review the 
allocation of resources and its administrative structure, especially the 
assignment of manpower, so that its programmes could be implemented to the 
maximum extent possible within the limited resources. 

GC(XX1X)/OR.270 
page 7 


18. In conclusion, he wished to point out that the Agency's role in 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was growing from year to year. 
Numerous technological problems remained, and the Agency should focus its 
efforts on resolving them. In the Agency, differences and conflicts of 
interest between Member States had never reached the stage of confrontation, 
and a spirit of co-operation had always prevailed. Problems had always been 
tackled as problems common to all Members, and that tradition was the greatest 
asset of the Agency for the future and should be nurtured with the greatest 
care. In that connection, it should be recalled that the Agency's raison 
d'etre was to contribute to the prosperity and welfare of mankind and to world 
peace. Its Members should renew their determination to make a united effort 
for the advancement of the Agency's programmes - by combining wisdom and 
endeavour they would succeed in overcoming the difficulties faced and in 
enhancing the value of the Agency's activities still more. 
19. Mr. RAMANNA (India) expressed his confidence that during the 
following four years the Director General would succeed in bringing about the 
changes necessary in the Agency to ensure the spread of nuclear power 
throughout the world, for his country was convinced more than ever before that 
it was nuclear power that held the answer to the world's energy needs. 
20. Nuclear power remained one of the few realistic, economically viable 
and environmentally safe energy options for the forseeable future. The 
Director General had stressed that the increase in installed nuclear capacity 
in 1984 had been the largest since nuclear power was first introduced. He had 
also made several proposals which the General Conference would no doubt 
examine in due course with all the attention they deserved. 
21. The year 1984-85 had been a good one for the Indian nuclear power 
programme: two more reactors had gone critical in the preceding few months 
and the availability factors for some of the older nuclear power stations had 
reached figures never achieved before. It was also clear that nuclear power 
in India could be classified as a safe and steady source of electricity, 
perhaps even more reliable than other sources. The 40 MW Cirus research 
reactor had celebrated its twenty-fifth year of continuous and trouble-free 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 8 


operation. It had been used for research and isotope production and had made 
a major contribution to the widespread use of isotopes in medicine, 
agriculture and industry. He wished to pay tribute to those who had designed, 
constructed and operated it. But since even Cirus had a finite existence, it 
had been decided some years before to build another reactor at the same site 
to take over many of its functions. The new research reactor, which was 
naturally more modern and of higher capacity (100 MW), had gone into operation 
on 8 August 1985. Designed and erected entirely by Indian engineers with 
Indian components, it had been named "Dhruva" - meaning the pole star in 
Sanskrit - by the late Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi. 


22. Another important achievement had been the commissioning of the second 
power reactor at Kalpakkam (MAPS-II), which had gone critical on 
12 August 1985 and had been coupled to the grid. It had incorporated several 
design changes, as compared to MAPS-I, in the light of the problems 
encountered in the earlier RAPS-I power reactor. The approach to criticality 
in the MAPS-II had been so smooth that it could be said that India had 
mastered that problem as far as 235 MW(e) reactors were concerned. Four such 
standardized power reactors were currently under construction, and sites and 
licences for four more had been approved in the course of 1985. 
23. During the past few years, India had been planning and designing 
500 MW(e) pressurized heavy-water reactors (PHWR). The designs were complete 
and sources of equipment for those reactors had been identified within the 
country; the heavy water, too, would be produced domestically. In addition to 
building more 235 MW(e) reactors, it was planned to put into operation 
500 MW(e) unit sizes and to complete the programme for the installation of 
10 000 MW(e) of nuclear generating capacity from PHWRs by the end of the 
century. 


24. The three-phase fuel cycle strategy adopted by India had started with 
the use of natural uranium in PHWRs, followed by plutonium-fuelled fast 
breeder reactors, and ultimately by the utilization of the thorium-uranium 233 
cycle. The second phase had been initiated by the start of construction of 
the second fast breeder reactor at Kalpakkam some years before. Fuel loading 
of that complex 40 MW test reactor, based on plutonium-uranium carbide fuel 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 9 


and sodium cooling, had begun, and it was scheduled to become critical in 
October 1985. That was an achievement for a developing country like India, 
especially since the fuel and many of the important components had been 
manufactured domestically. It was similar in design to the Rhapsodle in 
France, which had greatly promoted the development of fast breeder 
technology. With the commissioning of the test reactor India was moving into 
the latest technology in nuclear power and looking well ahead into the 
future. National teams had also made progress in the design of a 500 MW(e) 
fast breeder power reactor. 


25. The development of atomic energy in India, from the very start, had 
been a springboard for modern technology, especially in the field of materials 
development. The country had thus been able to manufacture its own carbide 
fuel for the fast breeder test reactor and to build the PURNIMA-II. The 
latter, which used a uranium-233 solution, had been built mainly for the 
233 


purpose of understanding the neutron and chemical behaviour of U systems. 


26. Isotope applications had reached higher levels of utilization in India, 
and the new Dhruva reactor was expected to meet the country's needs in the 
future. The use of isotope sources for irradiation of medical products as 
well as in industry and agriculture was already taken for granted in India, 
and their utilization would soon be extended to cover sewage treatment. The 
Indian Government was shortly expected to authorize irradiation for the 
preservaton of certain foodstuffs. Lastly, the importance of helping the 
universities with new facilities had not been disregarded: a 120 MeV alpha 
particle variable-energy cyclotron which had been built in co-operation with 
Indian industry and had been operating continuously for some years was being 
employed mainly by universities for basic studies in nuclear physics and 
chemistry; it was also being utilized for the production of short-lived 
isotopes for diagnosis and treatment. A Centre for Advanced Technologies 
(CAT) was being established at Indore in order to help the universities in 
their research programmes and to train the young talent needed for more 
ambitious programmes in the future. It would be operational by the end of 
1985 and would specialize in work on lasers and high-energy accelerators. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 10 


27. As in the past, India had been co-operating with the Agency in the 
implementation of safeguards at those facilities where it had voluntarily 
placed nuclear material under safeguards, and the relevant agreements were 
being smoothly implemented. The safeguards inspectors had carried out their 
duties in a satisfactory manner, and the Indian scientists and engineers had 
achieved improved efficiency in the operation of the reprocessing facility 
during safeguarded campaigns. 
28. One of the activities of the Agency to which India continued to accord 
particular importance was the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA). 
While RCA programmes had begun in fields such as the use of isotopes in 
agriculture and medicine, there was no doubt that its greatest importance in 
the future would lie in the co-operation between neighbouring countries in the 
development of nuclear power. It was difficult to understand why some 
countries considered that such co-operation was not feasible. In Europe, 
countries traded with each other in electricity and drew on each other's 
manpower and experience in a normal, routine manner. Third World countries 
should do the same. That was why RCA was essential and the Agency should not 
regard RCA activities as peripheral. One purpose of the RCA had been to help 
in manpower development in the region. Personnel from developing countries in 
Asia had been trained and should now increasingly be used for manning the 
various posts under the programme rather than the nationals from a handful of 
"donor" countries. 
29. Non-proliferation was one of the more controversial issues faced by the 
Agency. At various sessions of the General Conference statements had been 
made to the effect that since the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) had been 
signed by a majority of countries in the world, all others should follow 
suit. He was unable to understand that interpretation of democratic 
principles. Indeed, only 32% of power reactors in the world were now covered 
by NPT-type safeguards. That figure did not include the many reactors 
producing bombs in nuclear-weapon States of which one might never even have 
heard. The logical deduction seemed to be that certain countries which were 
nuclear-weapon States could engage in the unrestrained proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, while others were lectured on their commitments to democracy 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 11 


and were asked to compromise their sovereignty. India did not accept so


called non-proliferation measures which actually legitimized the possession of 
nuclear weapons by some States. It was regrettable that the terms 


"nuclear-weapon States" and "non-nuclear-weapon States", and a distinction 
between the two, had entered into the Director General's statement since such 
caste distinction should not be brought into an agency where all Member States 
were equal. Moreover, India could not subscribe to the idea that some 
countries or peoples were either more responsible or morally superior to 
others; those doctrines were as repulsive as apartheid. If NPT was to be 
effective, it had to apply equally to all countries. It was rather sad to see 
that even agreement on a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty was not forthcoming 
among the developed countries. Those were among the reasons why his country 
had not taken part in the recent Review Conference of the Parties to NPT and 
did not consider itself, or the IAEA, bound by decisions taken at that 
Conference. 


30. In that context, one disturbing development was the continued increase 
in the restraints and conditions imposed by suppliers on transfers of nuclear 
material, equipment and technology, which could only negatively affect the 
fundamental promotional purpose of the Agency. Efforts such as those in the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had little or no point if unilateral 
changes in existing agreements continued to be practised by suppliers in the 
name of non-proliferation. The primary need was surely to create trust; only 
then could the necessary details be worked out in a meaningful way. 
31. His country was deeply worried by the possibility of a nuclear war, a 
nuclear winter and "star wars". It was certainly high time for the countries 
of the world to get together and work out a programme which would make the 
world a safer place to live in. 
32. The effort expended on making weapons could be and should be diverted 
to the production of power in developing countries, which suffered greatly 
from a lack of electricity. He was glad to note that the Agency had recently 
held a series of meetings on small and medium power reactors, although 1985 
seemed rather late for that undertaking. One should make up for lost time and 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 12 


embark upon a programme for the introduction of nuclear power reactors in 
developing countries and assistance with their operation and maintenance. A 
number of developing countries would be facing a severe energy crisis in view 
of their increasing populations and hopes of improving their standards of 
living. Any delay in introducing nuclear power would only prolong the present 
unsatisfactory conditions. In recognition of that situation, India would be 
willing to share its experience with other developing countries. The Agency 
should now seriously consider how international funding could be secured for 
power reactors in developing countries and arrange for assistance in respect 
of the relevant infrastructure and technologies. 


33. India would pay its full share of voluntary contributions to the 
Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1985. In addition, as 
in the past, it would provide twelve Type II fellowships for the Agency. As a 
token of the importance which it attached to the RCA, his country would also 
be hosting some RCA meetings and training courses and pledged US $50 000 for 
the implementation of RCA activities. 
34. In conclusion, he observed that he had spoken frankly as someone who 
had attended many sessions of the General Conference, almost since the 
Agency's inception. The promise of nuclear energy remained valid; it was 
greater than before and had been proved by practice. It was now for the 
Agency and its Member States to see the promise fulfilled. 
35. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that 
the IAEA General Conference was being held immediately after the conclusion of 
the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The participants in that Review 
Conference had unanimously adopted the Final Declaration, in which they 
underlined the importance of the Treaty for world peace and security and 
restated their firm adherence to it and their determination to strengthen its 
authority. 
36. Those attending the Review Conference had shown a high sense of 
responsibility for the world's future by approving an important international 
document whose purpose was to help strengthen the international nuclear 

GC(XX1X)/OR.270 
page 13 


non-proliferation regime. In the present complicated and tense, if not 
explosive, world situation that Conference had adopted decisions by consensus 
on issues which were directly related to preserving peace, reducing the threat 
of a nuclear war and curbing the arms race. 


37. The Final Declaration affirmed the determination of States to 
strengthen further the barriers against the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
and other nuclear explosive devices. It noted that proliferation of nuclear 
weapons would add immeasurably to tension and suspicion among States at both 
the regional and the international level, enhance the risk of a nuclear war 
and lessen the security of all States. The participants of that Conference 
had declared that the Treaty and the non-proliferation regime played a central 
role in promoting regional and international peace and security. 
38. As Mr. M.S. Gorbachev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of 
the Soviet Communist Party, had pointed out in a message sent to that 
Conference, the Non-Proliferation Treaty had demonstrated in practice its 
viability and effectiveness. During the 15 years of the Treaty's 
implementation, not a single new nuclear-weapon State had emerged. The view 
that the Treaty equally satisfied the basic interests of States both large and 
small, nuclear and non-nuclear, developed and developing, was now firmly 
established. 
39. The Review Conference had noted with satisfaction that the overwhelming 
majority of States in the world had joined the Treaty, which now had more than 
130 signatories. It was, in terms of the number of parties to it, the 
broadest international agreement in the area of arms race limitation. At the 
same time, the Conference had expressed its profound concern at the fact that 
some States, developed in the nuclear field, were still refusing to j.oin the 
Treaty, and it had mentioned some of them by name, in particular Israel and 
South Africa, which did not in fact conceal their nuclear ambitions. 
40. The Review Conference had centred its attention on the most vital 
issues of the present time, which were concerned with the cessation of the 
nuclear arms race. It had welcomed the important unilateral action of the 
Soviet Government in announcing a moratorium on nuclear explosions of all 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 


page 14 


kinds for the period from 6 August 1985 to 1 January 1986, to be extended 
further if the United States, for its part, responded to that positive 
initiative and refrained from conducting nuclear tests. An important result 
of that Conference was the urgent appeal to the Soviet Union, the United 
States and the United Kingdom to resume trilateral negotiations on a 
comprehensive test-ban treaty in the current year as well as an appeal to all 
nuclear-weapon States to take part in the negotiations on that problem at the 
Geneva Conference on Disarmament as a matter of the highest priority. Only 
two States had not joined in that appeal - the United States and the United 
Kingdom. The Soviet Union hoped that their decision was not final. 


41. All real efforts to limit nuclear weapons had begun with the banning, 
under the 1963 Moscow Treaty, of nuclear-weapon tests in the atmosphere, in 
outer space and under water. As Mr. Gorbachev had pointed out in replying to 
questions put by "Time" magazine, a complete end to nuclear tests would 
eliminate the most dangerous aspect - the qualitative aspect - of the nuclear 
arms race. Also, it would help appreciably to uphold and strengthen the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
42. As was noted in the Final Declaration, the Conference had expressed its 
concern at developments with far-reaching implications and the possibility of 
a new environment - space - being drawn into the arms race. In fact, the 
problem of curbing the nuclear arms race in the nuclear and space era was 
inseparable from the task of preventing the militarization of outer space. If 
the latter was placed at the service of war, the nuclear threat would 
escalate. But if outer space was kept peaceful and out of the sphere of 
military rivalry, progress could be made towards the solution of the problems 
of limiting and reducing nuclear arsenals. That would at the same time open 
up vast possibilities for all-round international co-operation in various 
fields of human activity both on the earth and in space. Such was the purpose 
of the Soviet Union's concrete proposals submitted at the fortieth session of 
the United Nations General Assembly, concerning international co-operation in 
the peaceful utilization of outer space under non-militarized conditions. 
43. Reviewing the Agency's activities on the occasion of its annual General 
Conference, he observed that his country continued to accord great importance 


to one of the main aspects of its functions under the Statute - monitoring of 



GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 15 


the peaceful uses of atomic energy and constant improvement of the IAEA 


safeguards system. The Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT had 


highly appreciated the Agency's activities in the field of safeguards and had 


noted that the Agency had not detected any diversion of a significant amount 


of safeguarded material to the production of nuclear weapons or other nuclear 


explosive devices or to purposes unknown. The Final Declaration of that 


Conference contained a number of important practical recommendations on 


further improving the safeguards system. The Soviet Union, together with 
other States, would assist in every way with the implementation of those 
recommendations in the interest of further increasing the effectiveness of 
Agency safeguards. 


44. Consolidation of the non-proliferation regime depended directly on the 
functioning of the Agency's safeguards system. The Agency's efforts should 
therefore be geared to the complete coverage by safeguards of the nuclear 
material and facilities which were located in all non-nuclear-weapon States 
and were hazardous from the standpoint of production of nuclear explosive 
devices. In view of the Agency's limited resources, the Soviet delegation was 
in favour of increasing the effectiveness of safeguards in "near-nuclearweapon 
States", especially those which were not party to NPT. Safeguards 
activities should be focused on the "sensitive" stages of the nuclear fuel 
cycle; the effectiveness of safeguards should be increased by applying new and 
more sophisticated methods, procedures and technical equipment and by 
optimizing the use of the inspectorate staff. 


45. Much depended in that respect on the support given to the Agency by its 
Member States. The Soviet Union, for its part, had always held that the 
application of safeguards was the most important part of the Agency's 
activities, and it actively participated in scientific and technical 
safeguards programmes. A safeguards support programme was being carried out 
successfully in the Soviet Union. At present the programme activities for 
1983-1985, for which 2 million roubles had been allocated, were coming to an 
end and the work plan for 1986-1988 had been prepared. Under the latter there 
was to be a substantial expansion in the work done for the Agency by Soviet 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 16 


institutions and the resources allocated for the 1986-1988 programme amounted 
to 5 million roubles, apart from the special contribution of 330 000 roubles 
for financing other activities (inspector training, etc.). 


46. The agreement between the USSR and the IAEA on the application of 
safeguards in the Soviet Union had come into force in the current year and the 
first inspections had taken place in August. In that connection, he wished to 
mention the high level of co-operation between the Soviet Union and the 
Agency's Secretariat, which had substantially reduced the time usually needed 
for drafting an agreement and for its implementation. The USSR had 
endeavoured to bear in mind the difficulties which the Agency had to face in 
carrying out its verification functions, and had, in particular, shown the 
maximum flexibility in matters such as the designation of inspectors and 
determination of the inspection effort required. The Agency was being 
afforded an opportunity to develop new methods and procedures in the process 
of implementation of safeguards in the Soviet Union. He hoped that the 
conduct of those operations in the USSR would enable the Agency to acquire new 
experience in the practical implementation of safeguards and would help to 
improve their effectiveness. 
47. The Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT had confirmed that 
the non-proliferation and safeguards commitments contained in the Treaty were 
essential for peaceful nuclear commerce and co-operation and that the Treaty 
fostered the worldwide peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Soviet Union 
supported the Agency's activities on expanding international co-operation in 
those uses. 
48. His delegation especially endorsed the establishment of an 
international system of assured nuclear supplies, which was currently being 
developed in the Committee on Assurances of Supply. A system of that kind 
should be based on the principles of nuclear non-proliferation, which were the 
essential prerequisites for international co-operation in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy in general, and for any system for the 
preferential supply of nuclear materials, equipment and services, in 
particular. 

GC(XX1X)/OR.270 
page 17 


49. Recognizing the great importance of Agency activities in the 
development of scientific and technical co-operation among Member States, his 
country actively supported the principal areas of the Agency's activities in 
the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy and especially those 
programmes which were of interest to all countries. Mention should be made, 
first and foremost, of nuclear power, which was a reliable and economical 
source of energy and the share of which in the energy balances of States would 
be steadily growing. 
50. The USSR also supported the operation of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) and co-operation in the field of nuclear data. 
Those areas were very important for the development not only of nuclear power 
but also of other peaceful uses of atomic energy in all Member States. As in 
the past, he was in favour of the Agency's work on controlled thermonuclear 
fusion, in which field his country had initiated the development of the INTOR 
facility on an international basis. It also endorsed the nuclear safety and 
environmental protection programme, the Incident Reporting System and other 
activities. 
51. The Soviet Union regarded as important the Agency's activities in the 
field of technical assistance. The Agency devoted a substantial and everincreasing 
part of its budget to providing technical assistance for developing 
Member States, which was an obvious and measurable success on the part of the 
Agency. The practice followed in determining the level of the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund ensured considerable growth of the resources 
on a predictable basis. Having regard to the importance of that activity of 
the Agency for developing Member States, the Soviet Union wished to confirm 
its support for a target of US $30 million for the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund in 1986, it being understood that the principles governing 
the establishment of the Fund - voluntary contributions in national currency would 
remain unchanged. Soviet policy regarding co-operation with developing 
countries was reflected in the steady increase of its voluntary contributions 
to that Fund. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 18 


52. In 1986 the Soviet contribution would amount to 2 680 000 roubles and 
was intended for the supply of Soviet equipment, instruments and facilities to 
developing Member States and for training courses and other activities in the 
Soviet Union. 
53. His country would also make available 2 million roubles during 
1986-1988 in the form of additional assistance to States party to NPT for the 
financing of footnote a./ projects. In addition, resources would be allocated 
to cover the expenses of individual training of specialists from developing 
countries. In order to improve co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, the Soviet Union was willing to share its experience and technical 
potential with countries using the atom for peace. There was very extensive 
and fruitful co-operation between the USSR and the socialist Member States of 
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). It was multilateral in 
character and was carried out through the CMEA Standing Commission responsible 
for co-operation in the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, which was 
celebrating its twenty-fifth anniversary in the current year. There had been 
a considerable growth in joint projects in the field of nuclear science and 
technology on the basis of co-ordination and co-operation, agreements and 
contracts. A large-scale programme for nuclear power plant construction was 
in process of being implemented. 
54. By the end of 1984, the total capacity of the operating nuclear power 
plants in Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, the USSR and 
Czechoslovakia had amounted to more than 30 GW and, according to the energy 
development plans of CMEA Member States, would reach about 40 million kW in 
1985. Their electricity production would exceed 230 000 million kWh. It was 
expected that in the following decade the nuclear power plants in those States 
would have a total capacity of 100 million kW, and their share in the 
production of electricity would be 20-30%, or even over 40%. 
55. In the CMEA Member States the problems of supply of fresh fuel to 
nuclear power plants and its subsequent reprocessing were settled by agreement 
between the parties. Thus, the Soviet Union carried out isotopic enrichment 
of uranium, fabricated and delivered fuel assemblies to the CMEA Member States 

GC(XX1X)/0R.270 
page 19 


concerned and received spent fuel for reprocessing. That arrangement was 
economically advantageous for all the participating countries and ensured the 
storage of high-level wastes in a limited number of locations, although it 
involved additional problems related to the safe transport of spent fuel over 
long distances. 


56. In conclusion, the Soviet Union was confident that the Agency would 
remain a reliable instrument for the development of international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, within the context of the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
57. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) noted that, as in the 
preceding years, international co-operation on the basis of the Agency's 
programme had again made appreciable progress in 1984. That was the most 
important and welcome conclusion to be drawn from the Director General's 
highly informative address and from the documents submitted to the General 
Conference. 
58. The Secretariat's reports on technical co-operation showed that 
considerable progress had been made in that important area of its work. 
Obviously, that was the result of the new technical co-operation policies 
implemented recently and of the system of financing through voluntary 
contributions in national currency on the basis of indicative planning 
figures, which was now well established. Although in 1984 there had been only 
a slight overall increase in the implementation rate, substantial improvements 
had been achieved in certain areas, especially in the implementation of 
interregional projects and in the provision of experts. 
59. Endorsing the Agency's technical co-operation activities, his country 
contributed its share of the target for voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund and, in addition to the supply of 
equipment and material, endeavoured to provide training for scientists from 
developing countries in the form of courses, study tours and fellowships and 
by making experts available. In the preceding year, it had again held one 
training course, taken part in arrangements for two study tours and received 
nine fellows from six countries. 

GC(XX1X)/OR.270 
page 20 


60. In considering technical co-operation one should not forget the 
numerous activities of the Agency's "technical" Departments; although not 
directly related to the technical co-operation programme, those activities 
were highly relevant to the interests of developing countries. Apart from 
such traditional fields as health, food and agriculture, such co-operation 
increasingly involved physics, nuclear power and safety, and scientific and 
technical information. In the case of the last mentioned, following the 
inclusion of project-related training, it would perhaps be useful to introduce 
project-related information on the basis of INIS. 
61. As all were aware, international co-operation was a prerequisite for 
the world-wide use of sophisticated technologies related to the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, the dominant aspects of which were nuclear safety, 
radiation protection and nuclear safeguards. An instance of successful 
international co-operation in the nuclear field was the implementation of 
nuclear power programmes in the Member States of the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA), where the present installed capacity of nuclear 
power stations would have grown six-fold by the year 2000. Mention should 
also be made of the trend towards the use of nuclear energy for district 
heating and of a co-ordinated research programme on nuclear fusion. 
62. It was encouraging to see that the fourth Nuclear Safety Review had 
developed into a very informative document, which should also be made 
available outside the IAEA. Its most important conclusion was that 
nuclear-power-related activities had not led to accidents with consequences 
for public health and safety. However, the fact that there had been serious 
radiation incidents not related to nuclear power facilities gave rise to 
concern and underscored the need for stricter control of the use of ionizing 
radiation sources and radioactive material. 
63. On the subject of regulatory activities, it should be mentioned that at 
the beginning of the current year new regulations governing atomic safety and 
radiation protection had entered into force in his country. The term "atomic 
safety" covered all aspects of nuclear safety, nuclear safeguards and physical 
protection. In drafting those regulations, due account had been taken of the 
German Democratic Republic's Atomic Energy Act of 1983, the recommendations 
contained in ICRP Publication 26 and the Agency's Basic Safety Standards. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 21 


64. A third component part of the peaceful use of nuclear energy was 
nuclear safeguards. Experience had shown that the application of Agency 
safeguards to all nuclear activities did not impede the use of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. It could even be said that nuclear safeguards were a 
prerequisite for creating an atmosphere of world-wide mutual confidence and 
thereby generating favourable conditions for international co-operation. 
65. His country therefore welcomed the successful outcome of the Third 
Review Conference of the Parties to NPT, which had convincingly reaffirmed the 
importance of the Non-Proliferation Treaty for international peace and 
security as well as the Agency's key role in ensuring the implementation of 
its basic provisions. 
66. The Soviet Union's offer to accept Agency safeguards on several of its 
nuclear facilities would help to promote accession to NPT. His delegation 
therefore welcomed the conclusion of the safeguards agreement between the 
Soviet Union and the Agency. 
67. It was particularly gratifying to note that in 1984 there had again 
been no indication of diversion. Considerable effort was still needed on the 
part of both the Agency and the Member States if the objectivity and 
reliability of the annual safeguards report was to continue to increase. For 
that reason, his delegation wished to encourage the Agency to persist in its 
endeavours with a view to more satisfactory goal attainment by further 
improving the planning and evaluation of inspections and to making the 
statements under paragraphs 90(a) and (b) of document INFCIRC/153 more useful 
to Member States, thereby enabling them to take timely corrective action. 
68. His Government supported the Agency's attempts to improve the training 
of inspectors, and had therefore expressed its willingness to hold two 
training courses in 1985 for newly recruited inspectors and one course for 
safeguards trainees from developing countries. 
69. Safeguards issues were also playing an essential role in the 
deliberations of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS). The fact that 
recently there had been some progress was encouraging. The Committee should 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 22 


continue its work in a constructive and co-operative spirit so that it would 
eventually be able to find satisfactory ways of assuring the supply of fuel 
and equipment and of applying safeguards. 


70. A final problem related to nuclear safeguards was physical protection. 
The Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material could serve as 
an additional instrument in preventing the misuse of nuclear material and all 
States should therefore accede to it. 
71. Further development of the uses of nuclear energy for the benefit of 
all peoples required, first and foremost, peace - and especially nuclear 
peace. Preservation of peace and security was one of the main objectives of 
the United Nations, which had been founded 40 years before following the 
victory over fascism. 
72. The Agency, as an autonomous body within the United Nations family, was 
deeply involved in the endeavour to achieve that goal. It discharged its 
obligation to strengthen peace and security in the world in collaboration with 
its Member States by verifying that nuclear material and equipment intended 
for peaceful uses were not diverted for military purposes. 
73. For further success in securing peace it was necessary not only that 
all States become party to NPT and that all non-nuclear-weapon States accept 
full-scope safeguards, but also - and primarily - that any misuse of nuclear 
energy for belligerent purposes should be prevented and outlawed forever. A 
great step in that direction would be taken if all nuclear-weapon States 
undertook to halt nuclear-weapons tests, to renounce the first use of nuclear 
weapons, to freeze nuclear arsenals, to reduce the number of nuclear weapons 
step by step and to prevent the militarization of outer space. 
74. Time and again the Soviet Union had made highly constructive proposals 
concerning the attainment of those goals - goals which were in the vital 
interest of mankind. The Government and the people of the German Democratic 
Republic strongly supported such far-reaching proposals and initiatives for 
world-wide security. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 23 


75. Under the terms of the Charter of the United Nations all Member States 
undertook further "to employ international machinery for the promotion of the 
economic and social advancement of all peoples". In the nuclear field, those 
undertakings had become the Agency's objectives, which were to "seek to 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world." It was because of its endeavours to meet 
the requirements resulting from those ambitious objectives that the Agency was 
held in high esteem. To fulfil its mission, however, the Agency needed the 
active co-operation of all its Member States. His country, for its part, 
would continue assuredly to support the Agency to the best of its ability. 
76. Mr. LINDBLOM (Finland) first recalled with pleasure the Director 
General's recent visit to Finland, which had been a success and had reinforced 
the sound basis, already existant, for continued co-operation between his 
country and the Agency. 
77. The applications of nuclear energy, whether for power production or 
not, had become a vital part of present-day life. Nuclear energy was already 
one of the most important sources of electricity production in the world and 
its use would continue to grow. That trend was reflected in the Agency's 
Annual Report for 1984 and had been stressed by the Director General in his 
opening address. Nuclear power had proved to be both economically competitive 
and environmentally safe. 
78. Nevertheless, one should not lose sight of the ominous link between the 
peaceful nuclear fuel cycle and the production of the most destructive weapons 
known to mankind. The dreadful consequences of the use of nuclear weapons 
40 years before had recently been brought back to mind. Efforts should be 
made to ensure that such weapons were never used again. 
79. At the Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT, which had ended 
the previous week, the overwhelming majority of Member States of the Agency 
had reiterated their determination to work together to rid the world of 
nuclear weapons. Those countries had in that manner reaffirmed their 
conviction that NPT was the most important instrument serving the fundamental 
interests of the international community in terms of security; they had also 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 


page 24 


made it clear once again that broad accession to the Treaty was by far the 
best guarantee against the proliferation of nuclear weapons and an essential 
factor in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


80. The two statutory objectives of the Agency should therefore be given 
equal emphasis: to promote the use of nuclear energy for peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world, and to ensure that the assistance provided by 
the Agency was not used to further any military purposes. During the 30 years 
of its existence, the Agency had discharged both those functions admirably 
within the limits of its competence and the Annual Report showed that it was 
continuing to do so. The Agency's main programmes and its central role in the 
international non-proliferation regime had helped to build up the confidence 
between States that was a prerequisite for the continuing peaceful use of 
nuclear energy and for strengthening international security. The 
international network of nuclear trade and co-operation would be inconceivable 
without the guidance, standards and guarantees provided by the Agency. If the 
Agency was to play that vital role successfully, its structure and activities 
had to observe the principle of universality without any discrimination. 
81. Nuclear energy had often been perceived as a symbol of "hard" 
technology by the sector of the population worried about possible changes that 
nature might undergo and about potential ecological disasters. Another 
concern was that nuclear energy and, perhaps, a number of other new 
technologies were creating a society in which the majority would feel too 
dependent on a small group of experts talcing decisions. Carried further, 
there were also fears that such decision-making could be abused. Mutual 
confidence among all sectors of society had to be strengthened in order to 
solve that problem. The democratic aspects of decision-making procedures 
should also be emphasized. 
82. His Government had submitted for parliamentary approval a new nuclear 
energy bill which was based on those considerations and which aimed at 
modernizing the nuclear energy legislation enacted in the 1950s. Under the 
new law, major nuclear facilities such as power plants and waste storage 
repositories would require parliamentary approval in principle. However, 
parliament would not be expected to decide what kind or what make of nuclear 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 25 


power plant should be chosen, but rather, in each case, whether nuclear power 
was an acceptable and viable solution. The democratic nature of that decision 
process was further enhanced by the stipulation that municipal councils could 
veto the project if it did not meet with their approval. 


83. The Finnish authorities believed that responsibility for the safety of 
nuclear power should be borne by the electricity utilities throughout the 
whole fuel cycle until such time as the nuclear facilities were decommissioned 
and the nuclear wastes were finally disposed of or exported. The State would 
assume responsibility for safe final disposal only after the safety 
authorities had certified that the wastes had been duly stored and that all 
safety precautions had been taken. 
84. Several decades would be needed before the actual waste disposal 
operations could begin. To ensure that waste management costs were 
incorporated into the energy prices at the time the energy was produced, the 
electricity utilities should make advance contributions to a State-operated 
waste management fund to cover the future waste management and decommissioning 
costs. The fund would pay a fixed interest at a rate higher than the rate of 
inflation. Under the new proposal, the electricity utilities would be able to 
borrow back up to 75% of what they had paid into the fund. The remaining 25% 
could then be borrowed by the State at the above rate of interest. To 
estimate the sums to be funded, future waste management costs would not be 
discounted in the same way as in many other countries, but would be estimated 
on the basis of current prices and technology. The sums required for the fund 
would be adjusted annually to take into account existing price levels and 
technological innovations. At present, waste management costs could be 
estimated at about 10% of the cost of producing nuclear electricity. That 
cost included the decommissioning of facilities and direct final disposal of 
spent fuel without reprocessing. 
85. In 1984, nuclear energy accounted for about 40% of the electricity 
production in Finland - one of the highest rates in the world. All four 
nuclear units had availability factors close to 90%. The safety record had 
been more than satisfactory - there had been no incidents of a serious nature 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 26 


and very few malfunctions. Nuclear energy was at present by far the most 


economical source of electrical power. 


86. In view of that satisfactory operating experience, there was no doubt 
that the new nuclear legislation in Finland would prove viable and no drastic 
decision to curtail nuclear power would be taken in his country. The 
enactment of the new laws would also make it possible to ratify the Convention 
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
87. Finland did not have the necessary resources to set up the entire 
infrastructure required to construct nuclear power plants or to supply them 
with nuclear fuel. It therefore depended in many respects on material and 
services supplied by other countries. 
88. The nuclear power plants in his country had been built in the late 
1970s and most of the equipment and components required had been imported and 
adapted to meet his country's requirements and to accommodate safety-related 
concepts and standards. His country's experience was based on the bilateral 
and multilateral co-operation agreements signed with both the East and the 
West. With regard to the study on small and medium power reactors which the 
Agency was making and in which Finnish industry was also taking part, his 
country was ready to share its experience with other States, especially with 
those which were party to NPT. 
89. Finland was willing to assist the Agency in its work on reactor 
safety. It would therefore invite an Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) 
to Finland and share Finnish experience with it. He welcomed the 
recommendations and codes of practice drawn up by the Agency, and was sure 
that they had been and would be of great value to many countries and would 
help the development of international trade. 
90. Waste management was one of the key issues of public concern. For a 
small country, waste management involved specific problems. There were not 
yet any international waste repositories in existence and few countries seemed 
willing to offer final disposal facilities for nuclear waste stemming from 
other countries. That meant that the cost of waste disposal per unit of 
generated electricity was high in countries with only a few power plants. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 27 


From the standpoint of nuclear safety a large number of final repositories was 
not the best internationally acceptable solution. His country looked forward 
to more international co-operation in that area in the future. It also 
expected more technical demonstrations of waste management from countries with 
greater experience and more nuclear power plants. 


91. It was gratifying to note that the Agency, in carrying out its 
safeguards obligations, had not detected any diversion of a significant amount 
of safeguarded nuclear material for the manufacture of any nuclear weapon, or 
for any other military purpose, or for the manufacture of any other nuclear 
explosive device. At the same time, his country continued to be concerned at 
the fact that in six non-nuclear-weapon States unsafeguarded facilities of 
significance were in operation or under construction. 
92. In spite of the success of the Agency's safeguards system, there was no 
cause for complacency. The system was constantly facing new challenges. 
There was a steady growth in the number of nuclear facilities other than 
reactors, and that placed increasingly heavy demands on the Agency's 
inspectors in both qualitative and quantitative terms. To mention but one 
example, new enrichment technologies were continually being developed and they 
would inevitably require the development of more sophisticated methods of 
inspection. It might also be necessary to envisage entirely new technical and 
institutional arrangements. 
93. It was therefore essential to provide the Agency with the necessary 
resources to maintain the high level of confidence in its safeguards system 
which was vital for all countries, regardless of their options in the field of 
power production or their military doctrines. The Agency's safeguards system 
was also a necessary condition for international trade in nuclear materials 
and co-operation on a predictable, equitable and mutually beneficial basis. 
It was to be hoped that all States would do their best to assist the Agency in 
operating and improving the safeguards system. Experience gained by both the 
Finnish authorites and Finland's electricity utilities confirmed that 
safeguards implementation did not in any way hamper economic or technological 
development. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.270 
page 28 


94. Although the ultimate goal was, in his opinion, that all countries 
should accede to NPT, certain intermediate steps could obviously be taken; 
thus, all non-nuclear-weapon States should make a legally binding commitment 
to non-proliferation and place all their nuclear activities, both present and 
future, under full-scope safeguards so that that commitment could be 
verified. His country also urged all supplier States to keep that goal in 
mind when deciding on their nuclear export policies. There was no way of 
arriving at internationally acceptable norms for assurances of supply without 
effective assurances of non-proliferation. Finland continued to support the 
efforts made by the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) in its search for 
such norms and noted with satisfaction that the differences of opinion within 
the Committee had been narrowed down. 
95. His Government had noted with particular satisfaction that four of the 
five nuclear-weapon States had voluntarily placed some of their facilities 
under Agency safeguards. In that connection, all nuclear-weapon States should 
take steps to separate their civilian and military nuclear activities and 
undertake not to divert nuclear materials in peaceful uses to the manufacture 
of nuclear weapons or to other military uses. 
The meeting rose at 5 p.m. 



/ 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
International Atomic Energy Agency March 1986* 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 24 September 1985, at 10.20 a.m. 


President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 
later: Mr. WALKER (New Zealand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
Paragraphs 


provisional 
agenda** 


Arrangements for the Conference 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
of items for initial discussion 1 (
b) 
Closing date of the session and 
opening date of the next session 
General debate and annual report for 1984 
(resumed) Statements by the delegates of: 


Republic of Korea 8 -29 
Pakistan 


30 -50 
France 51 -89 
Hungary 90 -106 
United Kingdom 107 -121 


Federal Republic of Germany 122 -140 
China 141 -153 
Islamic Republic of Iran 154 -169 


*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 2 October 1985. 


**/ GC(XXIX)/746 and Add.1. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-1075 
0349e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXIX)/746 and Add.1) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee, 
at its meeting the previous day, had authorized him to report on the outcome 
of its consideration of the agenda and the allocation of items for initial 
discussion. The General Committee recommended that the agenda consist of all 
the items on the provisional agenda set forth in document GC(XXlX)/746, 
together with the supplementary item contained in document GC(XXIX)/746/Add.1. 
2. A member of the General Committee had expressed a reservation 
concerning the inclusion of the supplementary item. 
3. The General Committee further recommended that those items be allocated 
for initial discussion as indicated in documents GC(XXIX)/746 and 
GC(XXIX)/746/Add.1. 
4. Finally, the General Committee recommended that the supplementary item 
contained in document GC(XXIX)/746/Add.1 be included immediately after 
item 10, with the consequential renumbering of the subsequent items, and that 
the items be taken in the order in which they would then appear, subject to 
the understanding that changes might have to be made in the course of business 
so as to make the best use of the available time. 
5. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
6. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee 
had authorized him to report that it recommended fixing Friday, 
27 September 1985, as the closing date of the twenty-ninth regular session and 
Monday, 29 September 1986, as the opening date of the thirtieth regular 
session of the General Conference, to be held in Vienna. 
7. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr.1) (resumed) 


8. Mr. KWON (Republic of Korea) said that vitalizing the nuclear 
industry was a matter of great international concern, a fact which the Fifth 
Pacific Basin Nuclear Conference, held in May in Seoul with the theme of 
"Interdependency for a Vitalized Nuclear Industry", had fully recognized. 
That Conference had firmly concluded that the world's nuclear industry could 
and would be gradually vitalized despite stagnation caused by current 
constraints. 
9. That being so, the Director General should consider a programme aimed 
at revitalizing Member States' nuclear industries, thus ensuring an extensive 
use of nuclear power to cope with the energy shortage which would probably 
occur in the near future. 
10. The Republic of Korea was prepared to share with developing Member 
States its experience in initiating nuclear power projects, manpower training, 
domestic participation in nuclear power plant design and construction, and 
other fields of interest. 
11. The Seoul Conference, representing the world nuclear community, had 
fully recognized the importance of interdependency between countries at 
various stages of development for vitalizing the nuclear industry, and it had 
stressed that regional and international co-operation in the field of peaceful 
nuclear technology was more imperative than ever. Some important issues 
raised at the Seoul Conference would be carried over to the succeeding sixth 
Pacific Basin Nculear Conference to be held in Beijing in September 1987. 
12. Nuclear programmes in his country were constantly progressing, both 
qualitatively and quantitatively. One additional 950 MW pressurized water 
unit had gone into commercial operation the previous weekend. The Republic of 
Korea now had four operating nuclear power plants, and the nuclear share of 
the nation's total electrical installed capacity had increased to slightly 
over 20%. Five more PWR units were currently under construction, and would 
come into commercial operation at a rate of one per year from 1986. With all 
nine units in operation by 1989, nuclear capacity would increase to over 35%. 
The bid invitations for Korean nuclear units 11 and 12 would be issued in the 
very near future. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 4 


13. His Government was deeply concerned with nuclear safety, assurance of 
supply, the development of an indigenous capability for fuel design and 
fabrication as well as NSSS design, and the manufacture of nuclear-grade 
components and equipment. 
14. Nuclear power development strategy in Korea was being concentrated on 
standardizing future nuclear power plants and on maximum domestic 
participation, preferably throughout the nuclear sector, which would enable 
the country to keep abreast of the most important developments in the nuclear 
safety field. 
15. To that end, and in an attempt to improve national design and 
construction capability, it was his country's firm intention to increase local 
participation schemes substantially, thus encouraging local companies to work 
as the prime contractors for subsequent units (the authorities hoped, for 
nuclear units 13 and 14). 
16. In that regard, the Korea Electric Power Corporation planned to 
nominate local firms to supply nuclear equipment and components and to undertake 
installation services. The prime supplier would be totally responsible 
for overall project management as the prime contractor. 
17. The NSSS design work was being undertaken by the Korea Advanced Energy 
Research Institute. That Institute was also responsible for providing nuclear 
fuel fabrication software, while the Korea Nuclear Fuel Company would supply 
the fuel assemblies to all operating PWR units from 1989. It was estimated 
that over 200 tons of fabricated fuel would be needed annually from the 1990s 
for reloading operations. The current plan called for the construction of a 
commercial fuel fabrication plant by 1988. 
18. The achievement of national nuclear power development goals depended on 
timely deployment of qualified manpower in sufficient numbers. Most of the 
nuclear-related organizations in the country were pursuing intensive manpower 
training programmes either at their own in-house facilities or at professional 
training institutions. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 5 


19. The KAERI Nuclear Training Center had provided a wide range of courses 
for over fifteen years. In the current year, three IAEA-backed training 
courses had already been conducted at the Center, for which his Government was 
extremely grateful. It hoped that some of the Center's specific training 
courses could in future be offered to other Asian region participants. 
20. With regard to safety endeavours, various measures had been taken to 
gain public acceptance for the country's nuclear power programme. Of 
particular significance was the recent establishment of a safety assessment 
office under the direct control of the Minister of Science and Technology. 
21. His Government praised the Agency's work on nuclear safety, and would 
actively participate in its efforts to promote the exchange of information on 
safety issues. His country also took a keen interest in the Nuclear Safety 
Standards (NUSS) programme. 
22. The risk of nuclear-weapons proliferation was of concern to all. The 
Republic of Korea valued the Agency's efforts to make safeguards yet more 
effective and noted the implementation records with satisfaction. His 
delegation attached great importance to national as well as international 
efforts to minimize the danger of nuclear-weapons proliferation without 
jeopardizing the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
23. At the conclusion of the Third NPT Review Conference, the record of the 
foregoing five years clearly indicated the effectiveness of the international 
non-proliferation regime. His Government was pleased to note that the Review 
Conference's final declaration was unanimously agreed. 
24. The IAEA safeguards system was an extremely important vehicle for 
safeguarding a growing number of nuclear installations in Member States. 
However, there had been and still were occasional snags in the application of 
Agency safeguards; obviously they had to be applied on a non-discriminatory 
and equal basis, but in some cases that aim was not achieved. Ad hoc 
safeguards inspections at a certain nuclear facility took place frequently, it 
had to be said, and resulted in operational and economic difficulties. 

GC<XXIX)/OR.271 
page 6 


25. On the matter of Agency staffing, he was pleased to note that the 
Director General had made progress towards implementing the resolution on 
staffing adopted at the twenty-fifth session of the General Conference. 
Recognizing the increasing role played by the developing countries, 
particularly those which had a tangible nuclear power programme, and the need 
to recruit staff on a balanced geographical basis, his delegation strongly 
desired that the Director General should continue his efforts to increase the 
number of staff drawn from developing countries with active nuclear 
programmes, especially for the senior policy-making levels. His country had a 
comprehensive nuclear power programme, and his Government expressed its wish 
to play an even more active role in Agency policy-making by holding a seat on 
the Board of Governors for the coming year; a floating seat was available for 
the Far East region. He believed that, through such active participation, his 
country's nuclear programme could maintain closer bonds with the Agency and 
thereby serve as a bridge between the advanced and developing Member States. 
26. He was pleased to note that various projects under the RCA umbrella had 
been successfully carried out with the unsparing support of the Member States 
and the Agency. There was no doubt that the RCA had contributed greatly to 
promoting radiation and radioisotope techniques in his country. 
27. The Korean delegation considered it an honour to have been a member of 
the RCA for more than ten years and stressed that it would continue to give 
positive support to the Agreement's progress. The Republic of Korea would be 
hosting the eighth RCA Working Group Meeting in Seoul in the spring of 1986. 
28. The Republic of Korea believed that the benefits of nuclear energy for 
power and other peaceful uses had to be fully and fairly available to any 
country that both needed them and was capable of using them, having 
demonstrated its understanding of the obligations involved. 
29. In conclusion, his delegation wished to express its confidence that the 
Agency would continue to serve as a reliable instrument for the development of 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, while 
consistently ensuring the effectiveness of the international non-proliferation 
regime and, for that purpose, of its own safeguards regime. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 7 


30. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that it was not for him to comment on the 
outcome of the Third Review Conference of the NPT which had just concluded. 
His country supported all sincere and non-discriminatory initiatives to ensure 
both vertical and horizontal non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. However, 
the Agency was not a party to NPT and the terms and norms of that Treaty 
should not be imposed upon the general membership of the Agency and there 
should not be any discrimination between Member States based on their 
adherence to a particular regional or multinational treaty or arrangement, 
provided that they fully respected the Agency's Statute. 
31. The ascendency of the Super Powers in the development and deployment of 
nuclear weapons of mass destruction on the ground, under the sea and in space 
was unchallenged and their nuclear arsenals were increasing beyond any 
rational limits of self-defence. The earlier leadership of those countries in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy was being gradually eroded as more 
countries made progress in acquiring indigenous capability in the nuclear fuel 
cycle and nuclear power technology. That evolution should be welcomed as a 
healthy development for the wider growth of nuclear power. 
32. A deliberate policy of denying peaceful nuclear technology to the Third 
World countries would not succeed. An orderly and peaceful development of 
nuclear energy could be ensured only if there was a feeling of mutual trust 
and confidence between the supplier and recipient States. The norms of 
international trade and commerce in nuclear energy should be agreed upon 
through dialogue rather than imposed through coercion. His country had always 
supported the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and believed 
that a voluntary and negotiated agreement reached by that Committee would be 
more effective than the unilateral restrictions announced from time to time by 
the supplier States. While the Agency was the best forum for discussing the 
technical issues related to nuclear energy, the political aspects of 
co-operation and the economic and security implications of nuclear technology 
could best be discussed in the wider forum of the United Nations. It was to 
be hoped that the long delayed United Nations Conference on the Peaceful Uses 
of Nuclear Energy would be convened as soon as possible. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 8 


33. His Government had consistently supported measures for strengthening 
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime including the establishment 
of nuclear-free zones in different regions. The Conference of 
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States held in Geneva in 1968 had been convened at 
Pakistan's initiative to complement the objective of the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty for obtaining security guarantees for the non-nuclear-weapon States 
against nuclear threat or blackmail. His country supported the Agency's 
safeguards system which it believed should be applied to all Member States on 
a non-discriminatory basis. 
34. The growing stockpiles of nuclear weapons had not strengthened the 
security of the Super Powers, nor had they served the cause of world peace and 
the acquisition of nuclear weapons by the developing countries would also not 
contribute to their security but would constitute an unbearable burden on 
their limited economic and technical resources. For those reasons his country 
had taken important initiatives to reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation in 
its own region. It had advocated the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in South Asia and that proposal had received overwhelming support in the 
UN General Assembly. It had also expressed its willingness to subscribe to 
the NPT at the same time as India or to agree to reciprocal inspection of each 
other's nuclear facilities in order to assure the international community that 
nuclear weapons were not developed and introduced into the region. His 
country had also called for a formal joint declaration by the heads of the two 
Governments disavowing manufacture, acquisition or deployment of nuclear 
weapons. His country was prepared to enter into high-level consultations to 
consider those or any other positive and constructive proposals, which would 
ensure that the region would remain free from the scourge of nuclear weapons 
and that nuclear energy was used solely for the economic benefit of its 
peoples. 
35. Thirty-four new nuclear power plants had been established in thirteen 
countries during the previous year. That figure marked the largest annual 
increase since the early 1970s and was very encouraging, but it was disturbing 
to note that none of those reactors had been commissioned in any of the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 9 


developing countries which were in urgent need of nuclear power to promote 
their development. Nuclear power was economically competitive, operationally 


safe and environmentally benign and nuclear power plants under Agency 


safeguards posed no threat of proliferation. The nuclear industry in most of 
the industrialized countries was in a precarious position with a large 
unutilized manufacturing capability. There was an over-supply of uranium 
which had reduced its price; the enrichment capacity far exceeded the 
foreseeable requirements; and new cheaper, more economic methods of enrichment 
were being developed. There was a lack of demand for heavy-water production 
plants and for nuclear power plants. International commerce in nuclear power 
was at a standstill. 


36. That deplorable state of affairs was largely the result of the 
contradictory policies of supplier States, which were using nuclear power for 
political purposes and withholding it from the needy developing countries in 
order to gain certain objectives. Contrary to their declared objectives of 
promoting the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, they continued to deny 
peaceful nuclear technology to the energy-deficient developing countries. 
They used non-proliferation to justify that policy of denial but such a policy 
would be self-defeating since it was bound to generate strong political and 
economic motivation in the recipient States to seek greater self-reliance in 
nuclear power and as more countries were able to build their own nuclear power 
reactors and other facilities, they too would not be amenable to accepting 
safeguards on their indigenously produced facilities. The recipient States of 
the Third World were not willing to accept a permanent state of underdevelopment 
in nuclear technology. It would be better to seek to strengthen 
the non-proliferation regime through co-operation rather than to persist in a 
policy of denial. 
37. The unwarranted and unjustified Israeli attack on the Nuclear Reactor 
Centre in Iraq in June 1981, had done irreparable damage to the cause of the 
peaceful application of nuclear energy. It was imperative that Israel 
withdraw its threat to repeat such attacks on Iraq and other countries of the 
region, so that the nuclear facilities of those countries could be developed 
in an atmosphere of security. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 10 


38. The leading western countries, which enjoyed considerable influence 
with Israel should exert pressure on the Government of Israel to ensure that 
it complied with the provisions of resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 so that the 
issue, which was of deep concern to the international community, could be 
resolved in an equitable manner, without any further delay. 
39. There was also an urgent need for the international community to take 
strong and effective measures to prevent Israel or any other country from 
carrying out armed attacks with impunity against nuclear facilities devoted to 
peaceful purposes. His country fully endorsed the worldwide efforts for 
adopting an international convention, forbidding and preventing such attacks. 
40. His country strongly deplored the racial policies of the apartheid 
regime of South Africa which were directly responsible for the serious unrest 
in the country and which had been universally condemned. His country fully 
shared the concerns expressed about the nuclear programme of South Africa and 
was opposed to the continuation of any nuclear, military or economic 
co-operation with the racist regime of South Africa. 
41. There had been a welcome though modest increase in the resources made 
available for the technical co-operation programme of the Agency and his 
country was grateful to all those countries which had contributed to it. 
However, there were still a substantial number of technically sound projects, 
which could not be financed owing to lack of funds. 
42. For that reason, the technical assistance programme should be financed 
through the Regular Budget of the Agency or through other equally predictable 
and assured resources. The Agency should preserve a balance between its 
promotional and regulatory activities and treat them equally in terms of 
resource allocation and method of financing. 
43. His country, together with a number of other countries, had sponsored 
an amendment to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, which was designed to rectify 
the gross under-representation of the regions of Africa and the Middle East 
and South Asia on the Board. Despite the fact that the majority of Member 
States had supported an increase in the representation of those two regions on 
the Board, those regions had been denied their rights for more than a decade 
due to a lack of political will. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 11 


44. Another proposal had come forward for the revision of Article VI as a 
whole which would entail major structural changes in the composition of the 
Board instead of making limited changes to help rectify the glaring imbalance 
in the representation of the two specific regions. Although his country 
sympathized with the sponsors of that proposal for reviewing Article VI as a 
whole, it was felt that it would take a long time before a consensus emerged. 
Therefore, the limited amendments proposed in Article VI.A.2 should be carried 
out as soon as possible while efforts were continued to find a solution to the 
wider issue of the revision of Article VI as a whole. 
45. The efforts made by the Director General over the previous four years 
to increase the representation of developing countries at the policy-making 
level in the Secretariat were commendable. However, much still needed to be 
done before the goals set by resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 relating to a 
substantial increase in the number of staff members from developing countries 
at all levels were met. 
46. His country expressed its support for the programme and budget of the 
Agency in general and particularly appreciated its activities in the field of 
nuclear power, nuclear safety and health. The Agency should continue and 
intensify its efforts to promote the development of small and medium power 
reactors, which were of primary importance for the smaller grids of the 
developing countries. 
47. In view of the increasing need for peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy in developing countries, it was unrealistic to insist on a zero-growth 
concept for such programmes in the budget of the Agency. 
48. His country was continuing with the development of its peaceful nuclear 
energy programme in spite of the unilateral embargoes and restrictions. 
KANUPP had been operating successfully and was being regularly inspected by 
the Agency under its safeguards system. The planning of new nuclear power 
reactors was continuing. Nuclear power was the key to Pakistan's future 
economic development and represented the only viable alternative for 
overcoming the critical power shortages which it experienced. Use of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture had already made a significant impact on its 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 12 


national economy. The recent increase in the output of cotton crop was based 
partly on the use of a new mutant developed using nuclear techniques. Work, 
on the first gamma irradiation plant for sterilization of medical and 
agriculture products was proceeding and construction of the ninth nuclear 
medical centre would begin in the near future. 


49. The co-operation and support received from the Agency in the planning 
and implementation of various projects and programmes was very much 
appreciated. His country had been pleased to host the Seventh Working Group 
Meeting of RCA in March 1985 and to welcome 20 countries to its Annual Summer 
College on Physics in June 1985. 
50. Pakistan would continue to co-operate with the Director General in his 
endeavours to make the Agency an effective body for promoting both the 


regulatory and promotional programmes of the Agency. 


51. Mr. RENOH (France) said that because of its limited fossil fuel 
resources, France had long been making strenuous efforts to increase the 
nuclear share of its energy production, which now amounted to over 60%. For 
this purpose it had built up a nuclear industry covering all stages of the 
fuel cycle and power plant construction. Experience gained showed that 
greater international co-operation and exchange in the nuclear field, to which 
his country was particularly open, was vitally important. 
52. But the sensitivity of certain technologies employed in industry 
required a set of regulations offering assurances of non-diversion and in that 
connection France actively supported the Agency's safeguards system, which in 
order to receive international support, had always to be implemented with full 
respect for the sovereignty of the contracting States. All States freely 
entering into such international commitments had the right to nuclear energy 
and France would willingly share its experience with States embarking upon the 
nuclear path. 
53. France's experience had shown the feasibility of pursuing an 
independent energy policy under advantageous economic conditions. Its level 


of energy independence, which had fallen to 22.5% in 1973, today stood at 


42.6%. 



GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 13 


54. On the strength of the low cost price per kW/h obtained from fully 
standardized nuclear power plants constructed over a short space of time (five 
to six years), the nuclear share in national power consumption was increasing 
rapidly (23%), thereby giving impetus to modernization in numerous French 
industries. 
55. The mentioned figure of 60% for the nuclear share in electricity 
production would reach some 75% by 1990, when plants now under construction 
came into service. 
56. His country now had 61 units (of which 19 were under construction) with 
a total output of 60 000 MW and a fully established fuel cycle, and efforts 
were now focused on achieving high performance from those plants already in 
service by reducing outages for refuelling and maintenance and by increasing 
the operational flexibility of a set of reactors whose capacity already 
exceeded base load requirements. 
57. Availability of the standard 900 MW(e) reactors, the chief reactor type 
in France, had stood at more than 80% in 1984, and operational flexibility had 
been appreciably increased to cater for demand fluctuations within the grid. 
The latest technology was now rendering French nuclear plants more flexible 
than fossil-fuel plants. 
58. His country was also seeking greater energy independence through 
improvements within the fuel cycle. Despite a temporary world abundance of 
uranium, France was pursuing its policy of ore prospecting (accounting for 20% 
of world effort), and had contributed to the discovery of a 110 000 t uranium 
deposit with an unusually high ore grade (12%) at Cigar Lake in Canada. 
59. With regard to enrichment, the multinational Kurodif plant, with an 
annual capacity of 10.8 million separative work units (SWU), provided fuel for 
one out of three reactors in the West and offered economically attractive 
enrichment services. It was expected that laser enrichment techniques would 
be introduced in the 1990s. 
60. The 10 000th standard PWR fuel assembly had been fabricated at the end 
of 1984, while a new type of fuel called AFA had been developed. Moreover, 
the decision had been taken that year to produce a uranium piutonium fuel mix 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 14 


in order to utilize at an early stage plutonium stemming from reprocessing 
plants. A pilot facility was under construction at Cadarache for the 
fabrication of the first assemblies of that kind, while a project was being 
studied for a plant to produce 100 t per year, to respond to the demand 
expressed by Blectricite de France (EOF) for the early 1990s. 


61. By September 1985, the La Hague plant had reprocessed 1250 t of oxide 
fuel. The extension of this plant was going ahead according to plan and 
would raise its present nominal capacity from 400 to 1600 t/year by the early 
1990s. 
62. Work had been carried out on both high-level and low-level wastes. New 
surface storage sites had been sought, and the relevant proposals had been 
made to the French Government in 1985. So far, one site had been singled out 
as having the best features in conforming with the basic safety regulations 
governing radioactive waste disposal. 
63. In regard to high-level wastes, France was pursuing work on an 
underground laboratory, together with research into further improving 
technical procedures for classifying wastes, reducing their volume and their 
long-lived alpha-emitter content, improving the quality of the encapsulating 
materials used, and improving quality control. 
64. His country's faith in nuclear energy's contribution to world 
development was not confined to the implementation of present industrial 
production techniques - together with its European partners, France was 
preparing an almost inexhaustible source of energy for the future in the form 
of its fast breeder reactor. 
65. Superphenix had just demonstrated its technical and industrial reality 
by going critical for the first time on 7 September, an event which had 
coincided, to within a month, with the 40th anniversary of the Commissariat a 
1'Energie Atomique (CEA). Fast breeder technology would undoubtedly make a 
major contribution to world energy supplies by the beginning of the 21st 
century. Production of fast breeder reactors on an industrial scale could 
henceforth by envisaged, and a 1500 MW(e) industrial prototype was being 
studied. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 15 


66. It might be wondered, however, why France was investing so much effort 
in a fast breeder programme, just at the time when the world nuclear equipment 
programmes had slowed down, and when there was an abundance of uranium on the 
market with a spot price lower than US $16 per pound. 
67. Experience had shown that the energy market was subject to unexpected 
and sharp changes: the "golden age" of cheap oil had been preceded and 
followed by periods of shortage. Prices were now falling steeply, scarcely 
five years after the second oil crisis. One thing, however, was certain: 
the risk of shortage was ever present and its consequences were far worse than 
a surfeit. 
68. The French Government was convinced that the present situation with 
regard to uranium availability would change over the following years, and that 
it would be an unwise policy to slacken efforts aimed at increasing energy 
production efficiency. A new shortage would involve years of effort before 
equipment could be brought up to the level of meeting demands. 
69. Regarding new investments in nuclear projects, the Agency's statistics 
had shown that forecasts of installed capacity by 1990 were still below 
430 GW(e). In 1984, construction work had commenced on only 14 power plants 
totalling 11.3 GW(e). 
70. There were, however, encouraging signs of the opposite trend - the 
public image of nuclear technology had changed somewhat for the better, and 
although pockets of unfounded fear persisted, the contribution made by nuclear 
energy to mankind's well-being both in terms of energy supply and scientific 
development, was being appreciated more and more. 
71. Although there was little new construction work being undertaken at the 
present time, the commissioning of power plants built during the previous 
decade was going ahead at a great rate, giving rise to major developments in 
the fuel cycle industry and in power plant operation and maintenance 
services. The annual report for 1984 underlined that the world's installed 
nuclear power output in 1984 had totalled 220 GW(e), i.e. an annual increase 
of 17%, which was the biggest world increase since the early 1970s. Several 
countries which had previously considered themselves to be virtually 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 16 


uninvolved in the nuclear industry were now drawing up plans and concluding 
contracts in preparation for a return to international co-operation in that 
field. That development was foreseeable, given that many countries, like 
France, possessed insufficient fossil fuel resources and would eventually be 
drawn back, into the nuclear camp. 


72. Of course, the matter of financing nuclear power projects could be 
problematical, and the developing countries in particular might opt for lowor 
medium-output plants in order to reduce costs. In such a case France was 
prepared to make specific offers in that regard. 
73. France actively supported the Agency's efforts to promote nuclear 
technology with a view to world development. It also supported the Agency's 
activities involving bilateral co-operation, the forms of which included 
training in France for Agency fellows as well as missions by French experts to 
other countries. France also arranged training for professionals from 
abroad, for example, the annual courses held at the Institute National des 
Sciences et Techniques Nucleaires at Saclay. Training of that kind would be 
of great importance to future dec ision-makers and specialists when it came to 
defining and implementing their countries' energy policies. 
74. His Government therefore welcomed increased efforts to promote the use 
of nuclear techniques in the areas of agriculture, food production, medicine 
and hydrology. The Agency's activities in those areas should be pursued and 
expanded. 
75. The development of such technology could at the present stage have a 
major impact, even in those countries which would not subsequently be 
resorting to industrial nuclear power. It had to be borne in mind that the 
effectiveness of that kind of assistance lay in the quality of the experts, in 
choosing suitable equipment and in effective maintenance procedures. 
76. There had also to be a parallel effort in regard to scientific and 
professional training in the countries concerned. The systematic 
introduction of training programmes as part of technical assistance projects 
covering technology transfer responded to that need, and all those who had 
contributed to it were to be commended. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 17 


77. With regard to the funds allocated to technical assistance and 
co-operation, financed for the most part on a voluntary basis, his Government 
pledged its share of the target of US $33 million fixed by the Secretariat, 
insofar as it could be expected that those funds would be used effectively and 
subject to approval by the French Parliament. 
78. The programme on the planning and implementation of nuclear choices in 
developing countries was also fully in line with the long-term view by which 
the Agency's policy should be guided. His Government would welcome the 
inclusion in that programme of a few thoughts on the subject of suitable 
sources of funding. 
79. Activities relating to the fuel cycle, more especially radioactive 
waste management and storage, to which the Agency's budget accorded particular 
importance, matched developments in the operation of power reactors, of which 
the number in service was steadily growing. 
80. He noted with satisfaction that 15% of the Agency's total programme had 
been devoted to problems of nuclear safety as well as to initiatives recently 
taken by the Agency to meet requests for assistance or expertise in the matter 
of safety and radiation protection by countries implementing nuclear 
programmes. 
81. The work of the International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) 
should help to improve consistency in the Agency's activities in that field. 
82. Referring back to the question of international safeguards, his 
delegation noted with satisfaction that, as in preceding years, the 
Secretariat had been able to state that nuclear material under Agency 
safeguards in 1984 had remained in peaceful nuclear activities. The Agency's 
surveillance activities were a key factor in world nuclear development and 
France made systematic use of its safeguards system to keep check on its 
nuclear exports. 
83. The Agency's safeguards system was both reliable and credible, but it 
would have constantly to be improved to take account of the multiplicity and 
growing diversity of the facilities to be inspected. That would be necessary 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 18 


in order for it to maintain its credibility and effectiveness at a reasonable 
cost. His country would also prefer to see a safeguards system financed with 
equal sharing between all Member States. 


84. Discussions within the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGSI) had already made it possible to outline the different 
approaches within the present procedures applied. That work., however, was 
only in its infancy and there was need to pursue it in greater depth before 
its implementation could be envisaged. 
85. France was also continuing to participate in the safeguards support 
programme, the aim of which was to improve monitoring and inspection equipment 
and techniques employed by the Agency, as well as training of Agency 
inspectors. 
86. The Agency's budget for 1986 displayed a satisfying balance between 
promotional and safeguards activities. That fact was to be welcomed as the 
two activities were equally essential, and would now receive equal weighting 
in terms of the allocations made. 
87. It was also gratifying to note the considerable effort made by the 
Agency to streamline its budget which now met the requirement of zero growth 
of the Regular Budget. In that context, the constant endeavour to keep down 
costs while improving efficiency was an essential corollary to further 
development of the Agency's activities. 
88. The new system of holding intensive consultations with Member States 
when drafting the budget had shown the prime importance of identifying the 
priorities for programme implementation. It was hoped that the practice of 
budgetary constraints would continue. 
89. In conclusion, his delegation expressed its full support for the 
Agency's work, both as a whole and in the discharge of its individual 
responsibilities. That view was based on an in-depth analysis of the outlook, 
for nuclear development throughout the world in harmony with France's 
permanent commitments in favour of that development, of which he hoped France 
set an example. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 19 


90. Mr. TETENYT (Hungary) said that he first wished to congratulate 
the President of the General Conference on his election and also to express 
his best wishes to the Director General on the occasion of his reappointment 
for a new term of office. 
91. In the complex world situation of the present time it was appropriate 
to commemorate the great victory which 40 years before had ended the most 
terrible war in the history of mankind. That victory had made it possible to 
set up an international organization, the main objective of which was to 
maintain international peace and security. At the same time, however, it was 
a reminder that the first priority of international relations should be to end 
the nuclear arms race and prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
92. An important event of the previous two weeks had been the Third Review 
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons. The link between that Treaty and the Agency's activities was well 
known and it was gratifying to note that the main objectives of the Treaty had 
been attained, with no increase in the number of nuclear-weapon countries. 
The number of States acceding to NPT was now 130, making it the most 
widespread Treaty of its kind. 
93. His country attached particular importance to implementation of 
Article VI of NPT, under which all signatory States undertook to pursue 
negotiations aimed at the earliest possible cessation of the armaments race 
and at nuclear disarmament. It was regrettable that a number of politically 
and economically important countries had not yet adhered to the Treaty. 
94. More than ten years before a draft treaty had been submitted to the 
General Assembly of the United Nations for a total and overall ban on nuclear 
tests. The Soviet Union had recently announced a moratorium on its own tests 
and had called upon the other nuclear powers to do the same. It would be 
highly significant if, in the wake of the Soviet Union and China, other 
nuclear powers would commit themselves to not being the first to use nuclear 
weapons. All means available to the Agency should be set in motion to make 
NPT universal. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 20 


95. IAEA safeguards, which directly or indirectly promoted the 
non-proliferation regime, were highly important and Hungary had already made 
considerable efforts to foster such activity. As previously reported by his 
delegation, Hungary had developed a visual system for examining and 
identifying spent fuel assemblies and fuel elements. The system, which 
ensured optimum reproductivity of data, had already proved of great practical 
value in a number of countries. Hungary was prepared to offer the Agency its 
expertise in that field and to assist Agency inspectors in the practical 
application of the system. 
96. Hungary had also supported the Agency's safeguards activity in other 
ways. For example, to facilitate non-destructive measurements by Agency 
inspectors a permanent protection tube had been mounted, on a cost-free basis, 
in the wet storage basin used for spent fuel from the Central Physics Research 
Institute, and special collimators had been built into the wall of the storage 
basin at the Paks nuclear power station. 
97. At the same time, in addition to the positive achievements in Agency 
safeguards, his delegation felt there was need to mention some of the more 
problematic issues. It was noted, for example, that at certain facilities of 
primary importance from the safeguards standpoint, the safeguards goals had 
not been attained for many years. Although there might be technical reasons 
for that fact, more effort should be made by the Agency to achieve those goals 
and to increase the credibility of its safeguards system. 
98. Furthermore, there were other areas of the Secretariat where 
improvements and developments were feasible. For instance, it would be 
desirable - at least in the case of countries with minor nuclear activities to 
restore the duties of country officer, since it appeared that the recent 
abolition of that post had caused difficulties on both sides. But the 
Agency's achievements in introducing computerized processing of inspection 
data were highly appreciated and would make the conclusions with regard to 
safeguards activity not only more efficient, but also more objective. 
99. During the past year, Hungary's peaceful nuclear activities had made 
further headway. In the course of the previous winter, which had been 



GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 21 


particularly cold, the Hungarian nuclear power plant had proved a reliable 
source of energy, operating between 1 November 1984, and 31 March 1985, at 94% 
efficiency. 


100. The two WWER-440 units at present in operation at that power plant had 
produced a total of 9415 GWh of electricity by 30 June 1985. The high grade 
of work done during the design, construction and startup of the plant was 
shown by the fact that in 1984 availability of the first unit had been 75.3%, 
although the first refuelling and maintenance had taken up 74 days of the 
operation time for the year. 
101. The outages had been due mainly to refuelling and maintenance 
requirements, and only 1.5% was accounted for by incidents, the latter 
resulting to the extent of 66% from failure of mechanical components in the 
secondary circuit, and 25% from breakdown of the electrical equipment. 
102. Significant research and development work in the field of nuclear 
energy was envisaged under the five-year plan for 1986-1990. It was intended 
to concentrate on achieving optimum operation, better utilization and 
increased safety. It was also planned to establish the theoretical and 
experimental foundations for nation-wide application of probabilistic safety 
analysis, in which field the assistance of the Agency would be counted on. 
103. In addition to nuclear power, there had been steady development in 
other applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. After Budapest, 
the country town of Debrecen was becoming an important centre for nuclear 
research. A demonstration irradiation facility and a high-power neutron 
generator had been installed there with the assistance of the Agency. The 
cyclotron and associated laboratories at the Institute of Nuclear Research 
were also now nearing completion. That facility would be used for medical 
purposes as well as special isotope production. Clinical diagnostics and 
radiation therapy were also considered important activities and were being 
developed. 
104. The Hungarian Government greatly appreciated the Agency's efforts to 
attain its aims as set forth in the Statute. In addition to the safeguards 
activities already referred to, his delegation attributed great importance to 

GC(XXIX)/0R.271 
page 22 


the Agency's nuclear power and safety programmes. Also of special importance 
were the activities in waste management and the preservation of food by 


irradiation, as well as its programmes for promoting agricultural production 
and the food industry. 


105. After safeguards, the Agency's second most important area of activity 
was technical assistance and co-operation. It was gratifying to see that the 
funds available to the Agency for that purpose had been increasing. Hungary 
was contributing to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund to an 
ever-increasing extent both in terms of money and services. In that 
connection his delegation wished to pledge a voluntary contribution of 
3.6 million forints in national currency to the Fund for the year 1986. 
106. In consideration of the above and on the basis of the documents 
submitted for consideration by the General Conference, his delegation could, 
in conclusion, approve the Agency's Report for 1984. 
107. Mr. MORPHET (United Kingdom) said that the successes achieved by 
the Agency over the past year in support of the international development of 
peaceful nuclear power were impressive and should be a source of satisfaction 
to all. 
108. The Agency's unique safeguards system was vital to confidence that 
trade in nuclear materials, equipment and technology could be carried out 
without leading to proliferation of nuclear-weapons capability, and it was the 
responsibility of Member States to ensure that safeguards inspectors were 
equipped to meet the challenges of safeguarding plants using new 
technologies. Two ways of doing that were to give the Agency full 
co-operation in developing techniques for safeguarding the more advanced 
facilities already existing in some countries, and to ensure that safeguards 
considerations were given full weight at the design stage, when new facilities 
were still under consideration. On the first point, a great deal of effort 
had been put into identifying ways of safeguarding centrifuge enrichment 
plants. Over the period November 1980-March 1983 the Hexapartite Safeguards 
Project, chaired by the United Kingdom, had developed an internationally 
acceptable safeguards approach for such plants. The first specific agreement 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 23 


based on that approach, in respect of Almelo in the Netherlands, had recently 
been reported. Similar negotiations in relation to the Urenco-UK facility at 
Capenhurst in the United Kingdom had been conducted during the past sixteen 
months and his country was now ready to accept Agency safeguards at that 
facility under its voluntary offer. 


109. The United Kingdom had always adopted a responsible attitude to the 
safeguarding of advanced nuclear facilities and had co-operated closely in the 
application of Agency safeguards to the prototype fast reactor and its 
associated reprocessing plant at Dounreay in Scotland. It would also continue 
to play a full part in the development of safeguards technology, for instance 
by offering the use of major facilities and their staff for the purpose of 
training Agency inspectors. 
110. A specific example of taking safeguards considerations into account at 
the design stage of new installations was constituted by the development of 
laser technology for enrichment. In the past, the application of safeguards 
had tended to lag behind the introduction of new technologies, but that need 
not be the case in future, and his Government was encouraging the nuclear 
industry to take careful account of safeguards considerations in its design 
work. 
111. The management of spent fuel and waste was a key area of the Agency's 
work of considerable interest to its Members because the issues involved were 
of fundamental importance to the development of nuclear power. The nuclear 
industry in the United Kingdom was committed to the reprocessing of spent fuel 
from the present generation of reactors and would continue to offer 
reprocessing services to overseas customers under very high levels of 
security. Magnox fuel was normally stored in ponds on discharge from the 
reactor and had to be reprocessed quickly because it suffered a corrosion 
reaction. Advanced gas-cooled reactor (AGR) fuel had a longer storage life 
under water but also had to be reprocessed within a reasonable time. Apart 
from the industry's commitments to overseas customers, therefore, important 
technical reasons gave rise to a real need for the new thermal oxide 
reprocessing plant (THORP) currently under construction at Sellafield. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 24 


112. Looking further ahead, neither the industry nor his Government had 
taken a firm view on whether early reprocessing or a prolonged period of 
storage followed by either reprocessing or direct disposal would be preferable 
for the management of fuel from future reactors. The issue was by no means 
straightforward, and the points to be considered included economic, 
radiological and social/environmental aspects. Recent studies, including work 
by international organizations, had suggested that economics of the various 
options were finely balanced according to the particular circumstances in each 
country. Much depended on the assumptions made, for instance, about fast 
reactor development and future uranium prices. There were many uncertainties 
in such analyses. Some countries might see strategic as well as economic 
advantages in recovering uranium and plutonium from spent fuel. Certainly his 
country, which had no indigenous uranium resources, had made use of recycled 
uranium. About 80% of the fissile material for the initial charges for the 
AGR programme had come from Magnox operations. For radiological reasons, at 
least a few years* storage was needed before spent fuel could be treated to 
allow the intense radioactivity to decay. Reprocessing involved a radiation 
dose to the work force which could, however, be held at a small fraction of 
the limits recommended in the basic safety standards of the Agency and of WHO, 
ILO and NEA. After reprocessing it was possible to incorporate the waste 
products in a stable matrix to give high levels of protection. Direct 
disposal had the disadvantage that almost all of the original uranium was 
treated as a waste product, which had implications for the conservation of 
resources and for radiological control in uranium mining and the long-term 
management of mining wastes. 
113. Concerns had of course been expressed about the environmental impact of 
reprocessing plants, but it would be wrong to ignore the considerable 
improvements in control, including reduction of discharges to the environment, 
which were achieved under modern standards and the considerable investment 
which was being made to achieve such improvements. 
114. While plutonium represented a valuable potential energy source for the 
world, its storage and handling called for the closest attention to safety, 


and where it was traded its end use must also be watched carefully. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 25 


Quantities of spent fuel could be expected to increase signficantly as nuclear 
power programmes expanded. Management of those quantities constituted a 
long-term commitment of the nuclear industry and its regulators requiring the 
development of appropriate strategies, one component in which would be a 
balanced programme of reprocessing and recycling. 


115. The Board of Governors had already directed some attention to the 
establishment of storage schemes in implementation of Article XII.A.5 of the 
Statute. His country believed that the Agency should have an effective 
mechanism for that purpose and that there was a strong case for minimizing the 
number of storage locations. A recent decision by the members of the European 
Community on trading conditions illustrated both the sensitivity of the topic 
and the possibility of making progress: all those States had a strong 
commitment to non-proliferation and had set up a common market in civil 
nuclear materials. Nevertheless, they had recognized the great sensitivity of 
trade in plutonium and had specifically agreed on the peaceful purposes for 
which trade in plutonium would be allowed and on the need for each consignment 
to be covered by assurances regarding end use. Perhaps elements of such a 
system could have wider application. 
116. The Agency's work on technical assistance was also of key importance. 
The resources available for the technical assistance and co-operation 
programme had nearly doubled over the last five years. Further amounts had 
been made available from the Agency's Regular Budget, and the work of the 
technical Divisions of the Agency itself contributed significantly to the 
transfer of technology. Extrabudgetary funds also played an important role in 
funding the Agency's technical assistance. His country had been glad to give 
assistance in that area and had announced at the Third NPT Review Conference 
that it would continue to provide extrabudgetary funds for footnote a/ 
projects and would double the amount of its contribution over the period up to 
1990. 
117. It was important that assistance should be put to effective use. Hence 
it was gratifying to note that implementation rates had continued to improve 
and had reached 65% in 1984. In terms of disbursements, which might be taken 
as a measure of work accomplished, there had been a 90% increase in 1984 over 
1983. Nevertheless, further efficiency gains were possible, and his country, 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 26 


along with a number of others at the Review Conference, had co-sponsored a 
working paper which recognized the importance of the IAEA's technical 
assistance programme as the main element in the dissemination of nuclear 
technology for peaceful uses and put forward a series of proposals for 


improving technology transfer mechanisms, including reinforcement of the 
Agency's aid to countries seeking finance from organizations such as the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 


118. Over the last two years, the Agency had contributed to a comprehensive 
scientific review of the environmental effects of the sea disposal of 
radioactive waste which was currently being discussed at the Consultative 
Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the London Dumping Convention. The 
Agency had also been engaged in revising, at the request of the Contracting 
Parties, the definition of radioactive wastes not to be dumped at sea and the 
Board of Governors, at its meetings immediately preceding the present session 
of the General Conference, had agreed to transmit the revised definition to 
the Contracting Parties. His Government had considered the results of those 
reviews carefully and remained satisfied that there was no reason further to 
restrict sea disposal of radioactive waste, provided it was carried out in 
accordance with existing international recommendations, and that it was both 
prudent and reasonable to continue to retain sea disposal as one of the 
available options. 
119. His Governement was very glad to note that the Committee on Assurances 
of Supply (CAS) had made significant progress during the last year in 
formulating a consensus on the conditions which should apply to nuclear 
trade. His Government also approved of the Agency's continuing its work on 
small and medium power reactors because it was important to ascertain whether 
the circle of countries benefiting from nuclear power could be widened by 
means of smaller reactors. 
120. His Government, being satisfied with the Agency's work, also welcomed 
the Final Document of the Third NPT Review Conference because of the strong 
support expressed there for the Agency's safeguards and technical assistance 
work. The view had been put forward that the Agency's technical assistance 
worked well in general but could benefit from fine tuning; it had also been 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 27 


suggested that the funding of nuclear power programmes in developing countries 
should be strengthened. His delegation looked forward to hearing the Director 
General's views on all the references to the IAEA in the Final Document. 


121. In conclusion, he said that the United Kingdom had for nearly 30 years 
been using nuclear energy for civil power generation and had developed a range 
of organizations spanning the entire fuel cycle for power production as well 
as all other aspects of the use of nuclear energy. His country had assigned 
an important role to the nuclear component in its energy strategy, and had 
always sought to develop civil nuclear power as efficiently as possible under 
the highest standards of safety and security. Those continued to be his 
country's aims in its future plans, which included bringing into operation a 
most modern fuel cycle plant. The United Kingdom retained its commitment to 
backing all its efforts with adequate research so as to be confident in the 
technology it deployed. Not least, it intended to stand by its commitment to 
supporting the IAEA fully in its objectives. 
122. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) said that the past 
year had been witness to a considerable increase in the installed capacity of 
nuclear power. The future would be marked by a tendency towards steady 
growth, a fact that had been confirmed by the increased share of nuclear power 
in the world's overall electricity production, which now accounted for 13%. 
At the same time there had been a slow-down in the construction of new nuclear 
power plants. 
123. The Agency's important mission would continue as the application of 
nuclear techniques progressed. Its activities had been of great benefit to 
many countries and at the same time its safeguards system had helped to make 
the world feel safer. 
124. The Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT had shown the broad 
international support for that Treaty and it was encouraging to note that the 
Conference had also reconfirmed the importance of the Agency's work in 
safeguards and nuclear co-operation. 
125. In the Federal Republic of Germany there had been headway in all areas 
of nuclear power and its fuel cycle. There were now 19 nuclear power plants 
in operation with a total capacity of some 17 000 MW(e), representing an 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 28 


increase of 41% over 1983. The country's total nuclear capacity would reach 
20 000 MW(e) by 1987, and 24 300 MW(e) by 1990. In 1984 nuclear power plants 
had accounted for 27.6% of the public electric power generation. With a total 
production of 10.15 billion kWh in 1984, the Grafenrheinfeld power station 


(1240 MW(e)) had produced more electricity than any other nuclear power unit 
in the world for any one year. International statistics showed that the 
second and third places were taken by the stations at Krummel and Unterweser, 
both of which produced more than 10 billion kWh in 1984. 


126. Advanced reactor projects in the Federal Republic were progressing 
according to schedule: full commissioning of the 300 MW(e) high-temperature 
reactor at Schmehausen was scheduled for the end of 1985; the 300 MW(e) fast 
breeder reactor was nearing completion and due to start up in 1986; the first 
URENCO centrifuge enrichment, in the Federal Republic started up in August 
1985; a storage facility for spent fuel (1500 t) at Gorleben was ready for 
operation and construction of a second one at Ahaus had begun - in both cases, 
however, the licences were being contested in court proceedings; the PAMELA 
demonstration plant for vitrifying high-level waste at Mol (Belgium) had begun 
its test programme; the construction of two shafts for exploring the Gorleben 
salt dome for final storage of high-level waste was proceeding to schedule, 
and the KONRAD iron ore mine, now being converted into a repository for 
low-level waste and waste from the decommissioning of nuclear facilities, 
would be operational by 1989. 
127. The most important event of the past year had been the decision to 
build the first commercial reprocessing plant, to be operated by the DWK 
company. The new industrial complex, to be built at Wackersdorf in Bavaria, 
would also include a fuel reception and storage facility, a fuel fabrication 
plant, a radioactive waste conditioning plant and a waste storage facility. 
Cold operation of the plant was scheduled to start in 1993. The total cost 
would be DM 5 billion, which was to be provided solely from private funds. 
The decision to build the plant was based on a comprehensive study of the 
possible advantages from the safety standpoint of direct disposal versus 
reprocessing. From the study it was concluded that direct disposal did not 
offer decisive safety advantages and fell far short of the level of technical 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 29 


feasibility already attained in reprocessing. Hence for the time being direct 
disposal could not be considered an alternative to conditioning and disposal 
of nuclear waste after reprocessing, although that situation might well change 
in certain cases as research and development proceeded. 


128. Generally speaking, it could be said that in the Federal Republic of 
Germany nuclear energy continued to move towards a normal fully established 
and accepted energy source. Furthermore, industry was taking over full 
responsibility for the LWR fuel cycle and becoming more and more involved with 
the development and application of advanced nuclear technologies. With regard 
to the international activities of his country, he wished to mention in 
particular a memorandum of co-operation between German industry and China 
under an agreement signed in 1984. 
129. With regard to the Agency's activities, his delegation considered the 
Agency's safeguards system to be an essential element of non-proliferation 
policy. However, proliferation was first and foremost a political problem 
that could not be solved by purely technical means, although the 
confidence-building nature of safeguards was generally accepted as an 
indispensable component in an overall non-proliferation approach. The 
Agency's safeguards system was now generally recognized as a standard for 
world-wide nuclear co-operation and technology transfer. But his country 
fully accepted the notion that the credibility of safeguards also needed the 
readiness of supplier States to help other countries to acquire nuclear 
know-how. 
130. The Agency's safeguards system was now entering the stage of 
consolidation and optimization of the procedures and instrumentation. The 
Board of Governors and relevant advisory groups should improve the 
effectiveness and efficiency and also the consistency of the transparency of 
the system. All such endeavours were both useful and necessary. 
131. Germany welcomed the recent entry into force of the safeguards 
agreement between the Agency and the Soviet Union. 
132. Germany was continuing its safeguards support programme, especially in 
connection with large bulk-handling facilities and advanced reactors. For 
example, safeguards instrumentation had been developed in the Federal Republic 
for commercial-size fast breeder and high-temperature reactors. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 30 


133. The progress made by the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was 
heartening. It had managed to prepare a draft synthesis on the principles 
underlying its mandate. While acknowledging that the task of CAS was a 
complex one, he hoped that in due course final agreement would be reached. 
134. The Director General's report described the broad scope of the Agency's 
activities in technical assistance and co-operation. Resources available for 
it had increased remarkably over the past few years, accounting for 36 million 
dollars in 1984. Hence the Agency's efforts to improve its programme, more 
especially the project implementation rate, source utilization and more 
systematic evaluation of results were to be welcomed. 
135. The German Government had responded favourably to the Director 
General's request to support the initiative for intensifying regional 
co-operation in Latin America under the ARCAL programme and one of the project 
proposals under that new scheme would receive its support. His delegation was 
convinced that the regional effort would contribute to improved pooling of 
knowledge and utilization of resources as well as to greater co-operation 
between the countries taking part. 
136. His country was happy to be able to contribute significantly to the 
Agency's technical co-operation programme despite severe budgetary 
restrictions, and it pledged its full share for voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1986 and intended to make 
available additional, extrabudgetary resources. 
137. The results of the initial phase of the small and medium power reactor 
study completed in 1985 had been encouraging. It was a useful survey of the 
economic potential of such reactors and the maturity of available designs. 
Germany was interested in the development of small reactors based on both 
light-water and high-temperature technology geared to the needs of developing 
countries. In Germany, there was a renewal of efforts aimed at the conduct of 
detailed studies of that kind with a view to facilitating the elaboration of 
specific demonstration projects. The Agency could play a valuable role in 
promoting such efforts. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 31 


138. The assigning of high priority to nuclear safety was to be welcomed 
since the Agency had already played a constructive role in consultations and 
exchanges in that field. The fourth Nuclear Safety Review was a useful survey 
of the relevant international developments. Also to be welcomed was the 
Agency's work on the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme in 1985, and 
its willingness to assist with their implementation. The continued discussion 
of reactor safety research was particularly important and the recent Technical 
Committee meeting on that subject had shown that there was a very good basis 
for an in-depth exchange on a global scale. 
139. The International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG), which had 
started work in March 1985, would doubtless prove a good forum for discussion 
of safety issues, without interference in national regulatory responsibilities. 
140. In conclusion, his delegation wished to commend the Director General 
for his work over the past year and fully supported his renomination for a 
further term of office. 
141. Mr. ZHOU (China) said that the present session of the General 
Conference was the second one that China had attended since its admission to 
the Agency. Reviewing the Agency's work over the past year, one could say 
that it had done a great deal of useful work in helping Member States to 
develop nuclear power, carry out nuclear research and apply nuclear 
technology. The Agency's activities in promoting the development of small and 
medium sized power reactors, formulating nuclear safety standards, 
accelerating research in radiation protection, developing probabilistic risk 
assessment techniques and in various other related fields of nuclear energy 
were greatly appreciated. The steps taken by the Agency to improve the 
project implementation rate and enhance the efficiency of technical 
co-operation were praiseworthy. It had also played a positive role in 
promoting co-operation between Member States in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
142. Nevertheless, while recognizing the Agency's achievements one had to 
consider also the difficulties that it faced. The technical assistance 
provided was not yet sufficient to meet the needs of the developing countries 
and the proportion of safeguards expenditure in the Agency's budget had been 
increasing too rapidly. A greater effort would be required in order to 
overcome those problems. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 32 


143. China was a developing country with a vast amount of territory and a 
very large population. To attain the ambitious goals it had set for itself 
for socialist modernization by the end of the present century, China would 
have to exploit more fully its present nuclear industry and nuclear research 
facilities as well as deploy greater efforts in promoting the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy in every branch of the national economy. His country was now 
formulating a nuclear energy development programme of its own, with priority 
accorded to the construction of nuclear power stations in Guangdong and the 
eastern part of China, where the industry was concentrated and energy was in 
short supply. 
144. China already possessed research reactors, including high-flux and 
mini-neutron-source reactors as well as laboratory facilities, such as 
accelerators and an experimental nuclear fusion facility. China also 
possessed a fairly complete nuclear fuel cycle, ranging from uranium 
prospecting, mining, milling and enrichment to the disposal of nuclear 
wastes. It was planned to improve that industrial system in the future so as 
to cater for the increasing needs of China's nuclear power industry. 
145. In view of the importance of nuclear safety and radiation protection, 
there had been set up a Chinese national nuclear safety administration, which 
would seek to improve the existing nuclear safety regulations and draw up 
codes of practice and safety guides. 
146. There had already been marked socio-economic benefits for the national 
economy and public health from the application of isotopes, irradiation and 
nuclear technology. Use was also being made of radiometric technology and 
related instrumentation for the iron and steel, coal, metallurgical, chemical 
and other industries. In agriculture, radiation had been used to develop new 
varieties of crops, the cultivation of which already covered more than 
6.5 million hectares of land. Progress had been achieved as well in the 
preservation of food by irradiation and in 1986 the Agency planned to hold a 
seminar on that subject in China, at which the Chinese experience would be 
shared with other countries. 
147. China was a peace-loving country and stood in favour of nuclear 
disarmament. It needed peaceful conditions in order to be able to implement 
its modernization programme. The Chinese Government's decision to cut down 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 33 


the armed forces by one million men was a contribution to world peace. As far 
as nuclear policy was concerned, China supported the peaceful application of 
nuclear energy throughout the world for the benefit of mankind. Present and 
future co-operation with other countries in the nuclear field would be limited 
solely to peaceful purposes. As Premier Zhao Ziyang had declared in 1984, 
China was not in favour of nuclear proliferation and would not engage in it; 
nor would it help other countries to develop nuclear weapons. 


148. In line with its peaceful nuclear policy, China had carefully studied 
the safeguarding of civilian nuclear facilities. As a result, the Chinese 
Government had decided to voluntarily place some of its civilian facilities 
under Agency safeguards in due course, and would be discussing that matter 
with the Agency. It was to be stressed in that connection that the decision 
was based on China's independent foreign policy and not the result of any 
bilateral negotiations. 
149. China's modernization programme necessitated active international 
co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy and it therefore advocated 
wide-ranging collaboration between countries, organizations and experts based 
on principles of respect for national sovereignty, non-interference in the 
internal affairs of other countries, equality and mutual benefit. Following 
those principles, his country had since 1984 signed intergovernmental 
agreements with Argentina, Belgium, the United Kingdom, the United States of 
America and Japan, in addition to those already concluded with Yugoslavia, 
Italy, France and other countries. 
150. As a new Member of the Agency, China was already co-operating with the 
Agency and with other Member States. During the past year, Chinese 
representatives had attended over 50 specialized meetings and training courses 
as well as taking part in the fellowship activities sponsored or co-sponsored 
by the Agency. Nineteen research institutes in China had signed contracts and 
taken part in the co-ordinated research programme; China had also sent experts 
and delegations to visit the Agency, while the Agency had, in return, sent 
officials to China on a number of occasions. 
151. Since its admission to the Agency, China had made every effort to 
contribute to the Agency's technical co-operation activities. It was willing 
to share experience acquired in the nuclear industry and in nuclear research 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 34 


with other Member States on the principle that countries can learn from each 
other and in that way make up their deficiencies. In 1984 China had hosted 
training courses and international meetings. For example, a consultants' 
meeting on low-power research reactors and a training course on elementary 


analysis had recently been held in Beijing with success. 


152. His country had already joined INIS and had begun to supply it with 
information on Chinese nuclear science and technology. An application had 
been made for membership of the International Nuclear Data Committee as well. 
China had officially joined the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and 
the Pacific, which showed that co-operation with the Agency in the nuclear 
field would be further extended to cover a broader range of applications in 
industry, agriculture and medicine. 
153. During the short time it had been a Member of the Agency, China had 
developed good relations of co-operation both with the Agency and other Member 
States. His country would continue to render the Agency active support in its 
aim of promoting international co-operation in nuclear energy for the benefit 
of mankind. 
154. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his country 
aspired to the pure fundamentals of Islam and therefore endeavoured, in spite 
of all external pressures, to familiarize the world with the true teachings of 
that religion. The echoes of Islam could be heard in the hearts of the people 
of Africa, amongst the oppressed people of southern Lebanon and in the voices 
of all the repressed people of the world. The more pressure was exerted by 
the Super Powers upon Third World countries, the sooner the people of those 
countries would find their true paths and reach their desired goals. 
155. The nations of the Third World had long been under the control and at 
the mercy of the world Powers, and their natural resources had been 
transferred to a few countries whose industries were totally dependent upon 
such resources. According to the published statistics of the Agency 
(e.g. document GOV/2206), the share of the capitalistic countries in the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy had been increasing constantly, 
whereas the share of the Third World countries had followed a declining 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 35 


trend. The only reason for that state of affairs was the reluctance of the 
Super Powers to transfer technology to Third World countries, on the pretext 
of certain unfounded allegations. The oppressive countries introduced 
preventive tactics such as "export licences" for the transfer of their 
technology and know-how, but they were not prepared to accept any conditions 
when it came to pilfering the oil of the Middle East, which was the lifeline 
of its people, or to plundering the natural resources of Africa and South 
America. However, for the export of their products and know-how they created 
multitudes of terms and conditions. If such trends were not condemned by the 
non-aligned nations, then from the beginning of the twenty-first century the 
same Powers which had pilfered the natural resources of those nations would 
also retain their technological monopoly, and the longer the developing 
nations were kept away from such technology the harder it would be for them to 
gain any progress in those fields. 


156. In view, therefore, of the tendency of such countries to impose 
obstacles so as to restrict the transfer of technology and introduce 
self-styled and ill-intended political filters, the Islamic Republic of Iran 
wished to propose that the Third World countries recommend that international 
gatherings on nuclear science and technology should not be convened in 
imperialistic countries, particularly the United States of America because 
they did not refrain, even in technical and scientific matters, from 
interfering with the participation of the progressive countries of the Third 
World on various unfounded pretexts. 
157. The abhorrent policy of apartheid practised in South Africa had only 
recently led to atrocities and injustices inflicted upon the repressed black 
majority population of South Africa by a despotic minority white ruling group 
which was not only plundering the wealth of that mineral-rich country to build 
up its oppressive conventional forces, but was also actively involved in the 
non-peaceful applications of atomic energy in an attempt to gain access to the 
devastating potentials of a nuclear weapons arsenal. That represented a 
threat to the world in general and to the African people in particular. 
Moreover, it should not be forgotten that a close relationship and 
collaboration existed between the racist regime of South Africa and the 
occupying Zionist forces in Palestine, who were playing a similar role in the 
Middle East and posed the same actual and potential threats to the region as 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 36 


well as to other parts of the world. His Government sincerely hoped that as 
the solidarity and resistance of the people of Lebanon had helped defeat and 
repel the onslaught of the Zionist forces and their supporters, so the gleam 
of hope would soon appear in the sullen faces of the oppressed people of South 
Africa, a gleam which would no doubt lead to the inevitable radiance of 
victory. 


158. At a time when the Super Powers persisted in expanding their arsenals 
of nuclear weapons, the developing countries were increasingly being accused 
of promoting the proliferation of nuclear weapons, but of course such 
accusations were merely intended to divert attention from reality. Tensions 
were currently being built up between India and Pakistan by the Super Powers 
in an attempt to engage the two countries in a regional conflict on the 
pretext that one country was surpassing the nuclear capabilities of the 
other. That was why the news media of the Super Powers alternately decried 
the role of one country or the other in the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
159. His delegation had already proposed in previous sessions of the General 
Conference that the developing countries should seriously consider the 
establishment of a special international nuclear safeguards system for the 
non-discriminatory implementation of nuclear safeguards with a view to 
exerting effective control over the threat of nuclear weapons proliferation 
and thus ensuring world peace and security. 
160. Recent events in the conflict between his country and Iraq seemed to 
show that an august international body such as the IAEA was either unable to 
observe and implement its own adopted resolutions or else, more disturbingly, 
was strongly biased in its dealings with the affairs of its Member States. 
Iraq had attacked the Bushehr nuclear power plant three times so far. On each 
occasion the Agency had been notified in accordance with the appropriate 
procedures, and the case had been presented both to the Board of Governors and 
to the twenty-eighth regular session of the General Conference. During a 
meeting of the Board of Governors following the first attack, his delegation 
had pointed out that if no strong and appropriate measures were adopted 
against the Iraqi aggressions such attacks would be repeated. Unfortunately, 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 3 7 


no effective measures had been adopted by the Agency, so the Iraqi regime had 
attacked the Bushehr plant on two further occasions, with loss of life and 
more material damage. Full information on those attacks could be found in 
documents GOV/INF/471, GOV/INF/4 71/Add.1, GOV/INF/472 and GOV/INF/473. 


161. The response of the IAEA, or rather the lack thereof, suggested that 
such aggressions created an inconvenient conflict between the atrocities of 
aggressive regimes supported by Eastern or Western Powers on the one hand, and 
internationally adopted resolutions or codes of conduct on the other. It was 
not surprising, therefore, that the Powers supporting the aggressive regimes, 
not being able to reconcile the actions of their surrogates with the 
internationally adopted resolutions, preferred to remain silent. A prominent 
instance of such a conflict of interests was provided by General Conference 
resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407 as applied to the Iraqi military attacks on the 
Bushehr plant. 
162. It had often been argued that the Agency's lack of response to the 
military attacks was due to the fact that the Bushehr plant was not covered by 
Agency safeguards. However, as a signatory to NPT, his country had accepted 
safeguards procedures, and if the Bushehr plant had been completed as 
originally planned, it would definitely have come under an appropriate 
safeguards arrangement. Unit No. 1 was to have been provisonally accepted for 
safeguards implementation on 1 December 1980, and so the safeguards 
arrangements should have come into force by 1 December 1978, but they had not 
owing to delays caused by the Agency. Thus, since nuclear installations were 
evidently considered peaceful only if they were already subject to Agency 
safeguards, and since that condition had been fulfilled as far as the Islamic 
Republic of Iran was concerned, the military attacks on the Bushehr plant were 
clearly in contradiction with the resolutions in question. 
163. In that context the Iraqi regime, in a new spate of warmongery, had 
recently subjected Iranian cities and non-military installations to repeated 
bombing raids, and a number of bombs had struck locations around Iran's 
Nuclear Research Centre, which was devoted to peaceful purposes. Since the 
research reactor was operational and subject to safeguards inspections, the 
Agency's arguments for not taking any action against the attacks on the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 38 


Bushehr plant did not apply in the present case. Moreover, contrary to the 
statement by the Iraqi Resident Representative in his letter of 12 March 1985 
to the Director General, the Iraqi regime had no intention whatsoever of 
abiding by the Agency resolutions, particularly resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407. 
The Iranian Government felt compelled to report such incidents to the IAEA, 
but since earlier complaints to the Board of Governors and to the Director 
General had generally been ignored, the General Conference was now requested 
to urge the Director General to adopt stronger measures. All Member States, 
individually or collectively, were further urged to condemn the aggressor, to 
make every possible effort to prevent the recurrence of any further armed 
attacks against Iran's peaceful nuclear installations, to take the appropriate 
measures for full implementation of General Conference resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/407, and to support the spirit of the draft resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/742 submitted by the Islamic Republic of Iran at the 
twenty-eighth regular session of the General Conference. 


164. Turning to other matters, he said that the achievements of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had not so far been overly 
significant. As a result, no internationally binding regulations had emerged, 
and thus no predictable, reliable and generally assured sources of supply were 
at the disposal of developing Member States, which might encounter serious 
difficulties in consequence. For example, his country, before the victory of 
the Islamic Revolution, had signed a contract for the supply of nuclear fuel 
for its - safeguarded - research reactor with a United States company, and had 
complied with its obligations and effected payments of more than US $2 million 
for the delivery of the fuel. However, the company concerned had not 
fulfilled its obligations under pressure from the United States Government. 
Following that breach of agreement, as a result of which Iran had sustained 
direct and indirect damage amounting to well over $10 million, his country had 
applied to the Agency for assistance in obtaining the appropriate nuclear 
fuel; however, the Agency had not responded adequately. The Iranian 
delegation had in various CAS meetings stated its view that States accepting 
agreed and appropriate international safeguards applied through the Agency on 
a non-discriminatory basis should receive guaranteed assurances of supply, and 

GC(XX1X)/0R.271 
page 39 


would therefore continue to pursue that case of breach of agreement in the 
competent courts of law until such time as his country received what legally 
and rightfully belonged to it. 


165. The recent Third NPT Review Conference, intended to ascertain whether 
the objectives of NPT were being achieved, had unfortunately revealed that the 
Treaty was not being implemented effectively. In the first place, certain 
developing States had, gradually and over the years, managed to acquire a 
capability for manufacturing nuclear weapons, on a crude basis, simply on the 
pretext of not being NPT signatories. Secondly, the signatory States were at 
a double disadvantage in that, on the one hand, they fell behind in developing 
their nuclear capabilities on moral grounds as signatories of the Treaty, and 
on the other, they were discriminated against on political and ideological 
grounds by the nuclear-weapon States and nuclear material suppliers; thus, 
their pursuit of the peaceful application of atomic energy was also hampered. 
166. The United States Government's action in the case of nuclear fuel 
supply mentioned earlier constituted a clear violation of Article IV, 
Sections 1 and 2 of the Treaty, and an instance of discrimination by a 
nuclear-weapon State against a developing country. In view of such 
discriminatory acts, and of the progress made by other States, particularly 
those not party to the Treaty, in the field of nuclear weapons and the 
associated technologies, it seemed inevitable that the ratification of a new 
treaty would be reconsidered on the expiry of the present one, unless some 
assurances were provided that non-proliferation measures would not jeopardize 
the full exercise of the inalienable right of all States to apply and develop 
their peaceful nuclear energy programmes for economic and social development 
in conformity with their priorities, interests and needs, that all States 
would have access to and be free to acquire technology, equipment and 
materials for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, taking into account the 
particular needs of the developing countries, and that international 
co-operation in the nuclear field would be under agreed and appropriate 
international safeguards applied through the IAEA on a non-discriminatory 
basis in order to prevent effectively the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.271 
page 40 


167. In that connection, his Government considered that the implementation 
of safeguards at a very few specific nuclear installations in certain 
nuclear-weapon States was totally inadequate and superfluous in view of the 
continuing proliferation of the nuclear arsenals of those States. His 
country strongly disapproved of any form of proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
and insisted that it should be prevented by the implementation of 
non-discriminatory safeguards. 
168. As to the problem of financing technical assistance, that had already 
been recognized, but no serious measures had been taken in that respect and 
the uncertainty due to the voluntary nature of the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund still remained. The promotional activities of the Agency 
were so important for the developing countries that the financing of technical 
assistance must be placed on a predictable and assured basis. 
169. In conclusion, he wished to summarize briefly his country's most recent 
activities in the nuclear field. The Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, in 
addition to its other current activities, was planning to establish a centre 
for the application of nuclear energy in food and agriculture. A gamma 
irradiation centre was being commissioned which was primarily intended to 
provide gamma irradiation and support services for radiosterilization of 
disposable medical products, but was also expected to conduct additional 
research on an experimental basis for the radurization of foodstuffs, the 
radioprocessing of various polymeric materials and high-dose dosimetry. The 
Atomic Energy Organization of Iran also had several research projects in the 
field of plasma physics and nuclear fusion, including a small tokamak. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
April 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 24 September 1985, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. HIREMATH (India) 
later: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


General debate and annual report for 
1984 (continued) 1 - 118 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United Arab Emirates 1 -8 
Iraq 9 -19 
Holy See 20 -27 
Italy 28 -45 
Chile 46 -56 
Argentina 57 -69 
Brazil 70 -78 
Poland 79 -89 
Switzerland 90 -100 
Saudi Arabia 101 -110 


Reply by the delegate of Iraq 111 -114 
Reply by the delegate of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran 115 - 118 


*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 9 December 1985, 


**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-1408 
0411e 



GC(XX1X)/0R.272 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr.1) (continued) 


1. Mr AL-OWAIS (United Arab Emirates) said that the Director 
General's speech faithfully reflected the Agency's activities during the past 
year, as well as his untiring efforts in the service of the international 
community in the area of nuclear technology. His delegation thanked the 
Director General for his commendable unremitting efforts and for the interest 
which he showed in the affairs of Member States. His country set great store 
by the Agency's technical assistance programmes, which were designed to make 
nuclear techniques available to the whole of mankind without discrimination, 
and to use the atom as an instrument of peace and prosperity not as an 
instrument of destruction. The United Arab Emirates had benefited from the 
technical assistance programme during the past few years, and hoped to 
continue receiving the Agency's technical assistance, especially in the area 
of radioisotope applications, and particularly in hydrology, one of the main 
aims being to locate groundwater and ascertain the origins of its formation, 
its flow rate and recharge mechanisms as well as to determine rational 
utilization rates. In the area of nuclear medicine, his country had made 
great progress and several hospitals were using cobalt for diagnosis and 
treatment. His country was also following with interest the study and 
research programmes on small and medium power reactors. It was impatiently 
awaiting the time when new 50-100 MW power reactors would be developed, since 
they would be most suitable for small networks and isolated regions. It hoped 
that those carrying out research would endeavour to design reactors which were 
both simpler and more reliable. Lastly, efforts to standardize safety 
concepts and nuclear reactor requirements were extremely important and the 
present trend towards unifying safety concepts and objectives between States 
represented a very important step towards standardization of safety practices 
at the international level. 
2. The world was developing in very complex circumstances resulting from a 
combination of political, technical and economic factors which caused concern 
to many nations, particularly when those factors were connected with atomic 
energy, the militarization of space and "star wars". Those problems were 
3ssuming global proportions and endangering not only small States or 
non-nuclear-weapon States, but the whole world. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 3 


3. The safeguards system developed by the Agency to support national 
safeguards programmes and to permit the peaceful use of nuclear energy 
deserved respect and encouragement. Such a safeguards system could only be 
effective if it had international legal support. 
4. The hypothesis of an attack, on a nuclear installation had been well and 
truly confirmed by Israel's attack, on the Iraqi reactor in 1981. That reactor 
had at the time been under construction and subject to the controls of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, whereas the Israeli reactor remained 
outside the Non-Proliferation Treaty and outside the Agency's control. A no 
less serious danger existed in South Africa as a result of the arbitrary 
policies adopted by that State, which respected neither the decisions of the 
Agency nor the United Nations Charter. Such matters should not be regarded as 
outside the province of the Agency, inasmuch as it was a technical 
organization concerned with scientific research and studies on the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy. Nuclear energy was itself a political weapon, and even 
if politics should not triumph over science, talking about the subject could 
help to clarify certain important problems where politics and technology were 
interrelated. His country joined other peace-loving countries which had, at 
the General Conference, requested the Agency to do everything in its power to 
compel Israel to observe international agreements and to refrain from 
attacking peaceful installations. His country was concerned about stability 
in the Middle East, which had been disrupted by the Israeli attack, designed to 
implement that country's plans against the legitimate rights of the 
Palestinian and Lebanese peoples. 
5. The United Arab Emirates regretted the lack of any decision on an 
amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute concerning the 
representation of developing countries in Africa and the Middle East and South 
Asia - representation which was at present neither just nor fair. In view of 
the legitimacy of their claims, the failure to reach a decision could have an 
adverse effect on the Member States of those regions. 
6. Finally, his country believed that the nuclear powers should bear the 
costs of safeguards. It was unjust to finance safeguards from the Agency's 
Regular Budget and that practice had a negative effect on the Agency's 
activities and on the technical assistance provided to developing countries 
which were in such need of it. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 4 


7. Recalling a proposal made by the delegate of Saudi Arabia at the 
twenty-seventh session of the General Conference to hold the Conference only 
every two years, he said he shared the belief that there was no need for it to 
take place every year. Considerable savings could thereby be made, both for 
the Agency and for developing countries, and the preparatory work, of the 
Secretariat could be reduced. The resources saved as a result could be used 
more effectively for technical assistance. 
8. In conclusion, he wished the General Conference every success and 
expressed his confidence in the future of the Agency's activities. 
9. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that the Agency had an important role to 
play in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in various areas, such 
as power production, medicine, agriculture and industry, by providing direct 
or indirect technical assistance in the form of advisory services, training 
and the exchange of information. However, in order to improve the 
effectiveness of those activities, it was necessary to increase mutual 
confidence between the Members of the Agency and their confidence in the 
various organs of the Agency. Such confidence could only exist if Member 
States felt that there was fairness in the provision of services, in the 
composition of the Board of Governors and in the staffing of the Secretariat. 
10. For a long time, developing countries had been seeking to establish 
such confidence and had made three requests which the Board of Governors and 
the General Conference had been examining for several years without reaching 
an equitable solution. Those requests concerned the financing of technical 
assistance from the Regular Budget or other stable resources, so as not to 
have to rely on voluntary contributions - an arrangement which hampered many 
projects in the Agency's technical assistance programme and did not provide 
sufficient funds to implement footnote a/ projects; the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, to ensure equitable representation of countries 
from the areas of Africa and the Middle Bast and South Asia on the Board of 
Governors; and an increase in the number of staff from developing countries in 
the Agency's Secretariat. His delegation requested those delegates who were 
continuing to oppose a solution to those problems to show greater flexibility 
and understanding during the debates in the Committee of the Whole, in the 
interests of the Agency and of all Member States. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 5 


11. The precedent of a military attack, against a safeguarded peaceful 
nuclear installation, suffered by the Tamuz reactor in Iraq, would inevitably 
be repeated unless the international community shouldered unequivocally its 
responsibilities with regard to such aggressive practices which violated the 
United Nations Charter and the sovereignty and basic rights of peoples. Such 
practices constituted a serious threat to the future of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, and a flagrant violation of the inalienable rights of all 
peoples to benefit from scientific and technological progress, including 
peaceful nuclear technology, for their economic, agricultural and social 
development. 
12. Since its act of aggression - which had been condemned - against the 
Iraqi nuclear installation, the Israeli regime had deliberately reiterated its 
threat to repeat its aggression whenever it decided unilaterally that a 
reactor represented a threat to Israel's security. It had refused and 
continued to refuse to recognize that the Agency's safeguards system was a 
useful international instrument to verify the peaceful nature of nuclear 
installations. Despite Security Council resolution 487 (1981) and the many 
resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly and the Agency's General 
Conference, including resolutions GC(XXVII)/RES/409 (1983) and 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 (1984), Israel continued to act in defiance of the 
international community and insisted on remaining the sole judge of the 
peaceful nature of a nuclear installation, thereby giving itself a pretext to 
attack, it. 
13. Rather than submitting to those resolutions, Israel had repeated its 
threats on several occasions. On 21 March 1985 Ariel Sharon had again 
repeated threats in a Radio Israel broadcast, where he had made the following 
statement: "We are prepared to attack any atomic reactor that Iraq might 
build in the future". Sharon, the former Minister of Defence, who had planned 
and perpetrated the aggression against the Tamuz reactor in 1981, seemed to 
ignore the existence of a safeguards system and international standards to 
which his country's regime should be committed. He had thus expressed his 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 6 


regime's contempt for international organizations and their basic functions. 
For his part, Israel's Ambassador to Canada, in explaining the reason why 
Israel had not acceded to NPT, had said on 4 December 1983: 


"I am rather sceptical about the ability of the world organizations, 
nowadays dominated as they are by the Soviet block, by Third World 
countries and by the Arab countries, to provide that kind of impeccable 
objective supervision with which we would be comfortable". 


14. In the light of the Director General's report, which showed that Israel 
had not provided the assurances repeatedly requested by the General Conference 
and was persisting in its aggressive attitude and in its defiance of the 
resolutions of the Security Council and of the General Conference, the 
Conference had no alternative but to take deterrent action and to implement 
its resolutions GC(XXVII)/RES/409 and GC(XXVIII)/RES/425. His delegation 
called upon the General Conference to assume its full responsibility as the 
organization whose task it was to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
throughout the world and the application of safeguards and verification of the 
peaceful nature of nuclear activities. His delegation would not be influenced 
by any manoeuvres or attempts to divert the attention of the General 
Conference, including the letter circulated that morning by the delegate of 
Israel, which clearly reflected a lack of seriousness and goodwill and which 
resorted to prevarication and subterfuge rather than complying sincerely with 
the resolutions of the General Conference and assuming the duties and 
responsibilities incumbent upon everyone. His delegation believed that 
Israel's letter was an obvious attempt by certain States - headed by the 
United States of America, which habitually supported Israel and protected it 
in all circumstances - to justify their protection of that country and to 
endeavour to obstruct the General Conference and prevent it from fulfilling 
its duties. 
15. The international community was once again deeply perturbed by the 
barbarous and inhumane practices adopted by the racist regime of South Africa 
against the indigenous population. Those practices were degrading and 
completely contrary to the rules of international law and human rights. The 
tragic situation in that region was the result of the policies and actions of 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 7 


the racist regime, particularly its attempts to consolidate its racial 
hegemony, while persecuting its opponents, and its repeated acts of aggression 


against neighbouring States, not to mention its untiring efforts to strengthen 


its nuclear capabilities with a view to acquiring nuclear weapons. The 


available information and reports confirmed the existence of links between 


South Africa and Israel under a joint programme for the development of their 
nuclear capabilities under which the one exploited uranium illegally mined in 
Namibia and the other provided scientific and technological experience in the 
manufacture of nuclear weapons and nuclear warhead delivery systems. Strongly 
condemning such co-operation, his delegation called upon the General 
Conference to take steps to prevent it, since it would lead to a strengthening 
of the nuclear capabilities of those two countries. His delegation called 
upon those two countries to refrain from manufacturing or acquiring nuclear 
weapons and to place all their nuclear facilities under Agency control. 


16. The final statement of the Third NPT Review Conference, which it had 
been possible to publish despite unjust pressures and attempted blackmail to 
exploit the consensus approach, contained positive conclusions, but even so 
did not properly reflect the views of non-nuclear-weapon States, particularly 
developing countries. It did not take sufficient account of the concern of 
developing countries facing the increasing obstacles to the transfer of 
peaceful nuclear technology imposed by a certain number of exporting States. 
It did not respond forcefully enough to the deep concern expressed by 
developing countries with regard to the strengthening of the nuclear 
capabilities of the Tel Aviv and Pretoria regimes. It did not deal fully with 
the question of armed aggression against peaceful nuclear installations which 
had arisen after the Zionist attack on the Iraqi reactor. Furthermore, there 
was cause for concern because the terminology used in certain parts of the 
document was unrelated to that of the Treaty. For example, the expression 
"barriers to non-proliferation" was used instead of the word "safeguards" and 
terms such as "nuclear explosive capability" in relation to non-nuclear-weapon 
States which were parties to the Treaty. Moreover, the document did not 
express clearly enough the concern felt in the world at the failure of 
nuclear-weapon States to limit the arms race and to prevent it from being 
extended to outer space, and their failure to reach an agreement totally 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 8 


prohibiting nuclear tests. In spite of those reservations, his delegation had 
not opposed the consensus since it was convinced of the role that NPT could 
play in disarmament and in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy if it were properly applied and if nuclear-weapon States and the 
exporting States which were party to the Treaty fully complied with their 
commitments in the same way as non-nuclear-weapon States which were party to 
the Treaty. 


17. Despite propoganda campaigns and the armed aggression aimed at 
obstructing its peaceful nuclear programme, Iraq was continuing its programme 
alongside its efforts devoted to other aspects of development. As the 
President of Iraq had stated in his message to the twenty-sixth session of the 
General Conference, his country had established a wide-ranging development 
programme covering all economic, social and cultural aspects using scientific 
planning for the optimum exploitation of its resources. It attached 
particular importance to the development of scientific research, which it 
believed was indispensable for the transfer and development of the technology 
needed to implement his country's development programme. 
18. One of the objectives of Iraq's development plans was to use nuclear 
energy for at least 10-15% of total power generation by the year 2000. The 
first contract for the selection of a site for the country's first nuclear 
power plant had been completed in 1985. The Agency had provided experts for 
that purpose and had trained Iraqi personnel in Vienna. His country was 
continuing its efforts to achieve self-sufficiency in the production of 
isotopes for medical applications and hoped eventually to have a surplus of 
radioisotopes for export. The Iraqi Nuclear Research Centre had signed a 
research contract with the Agency and another similar contract had been 
extended. His country was contributing to all the activities of the Agency 
aimed at improving the services provided and strengthening international 
co-operation. In particular, it had participated in the work, of the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and in the UNCPICPUNB Preparatory Committee. 
His delegation attached great importance to the convening of that Conference 
on the date specified. Pursuant to resolution 32/50 of the United Nations 
General Assembly, the Conference should make it possible to formulate 



GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 9 


practical methods of improving international co-operation in the area of 
nuclear energy and facilitating the free transfer of technology, as well as 
the supply of nuclear material equipment and services (needed particularly by 
the developing countries to implement their peaceful nuclear programmes for 
social and economic development). Convinced that the success of CAS would 
greatly contribute to that of the Conference, his delegation urged Member 
States participating in the work of CAS and of the Board of Governors to take 
steps which would help the Committee accomplish the tasks entrusted to it by 
the Board, so that it could implement its conclusions. 


19. Since the beginning of the Iranian aggression in 1980, the Iranian 
authorities had not ceased shelling civilian centres in Iraq and in 1984 his 
Government had proposed that an agreement be concluded between the two 
countries, under the supervision of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations, to refrain from shelling civilian centres. The Secretary-General had 
succeeded in persuading the Iranian authorities and an agreement had been 
concluded between the two countries on 12 June 1984 to put an end to the 
shelling of civilian zones. However, since that agreement did not provide for 
any guarantee preventing the use of those centres for military purposes, Iran 
had exploited the agreement by building up its forces and continuing its 
aggression against Iraq. When Iraq had shelled a military target in Ham, 
Iran had responded with a warning to the inhabitants of Bassora to evacuate 
the city and had begun to shell it as well as other Iraqi cities, including 
Baghdad, instead of requesting the United Nations team to inspect the military 
target shelled by Iraq and had thereby violated the agreement concluded on 
12 June 1984. Iraq had had no alternative but to respond to that aggression. 
Iran had shelled Baghdad at random with rockets and had exposed Iraqi nuclear 
facilities to real danger. Iraq, which had called for a cessation of 
hostilities and for peaceful resolution of the conflict, did not bear any 
responsibility for the victims and material damage caused to both parties by 
the Iranian aggression. It was the party that persisted with its aggression 
and which refused international mediation which bore the full responsibility 
not only for the victims and material damage but also for the threat posed to 
international peace and security. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 10 


20. Mr. CEIRANO (Holy See) expressed his delegation's conviction that 
all Members of the Agency should give priority to studying the problem of 
nuclear weapons and nuclear-weapon systems as a whole. The constant and 
threatening increase in the use of nuclear energy for military purposes had 
overshadowed all attempts which had been made to ensure the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. The work of the Agency and other organizations 
had been disrupted by the fact that an increasing number of nations had the 
capacity and technological expertise needed to use nuclear energy for military 
rather than peaceful purposes. At the Third NPT Review Conference, which had 
been recently concluded in Geneva, the delegate of the Holy See had expressed 
the position of the Holy See in the following way: 
"There must be a reversal of the trend of vertical proliferation. We 


feel that there is a moral link, between the limitation of horizontal 


proliferation and the reversal of vertical proliferation. The nations 
in possession of nuclear power had the duty to fulfil their 


responsibilities as enunciated in Article VI of the Treaty. Without 


presuming to give suggestions of a technical order - which is outside 


the role of the Holy See - it must be remembered that there are many 


more weapons and weapon systems than are needed to ensure the security 


of all nations. Public opinion is aware of this fact and has already 


made its desire known and its position clear. The people want a 


reversal of the arms race. In this circumstance, this delegation 


reiterates the appeal of His Holiness Pope John Paul II to reverse the 


current trend in the arms race" (Osservatore Romano, 1 September 1985, 


page 2). 


21. By contrast, programmes for the peaceful use of nuclear energy should 
be enhanced and the Agency should be given the necessary means to play its 
natural role in the establishment of such programmes, in their implementation 
and their co-ordination. In those programmes, emphasis should be given to the 
need to ensure that nuclear energy served man and his spiritual and material 
development. The extent of that contribution should be the standard by which 
to judge the quality of such programmes. 
22. As a general rule, each country should decide for itself whether to 
develop nuclear energy and to what extent, always with regard to its own needs 


and resources. However, recourse to nuclear energy must, of course, safeguard 


the security of the individual and society as a whole, and take into account 



GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 11 


ecological needs. For that reason, priority should be given to programmes 
concerned with radiation safety and protection which would enable developing 
countries to choose reasonable and safe solutions. 


23. Outside the area of power production, nuclear technology could and 
should be used for the benefit of all mankind in other fields such as 
agriculture, medicine, geology, scientific research and for progress in 
general. In those areas, appropriate investment should be encouraged, since 
it was possible - with a relatively modest capital input - to obtain 
relatively high returns. Therefore, special attention should be given to 
projects with such objectives. 
24. To illustrate those ideas, the work being carried out in the area of 
waste management was very important for the present and future of the planet 
Earth. Progress in low- and intermediate-level waste management would be 
useful for all countries, while new fears about high-level waste seemed to 
respond to a concern for the safety of peoples and nations, which should never 
be forgotten. With regard to the use of available resources, international 
justice demanded that they should not be diverted to a few large projects 
carried out in a small number of countries, but should be used to promote a 
large number of small projects which were of benefit to a maximum number of 
people and were adapted to the social and economic conditions and the actual 
possibilities of many different countries. It was therefore important to keep 
in constant contact with the exigencies and realities at local level. 
25. Believing that intermediate and appropriate technology was preferable 
to highly advanced technology and installations, his delegation was very 
interested in the results of research on small and medium power reactors. 
Collaboration of buyers, sellers and financial institutions in such projects 
would help the general development of societies which were only just beginning 
to develop their energy resources and to realise their potential. Finally, in 
the same perspective, note should be taken of the efforts to provide 
developing countries in particular with up-to-date information on the 
comparative economic and technical performances of nuclear and fossil-fuel 
power plants. Those activities, which enabled developing countries to choose 
and develop the energy systems most suited to their real needs, could be 
considered as some of the best work done by the Agency. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 12 


26. Given his special position as delegate of a founding Member of the 
Agency which endeavoured to play exclusively a moral role consistent with its 
proper mission he believed that two factors should be considered with regard 
to the delicate question of staff recruitment. On the one hand, there was the 
increasing number of Members of the Agency, which naturally led to the 
expression by a number of States of the desire that the staff of the Agency 
should reflect the geopolitical spectrum and, on the other hand, there was the 
fact that the Agency had always placed strong emphasis on the need to give 
priority to people with technical expertise, which had greatly contributed to 
the prestige and effectiveness of the Agency and its programme. While wishing 
for as wide a representation as possible among the Agency staff, his 
delegation was also very much in favour of maintaining the high technical 
standards which characterized the Agency's work. Therefore, it did not 
hesitate to recommend that the example of the past be followed, while 
remaining confident that, with the goodwill of all, it would be possible to 
respond to the situation without lowering the technical quality or the 
representative nature of the staff. 
27. Since the Agency was endeavouring to develop its programmes and 
activites for the good of all nations and peoples, the real object of its work 
apart from the specific good results of any particular project, would be an 
increased spirit of co-operation and harmony between peoples and nations. In 
the message which he had addressed to the special session on disarmament, 
Pope John Paul II had described what ought to be the Agency's goal: 
"The building of links among peoples means the rediscovery and 
reassertion of all the values that reinforce peace and that join people 
together in harmony. This also means the renewal of what is best in 
the heart of man, the heart that seeks the good of the other in 
friendship and love." 


28. Mr. BORGA (Italy) observed that the current session of the General 
Conference was being held immediately after the Third Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which 
had contributed to enhancing the effectiveness of that Treaty. The Italian 
Government welcomed that result because it considered NPT to be an achievement 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 13 


essential for strengthening the security of all States and for promoting 
disarmament in the context of stability and international security. It also 
believed that in the interest of all countries of the world the effectiveness 
of NPT should be enhanced through scrupulous compliance with all the Treaty 
provisions, rigorous implementation of the non-proliferation goals, and 
accession of a growing number of States. In fact, the structure and the 
spirit of the Treaty were based on a specific balance and on reciprocal 
commitments. 


29. It was in that context that IAEA activities must be seen as 
particularly important. On the occasion of that Review Conference the 
Italian Government had reaffirmed its full confidence in the safeguards system 
operated by the Agency in carrying out the tasks assigned it by the Treaty. 
Those were obviously essential tasks because the credibility of the system and 
a general confidence in the full compliance with the Treaty's provisions 
constituted the mainstay of the non-proliferation regime. In his 
Government's opinion, it was thus necessary to promote all measures likely to 
strengthen that credibility and confidence and consequently to promote new 
accessions to the Treaty. In that connection, it is essential to improve the 
effectiveness of the safeguards system without unduly adding to the burdens of 
Member States, many of which were experiencing budgetary austerity. Within 
that framework, two kinds of measures could be envisaged. First, an 
acceptable mechanism for financing safeguards should be established, and in 
that regard Italy wished to express its support for the new proposals which 
had been submitted by Belgium at the most recent series of meetings of the 
Board and the purpose of which was to promote greater equity. Second, the 
system of controls should be rationalized and improved through the use of new 
technologies, more effective utilization of the inspecting personnel, greater 
attention to the implementation of safeguards in sensitive plants and the 
development of faster accounting techniques. 
30. He considered it very important that NPT Member States should 
participate directly in the efforts to rationalize and improve the safeguards 
system. In that spirit his country had recently proposed to the IAEA a 
support programme involving the development of measurement and control 
techniques for fuel reprocessing plants and mixed-oxide fuel fabrication 
plants. 

GC{XXIX)/OR.272 
page 14 


31. The Italian Government: obviously supported full-scope safeguards under 
the Treaty and was in favour, in principle, of their generalized 
application. In fact, it would not seem appropriate that NPT countries, 
which had accepted commitments and burdens with a view to the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, should be treated less favourably in the 
field of safeguards than countries which had not accepted the same commitments 
and burdens. However, in Italy's opinion, the application of full-scope 
safeguards should be promoted gradually and, possibly, by persuasion and not 
through imposition. 
32. As to equity and non-discrimination, his Government believed that those 
needs could also be satisfied by the submission to IAEA safeguards of a 
greater number of peaceful nuclear facilities of the nuclear-weapon States. 
The recently concluded agreement between the Agency and the USSR was a step in 
the right direction. Italy hoped that in the future the nuclear-weapon States 
would gradually place all their peaceful facilities under IAEA safeguards, 
granting the Agency wide discretionary powers to select the most significant 
plants on which it would carry out verification. 
33. He also noted with satisfaction that, according to the Safeguards 
Implementation Report for 1984, the Agency had not detected any anomaly which 
would have indicated the diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded 
nuclear material for the manufacture of any nuclear weapon, or for any other 
military purpose, or for the manufacture of any other nuclear explosive 
device, or for purposes unknown. 
34. Italy was convinced of the need to ensure wider and fuller 
implementation of Article IV of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and, in that 
connection, it had spared no effort to assure adequate technical co-operation 
with developing countries in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. In fact, Italy had attached great importance to the Agency's role as 
a promoter of the various peaceful uses of nuclear energy and was a strong 
supporter of many of those activities. He shared the Director General's 
views concerning the increasing role which nuclear energy was bound to play in 
the overall energy production: the economic viability of nuclear power, its 
reliability, safety and excellent environmental record could not be ignored. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 15 


It was nob by chance that in the preceding year, the total installed nuclear 
capacity had grown by 17%, the largest annual increase since the introduction 
of nuclear power in the early 1970s. It should also be recognized that full 
exploitation of that source of energy could not be made without developing 
advanced technologies, such as breeder and fusion technologies, which would in 
future ensure adequate and long-lasting energy sources. 


35. Other applications of nuclear techniques, such as those in food and 
agriculture, medicine and industry, enjoyed his Government's full support, as 
had concretely been demonstrated by the sizable financial contributions which 
it had offered for a number of long-term programmes carried out by the 
Department for Research and Isotopes in the areas of animal productivity and 
pasture management, the sterile-insect technique and the application of 
isotope and geochemical techniques in geothermal resources exploration. Its 
total voluntary commitment in those areas - including a number of footnote-a/ 
projects - would amount to over US $18 million in 1981-86. Even if it was 
not completely satisfied with the results achieved to date in some of those 
programmes, it was confident that the experience gained by the Secretariat 
would help in improving the results and in overcoming any shortcomings in the 
future. That was why, while Italy considered that the new approach endorsed a 
few years ago by the Board of Governors in the field of technical co-operation 
policy was worth pursuing, it was particularly interested not only in project 
evaluation - including field evaluation - but also in the preparation of 
projects and the continuous monitoring of their implementation. 
36. As one of the major contributors to international co-operation 
activities, through extrabudgetary resources, Italy wished quite naturally to 
be assured that its financial efforts were producing maximum results. For the 
same reason, it was in favour of a periodic review of the Agency's policy in 
that field. In its opinion, a better integration of the technical 
co-operation activities with other programme areas in all phases of project 
implementation was still necessary. One of the major problems which most 
developing - as well as industrialized - countries continued to face was the 
financing of nuclear power. The approach which was currently contemplated by 
the Secretariat and had been mentioned by the Director General in his 
statement, namely the establishment of joint ventures between suppliers and 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 16 


local utilities, was worth studying. He also recalled that his country 
financed a major part of the activities of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste, which was jointly managed by the IAEA and 
UNESCO, with an annual contribution of US $3 million amounting to more than 
two thirds of the Centre's budget. The Italian Government had allotted an 
additional US $4.5 million in 1985 for the extension of the Centre's 
activities with particular reference to the needs of the national centres 
located in developing countries. 


37. Italy actively supported the Agency's initiatives in the field of 
nuclear trade and, in particular, the activities of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS), the purpose of which was to establish mechanisms 
for assuring supplies and at the same time guaranteeing non-proliferation. 
Assurance of supplies and free access to scientific information and to new 
achievements in technology were the basic conditions for extensive and fair 
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and for the gradual 
extension of economic benefits thereof. 
38. The General Conference had often devoted a very large part of its time 
to the discussion of problems which, in his view, belonged more appropriately 
to the province of other, international forums. It was true, however, that 
the general international situation also affected, to some extent, the 
Agency's work, and activities. In that context, it seemed fair to say that the 
international climate, though still characterized by uncertainties and 
tensions, had been showing signs of improvement since the preceding year. In 
particular, his Government viewed the start of negotiations between the United 
States and the USSR on nuclear and space weapons as an event of great 
political significance. It could certainly be hoped, therefore, that the 
dialogue and the summit meeting to be held in November would contribute to a 
gradual relaxation of tensions and to the progress of the disarmament process 
in all its aspects. The Italian Government, which had actively worked in the 
past to promote and facilitate disarmament negotiations in all bilateral and 
multilateral forums, intended to continue striving for effective progress. As 
to the political problems which had been the subject of the Agency's attention 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 17 


in the past, he considered that the organization's universality should be 
safeguarded as much as possible and that exclusion of any State or any 
development affecting the rights and privileges of Member States would also 
negatively affect the extent to which the duties and commitments were 
fulfilled. 


39. Italy attached especial importance to the question of representation on 
the Board of Governors. In that context, it was necessary to bear in mind not 
only the principle of just geographical distribution but also other criteria 
such as the States' experience in the nuclear sector, their technological 
advancement and their financial contributions to the Agency's programmes. In 
his opinion, it was legitimate that a country which contributed large 
resources to the Agency's activities should participate in a more significant 
and permament way in the management and in the taking of major decisions by 
its policy-making bodies. While Italy was willing to make in the future, as 
it had in the past, a large financial contribution to the Agency, it could not 
remain indifferent to the management of that contribution. The generally 
recognized associative rule, according to which the major financial backers 
should have a voice in the promotion of the fundamental activities, ought also 
to be applied to the Agency. On the basis of those principles, his delegation 
was in favour of a general review of Article VI of the Statute in order to 
achieve a more equitable and more balanced representation through a limited 
increase of the Board's membership. In that spirit, Italy had sponsored, 
together with Belgium and Sweden, the proposal submitted by Spain on that 
issue, which seemed also to respond to the need for maintaining the Board's 
effectiveness. 
40. He wished briefly to dwell on the situation of nuclear power production 
and on the most recent development in the nuclear field in Italy. Nuclear 
power production in 1984 had amounted to 6900 million kWh, representing a 19% 
increase over the 5800 million kWh produced in 1983. The construction of two 
1000 HW(e) BWR units was going ahead and the siting studies for a number of 
pressurized-water reactors (PWR) had been undertaken or completed. As for the 
scheduled startup of the nuclear power stations which were now under 
construction or were planned in Italy, a review of the status of 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 18 


implementation of the 1981 national energy plan showed that the objectives set 
at that time were still valid and must be pursued with utmost determination. 
In 1984, the Italian Atomic Energy Authority (ENEA) had placed emphasis on a 
truly modern industrial policy for Italy. Italian industry had considerably 
expanded its resources for the design and construction of nuclear power plants 
under the national energy plan and for activities connected with the nuclear 
fuel cycle. As for international relations, greater attention had been given 
to co-operation with developing countries, which had been carried either 
directly or through the ENEA's technical support to co-operation programmes 
financed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Furthermore, the ENEA's role as 
the regulatory and supervisory authority had been further strengthened. 


41. In the nuclear field the noteworthy developments included: 
the completion of the mechanical assembly of the 40 MW(e) CIRENE reactor; 
progress in the construction of the PEC fast reactor (fuel element test 
reactor); continuation of activities in the field of controlled nuclear fusion 
as part of a European Community co-operative effort; lastly, research on fast 
breeders had continued under a co-operation programme involving all public 
utility companies and the competent agencies. An important step in that 
connection was the conclusion in January 1984 by Belgium, France, Italy, the 
Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom of a co-operation agreement 
to be followed by a number of specific operational agreements. 
42. The ENEA fifth five-year plan (1985-1989) now under discussion in the 
Senate provided not only for the continuation of the activities under the 
previous plan but also for some innovations. Thus, the work on thermal 
reactors would be oriented mainly towards fostering greater involvement of 
Italian industry, including small- and medium-sized firms, in the construction 
of PWR power plants. As to fast breeder reactors, the ENEA's activities would 
be focused on the completion of the PEC reactor and on further improvement of 
the capabilities of the national nuclear industry with a view to increasing 
Italian participation in the construction of European fast reactors and to 
facilitating the introduction of those reactors in Italy. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 19 


A3. As regards the fuel cycle, the fifth five-year plan set three primary 
objectives for the ENEA. First, it was to maintain a modest level of research 
and development activity in areas where the market was not likely to require 
any further industrial activity for some time to come, for example uranium 
isotopic enrichment. Second, it should focus its efforts on developing 
activities in those areas of the fuel cycle which were deemed to be decisive, 
namely spent fuel reprocessing, radioactive waste management and the 
production of mixed-oxide fuel, and on expanding research and development work 
on safeguards in order to establish favourable conditions for industry in 
Italy and more extensive international co-operation. Lastly, Italy's 
participation in a co-operative European fuel reprocessing programme should be 
enhanced. 


44. In the area of controlled nuclear fusion, the plan called for 
continuation of the work carried out under the joint European programme. As 
for alternative energy sources, the main emphasis could be placed on 
photovoltaic cells, bio-mass and, to a lesser degree, on wind power. With 
regard to energy conservation, the ENEA would continue to strive for the full 
implementation of the law of 1983. In the area of environmental protection, 
it would step up its activities with the prime objective of locating a 
domestic site for the temporary storage and final disposal of low-level 
radioactive waste. 
45. In conclusion, he hoped that his statement had highlighted two points 
of paramount importance to his country. The first was that Italy continued to 
attach great importance to nuclear energy and to its vital role for the future 
of mankind, essentially as an adequate and economical source of energy. The 
second point was his country's continued commitment to and confidence in the 
IAEA, and it intended to offer the Agency, as in the past, its full technical 
and financial co-operation. 
46. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) wished, first of all, to express his 
country's gratitude to the Director General, Mr. Blix, for his visit to Chile 
in October 1984 at the Chilean Government's invitation, on which occasion the 
Director General had had an opportunity to be informed in detail of Chile's 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 20 


nuclear programme, of its achievements and of the various national programmes 
on social and economic development. The visit had stimulated an exchange of 
practical ideas about the various nuclear projects and programmes which were 
in progress in Chile. 


47. In October a co-ordination meeting had been held to discuss the 
prospects of radioisotope production in Latin America. The recommendations 
and conclusions of that meeting had been transmitted to the Inter-American 
Nuclear Energy Commission, which had sponsored the meeting, and a copy of the 
report had been sent to the Agency. 
48. He recalled that his country had agreed to participate in the 
development of the ARCAL programme (Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the 
Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America). Chile viewed 
that programme as an effective tool for strengthening regional co-operation in 
the nuclear field. It was confident that with time the number of 
participating countries would increase, since all Latin American States would 
benefit from the exchange of experience which would result from joint work. 
His delegation had no doubt that the document prepared at the second ARCAL 
technical planning and co-ordinating meeting, held in July in Quito, would be 
examined positively in the various capitals, and in particular by the 
developed countries, with a view to finding the financial resources essential 
for the different ARCAL projects and programmes. 
49. As to nuclear safety and radiological protection, the Chilean Nuclear 
Energy Commission (CChEN) was continuing to prepare the various technical 
regulations, standards and guides to supplement the nuclear safety law enacted 
in 1984. A great impetus had been given to the Chilean radioisotope and 
radiation application programme, in which universities, scientific and 
technological institutes and organizations in the production sector were 
participating actively. In the matter of reactor conversion, the CChEN had 
carried out a series of activities in order to permit the use of medium- and 
low-enriched fuel in its two reactors. 
50. During the preceding year Chile had co-sponsored a number of regional 
events intended to improve manpower training in the Latin American area, and 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 21 


had in particular hosted an Agency workshop on technical co-operation practice 
and procedures. It had also recently organized, in collaboration with the 
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission, a course in X-ray fluoresence. 
Moreover it had, with great interest, attended IAEA meetings dealing with new 
developments in the area of small and medium power reactors, which were of 
great importance to developing countries. 


51. He expressed the hope that the deliberations of the General Conference 
would be translated into concrete action. He noted with satisfaction, as had 
been pointed out in the Director General's statement, that a number of new 
activities had been initiated without additional financial resources, 
indicating that the funds allocated had been used rationally and that the 
Agency's staff had worked with optimum efficiency. 
52. As far as the international situation in the field of nuclear 
co-operation was concerned, he wished to recall his country's permanent and 
unreserved commitment to the utilization of nuclear energy exclusively for 
peaceful purposes, which meant that it condemned its use for any other 
purposes. The principles on which Chile's development in the nuclear sphere 
was based were guided by those considerations, and it was also for that reason 
that his country had accepted the Agency's safeguards system. The application 
of safeguards depended on the sovereign will of each State. He considered 
safeguards preferable to other ways of reaffirming the peaceful purpose of 
nuclear activities, and in particular to instruments such as the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS) and the International Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material. 
53. There were certain aspects of NPT which could not be described as 
positive. One was its discriminatory spirit: it made no reference to 
vertical proliferation and concentrated exclusively on horizontal 
proliferation. Another negative feature of NPT was its failure to come to 
grips with the principle of nuclear disarmament. Moreover, the Treaty did not 
seem to fulfil the objective of transferring know-how and technology in the 
nuclear field to the countries which needed them. Lastly, Chile was not 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 22 


satisfied with the success of what had been called the spirit of NPT, nor with 
the legal instrument itself, because it consecrated in law, so to speak, the 
world imbalance in the utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful or 
non-peaceful purposes. The success of NPT should not be judged only by the 
number of signatory countries but by the extent to which those countries 
benefited effectively from the scientific knowledge necessary to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 


54. The work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) bore witness to 
the difficult process of reconciling the different points of view. He was 
concerned to note the downgrading of the importance of IAEA safeguards as a 
factor which was sufficient in itself for reconciling the assurances of 
non-proliferation and the concomitant assurances of supply. Chile considered 
the existing safeguards system a reliable means of ensuring nuclear 
non-proliferation. 
55. His delegation was sceptical about the supposed advantages of the 
International Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. In 
his opinion, it was based on a philosophy contrary to the postulates which his 
country had always defended in relation to self-determination in the area of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, since it sought to place under strict 
control, and thereby make less accessible, the nuclear material essential to 
developing countries for their peaceful nuclear progress. At the same time, 
the nuclear material which the Great Powers used for military purposes would 
remain outside the control of the Convention, which meant that vertical 
proliferation could continue, with consequent dangers for world peace and 
security. He considered that those additional controls were difficult to 
accept and that they would also contribute to undermining Member States* 
condidence in the Agency's safeguards system. 
56. Lastly, referring to voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1986, he recalled Chile's oft-repeated 
position that the technical assistance and co-operation activities should be 
financed increasingly from the Agency's Regular Budget. For that purpose, the 
policy of zero growth which the Agency had adopted for its budget should be 

GC<XXIX)/OR.272 
page 23 


revised. Nevertheless, he wished to announce his country's willingness to 
contribute its full share to the Fund for 1986. In that connection, he 
appealed to Member States which were in arrears with the payment of their 
contributions to bring their accounts up to date and to some other States to 
make contributions representing their share of the indicative target figures. 


57. Mr. CONSTANTIHI (Argentina) said that his country's difficult 
economic situation had forced his Government to reduce public expenditure 
drastically. Consequently, in the current financial year, there had been 
severe budgetary restraints which had considerably slowed down the progress of 
work, under the Argentine nuclear programme and had resulted in setting 
priorities oriented towards the real needs of the immediate future. 
58. However, the Argentine President, Mr. Raoul Alfonsin, had repeatedly 
reaffirmed his Government's firm resolve to continue to develop the country's 
technological capabilities in the nuclear field and to implement its nuclear 
programme with a view to attaining self-sufficiency and freedom of decision, 
which were its main objectives. For that reason, it had accorded priority to 
manpower training, and to activities required for completing the nuclear fuel 
cycle and for the production of basic materials needed to sustain the 
country's chosen nuclear power generation technology. 
59. In Argentina nuclear power had continued to grow in importance; the 
Atucha I and the Embalse nuclear power plants had accounted for 11.4% of the 
total electricity produced in 1984, so that Argentina occupied the fourteenth 
place in the world in that regard. As for other applications of nuclear 
energy, Argentina had placed fresh emphasis on the production of radioisotopes 
and certain radionuclides needed for its nuclear medicine programme, as well 
as on radioisotope applications in agriculture, veterinary medicine and 
industry - areas in which a number of important projects were being planned 
which would make it possible to meet ever-increasing national and regional 
needs. 
60. Since the last session of the General Conference his country had been 
very active in international co-operation. At the multilateral level and 
especially within the framework, of the Agency, Argentina had maintained and 
even intensified, despite its economic difficulties, its participation in the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 24 


Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme, as was shown by the 
large number of Argentine experts made available to the Agency and by the 
holding, in collaboration with the Agency, of four courses in Argentina which 
dealt, respectively, with radiological protection and nuclear safety, the 


training of instructors in radioimmunoassay data processing, power planning in 
developing countries with emphasis on nuclear power, and quality assurance. 


61. Also within the Agency's framework., Argentina had started contributing 
actively to the ARCAL programme, to which it would be offering its full 
support. That programme could truly serve as the prime mover of regional 
integration in Latin America in a field which was vital for the development 
and well-being of peoples, so that the Secretariat should give it as much 
financial support as possible. The interest of the countries of the region in 
the ARCAL programme had been demonstrated at the recent planning meeting held 
in August at Quito, where the participating countries had to the best of their 
abilities, multiplied their offers of collaboration and contributions in what 
had appeared to be a demonstration of their sense of responsibility and 
solidarity. In that connection, he wished to announce that, as in the 
preceding years, Argentina would make a contribution in national currency to 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1986. 
62. Within the framework of the Organization of American States (OAS), his 
country had continued to support the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission 
(IANEC) and had given effect to the offers it had made at the thirteenth 
regular session held in January 1984. Thus, it had organized at Buenos Aires 
in October 1984 a regional seminar on the applications of nuclear energy in 
veterinary medicine and animal production, which had been attended by eminent 
specialists from Latin America. An OAS-sponsored course on metallurgy and 
technology of materials had been held for the fifth time in Argentina. A 
number of regional courses on the technology of research reactor fuel 
elements, on radioisotope methodology for radioimmunoassay and on the 
application of radioisotopes in veterinary medicine and biochemistry, as well 
as a workshop-seminar on instrumentation and quality control in nuclear 
medicine, had also been held. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 25 


63. In the bilateral area, Argentina had concluded with friendly nations 
all over the world 17 co-operation agreements on the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, the last of them with China. Two more agreements were to be concluded 
shortly. He wished specifically to mention the initiation of co-operation 
with the Soviet Union, the intensification of collaboration with India and the 
strengthening of co-operative links with Algeria. Moreover, Argentina had 
continued its fruitful co-operation with the Federal Republic of Germany and 
France in addition to maintaining its traditional relations with the Latin 
American countries. 
64. His country was always willing to establish and strengthen co-operation 
with all nations in the world on the basis of legal equality and mutual 
respect. It was convinced of the need for making available to the peoples of 
the world the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy without 
restrictions based on equivocal non-proliferation justifications, but subject 
to the requirement, and acceptance, of adequate safeguards ensuring that the 
nuclear technology, facilities and material transferred would be used only for 
peaceful purposes. In that regard, Argentina considered the Agency's 
safeguards system to be the appropriate means of ensuring the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. Any other additional requirement, such as 
restrictions on the transfer of technology in areas which were tendentiously 
termed sensitive, could only be suspected of concealing the intention of 
preserving political and commercial supremacy. 
65. Argentina continued its firm support for world efforts to prevent 
nuclear proliferation in both the vertical and horizontal direction. 
Therefore, his Government, jointly with the Governments of five other States 
from all over the world which shared its concern for world peace, had issued 
the New Delhi Declaration, whose objectives fully coincided with those of the 
Agency. On that occasion, President Alfonsin had expressed the hope that the 
Great Powers would unequivocally demonstrate to mankind in that very year that 
they shared his concern by promoting and implementing immediately effective 
measures which should eliminate, once and for all, the danger of a nuclear 
holocaust. There would then be grounds for believing that mankind had finally 
begun to win the battle for life. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 26 


66. With regard to technical assistance, he again noted with appreciation 
the Secretariat's efforts to obtain better results with chronically 
insufficient resources. However, he wished to stress, as Argentina already 
had pointed out at the meetings of the Board of Governors, that the 
implementation level attained was not as satisfactory as could be desired, and 
urged the Secretariat to redouble its efforts in that direction. He wished 
likewise to express his dissatisfaction with the conditions imposed on the use 
of certain extrabudgetary funds, which violated the spirit of the Statute, and 
with the continued application of the Revised Guiding Principles and General 
Operating Rules to Govern the Provision of Technical Assistance by the Agency, 
since the latter imposed conditions which his delegation considered arbitrary. 
67. With respect to the other great responsibility of the Agency, namely 
the application of safeguards, his delegation noted with satisfaction that in 
1984 again there had been no failure to comply with the undertakings made by 
Member States, and that, consequently, the Agency was able to assure that 
there had been no diversion of safeguarded material for non-peaceful 
purposes. He also commended the Secretariat for responding to the repeated 
requests made by several Member States, including Argentina, at the meetings 
of the Board that the internal transparency of the safeguards system be 
improved. It must be recognized that Argentina was now receiving better 
information, which would help in the continuous improvement of the methods of 
safeguards measurement, verification and control. He also appreciated the 
Secretariat's efforts to improve safeguards equipment and to make more 
efficient use of the inspectorate staff. However, much remained to be done in 
the latter respect, as Argentina had observed at the meetings of the Board 
held in June. On the same subject, he wished to point out that during the 
preceding year his country had continued to implement, jointly with the 
Agency, a programme designed to test a containment and surveillance system for 
the Bmbalse nuclear power plant. However, the results obtained to date could 
not be regarded as very promising. 
68. As for the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), 
Argentina's well-known stand was that assurances of non-proliferation and 
those relating to the provision of technology and the other inputs needed for 
developing a peaceful nuclear programme should be inseparable. In that 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 27 


connection, Argentina felt, as it had observed at the meetings of the Board, 
that the efforts of the preceding few years were beginning to bear fruit. 
There was now a simple, clear and comprehensive working document. However, 
that document was not the final expression of a consensus since it lacked 
certain elements needed for maintaining the delicate balance between the 
different interpretations of various facets of the problem which the parties 
could quite legitimately have. He was none the less optimistic that, if the 
will to compromise persisted, a reasonable balance between the different 
points of view could finally be arrived at. 


69. In conclusion, he wished once more to express his satisfaction at the 
very positive results of the Agency's technical programmes, and in particular 
its programme on radiological protection and nuclear safety, under which the 
Secretariat had prepared for the information of the Board the excellent report 
entitled Nuclear Safety Review, 1984. Those promotional programmes were a 
form of assistance of great usefulness to developing countries; it was 
therefore unacceptable that such programmes should be restricted in order to 
maintain zero growth in the Agency's budget. The latter objective should be 
met by optimizing the costs of the safeguards programme through more efficient 
use of the equipment and manpower available. 
Mr. Manouan (Cote d'Ivoire) took the Chair. 


70. Mr. ALVES (Brazil) recalled that, since the 1984 session of the General 
Conference, Brazil had made renewed efforts to implement its programme on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy despite the economic and financial constraints 
which had dramatically affected the level of investment, particularly in 
developing countries. It was true that those countries were bearing the brunt 
of the current malfunctioning of the world economy. The overall scarcity of 
financial resources had limited their various development programmes, 
including the nuclear ones. Brazil was no exception to the rule, but, despite 
its problems, remained convinced that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were 
important not only for the future of its economy, but also for the well-being 
of its population. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 28 


71. As far as nuclear power generation was concerned, Brazil's first 
nuclear power plant, Angra I, had already been connected to the grid and was 
providing most of the electricity required by the Centre South Region of the 
country. Brazil's second nculear power plant, Angra II, was being completed. 
Opportunity costs, which were increasingly favouring the use of nuclear power 
for the generation of electricity, would determine the pace of the programme. 
72. The application of nuclear techniques in medicine, industry and 
agriculture had been emphasized, given the results which could be obtained in 
the short term both in the social and the economic areas. There were now 
1090 medical centres throughout Brazil which were making use of nuclear 
techniques for diagnosis and therapy. Brazil had also recently completed its 
basic legal procedures for food irradiation. It was hope that those 
techniques would reduce the amount of food losses caused by difficulties in 
storage and long-distance transport coupled with the climatic conditions 
prevailing in the country. 
73. Brazil had not deviated from its long-standing policy of firmly 
supporting the activities of the Agency. The Statute of the Agency gave the 
guidelines for those activities, and compliance with it provided the necessary 
non-discriminatory basis for international co-operation. As a developing 
country, Brazil naturally considered the Agency's technical assistance 
programme as an important tool for its own development. In that connnection, 
he wished to announce that Brazil's voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund would be maintained at the level of previous 
years. It was to be stressed that the technical assistance provided by the 
Agency had contributed to Brazil's achievements, particularly in radiation 
protection, dosimetry and nuclear safety. The excellent rate of implementation 
of the Agency's technical assistance projects in Brazil had played an 
important role in that respect, and had encouraged the Brazilian Government to 
submit a project of special significance and scope for the Amazon region: 
that project, recently approved, would assist the Brazilian Government to 
carry through its studies on the effects of changing land use on the ecology 
and climate of the Amazon region. Nevertheless, some aspects of the situation 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 29 


in Brazil, a tropical developing country, rendered it necessary to adapt some 
of the techniques received. The resulting knowledge and experience would 
benefit other developing countries through the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. 


74. Brazil had endeavoured as far as possible to give favourable responses 
to fellowship requests channelled through the Agency. Since September 1984 it 
had thus awarded 18 fellowships to trainees from other developing countries. 
Also, two interregional courses had been held in Brazil, one on dosimetry and 
the other on prospecting for uranium deposits and evaluating reserves. Brazil 
had also provided cost-free expert services for Agency technical assistance 
projects in other developing countries. That co-operation had been fruitful, 
as the increasing requests for Brazilian experts showed, and Brazil was 
anxious to continue and even to enhance it. With regard to regional 
co-ordination of Agency co-operation activities, the establishment and the 
setting in motion of the institutional mechanisms of the ARCAL programme were 
completely satisfactory, and Brazil supported the programme, taking into 
consideration the recommendations approved at the Quito meeting. As to the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities as a whole, it was apposite to take 
note of the increase of 22.4% in the resources provided in 1984 compared to 
the previous year, and of the increase in extrabudgetary funds, although the 
persistent reduction in UNDP contributions must be regretted. 
75. In the area of nuclear safety, an activity to which Brazil had long 
given and would always continue to give firm support, his delegation 
considered laudable some recent initiatives undertaken by the Agency, such as 
the radiation protection advisory teams, the Incident Reporting System and the 
continuing progress of the Nuclear Safety Standards Programme. On the subject 
of the operational safety review teams, he stressed the excellent results of 
the August 1985 mission to the Angra I nuclear power plant. According to 
UNSCEAR assessments, the medical uses of radiation were the major source of 
collective exposure. Brazil consequently appreciated the Agency's support for 
the Secondary Standard Dosimetry Laboratory system, which played a fundamental 
role in the control of exposure levels. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 30 


76. The Agency was to be congratulated on the occasion of the fifteenth 
anniversary of the International Nuclear Information Systems (INIS), in which 
Brazil had participated from the beginning. INIS had proved the usefulness 
for all countries, developing and industrialized alike, of the information 
exchanges conducted by it; that activity, which should continue, was one of 
the most important tasks assigned to the Agency. 
77. The Brazilian Government was currently endeavouring to improve its 
national nuclear material control and accounting system to bring it as close 
as possible to the Agency's system. The Division of Safeguards of the 
National Nuclear Energy Commission had recently established a safeguards 
laboratory, designed with the help of the Agency's Safeguards Analytical 
Laboratory, with which it would co-operate As a result of the Brazilian 
authorities* efforts and of the co-operation between the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory and the new Brazilian laboratory, it had been possible to carry out 
measurements on all fuel assemblies at the Resende Fuel Fabrication Plant. A 
second project was being prepared in order to measure the irradiated fuel to 
be discharged from the Angra I power reactor. At the same time, a project in 
the area of safeguards had been agreed between Brazil and the Federal Republic 
of Germany; its objective was to harmonize measurement methodologies and to 
compare the results obtained in Brazil, the Federal Republic of Germany and 
the Agency. In that respect, it was to be pointed out that Brazil had 
concluded an agreement with the Agency concerning two facility attachments to 
the Subsidiary Arrangements set forth in document INFCIRC/237. 
78. Brazil had confidence in the Agency's activities in disseminating 
nuclear technology; the universal and non-discriminatory dissemination of the 
benefits resulting from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had in the past 
assured the Agency's credibility and would continue to do so in future. 
79. Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland) noted that the Agency's activities were 
convincing proof of the necessity for international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The principle co-ordination centre for such 
co-operation was the Agency, whose efficiency and authority resulted 
particularly from the competence of its management, its personnel and its 
experts. In that respect, the Secretariat was to be commended on its rational 
use of the resources placed at its disposal. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 31 


80. Strengthening the regime of non-proliferation had an essential place in 
endeavours to build peace and confidence in the world. In that connection he 
welcomed the agreement concluded by the Soviet Union to submit certain of its 
nuclear installations to Agency safeguards, which was a proof of the 
universality of NPT. He was further gratified that the first inspection on 
USSR territory had taken place very shortly after the agreement had been 
concluded. 
81. He pointed out that the General Conference was meeting when the whole 
world's attention was directed towards the problems of nuclear disarmament and 
non-proliferation which had been brought out at the Third NPT Review 
Conference. His delegation was gratified to note the positive results of that 
Conference, which had recommended that negotiations be started towards 
concluding a treaty prohibiting all nuclear tests. The adoption by the USSR 
of a moratorium on tests was a very important initiative of which full 
advantage should be taken. The Agency played a predominant role in efforts to 
maintain and strengthen the non-proliferation regime. 
82. The Polish delegation had examined with interest the Secretariat's 
report on the application of safeguards in 1984, which demonstrated that the 
Agency's safeguards system had been strengthened and that inspection 
activities had been concentrated on the most important tasks. Many problems 
remained to be resolved, but the fact that the Secretariat was transmitting a 
list of those problems to Member States was very encouraging. It appeared 
more and more evident that the existence of an effective nuclear nonproliferation 
regime was of paramount importance for international security 
and for co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. For that reason, 
the Polish delegation believed that the excellent progress made in the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was an important step towards ensuring 
the universality of the Treaty. 
83. He noted that a very serious problem remained to be resolved in the 
area of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, namely the physical protection of 
nuclear materials to remove the risk of any illegal use of those materials. 
In 1983, Poland had ratified the International Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material, and hoped that the process of ratification by 
Member States would continue and accelerate. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 32 


84. He emphasized the Agency's acknowledged pre-eminent role in the matter 
of nuclear safety; it was true that the essential goal of international 
co-operation was to prevent any risk, to the population and to persons 
occupationally exposed to radiation. Poland had used the Agency's nuclear 
safety norms to elaborate a law on safety in the utilization of nuclear 
energy. The systematic accumulation and analysis of data on nuclear plant 
operation facilitated the sharing of experience, which was directly useful for 
Member States and enabled the safety and reliability of nuclear installations 
to be improved. 
85. The Incident Reporting System, to which 17 Member States had adhered, 
was of paramount importance for countries whose nuclear power generation 
programmes were just beginning. The Polish Parliament had just approved a 
programme to develop nuclear power generation under which the total installed 
capacity of nuclear power stations in the country would reach 8000 Mtf(e) in 
the year 2000. Despite major economic difficulties, Poland was obliged to 
develop its nuclear power generation industry because of the very high level 
of pollution suffered by some regions of the country through the use of coal 
and lignite in producing electrical and thermal energy. To that end, Poland 
was relying on close collaboration with the Soviet Union and other CMBA 
countries, as well as on the assistance and experience of the Agency. 
86. His delegation congratulated the Agency on its nuclear energy 
activities under the technical assistance and co-operation programme, 
particularly in the matter of promoting sophisticated methods for improving 
harvests, reducing food losses and combating parasites. The results obtained 
in these areas were of particular interest to Poland, whose fundamental 
concern was that of ensuring self-sufficiency in food production. In order to 
achieve that end, Poland had to use nuclear techniques and create the 
necessary conditions for applying the scientific results obtained over the 
past 20 years by the FAO/IABA Joint Division, in particular those concerning 
the preservation of agricultural products. Poland planned to set up between 
1985 and 1989 two centres provided with large radiation sources. It was 
planning to use electron accelerators, which had many advantages in use and 
which were more economical than other sources. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 33 


87. He hoped that the Agency's assistance and co-operation would enable 
practical results to be obtained rapidly in applying those nuclear 
techniques. Poland, for its part, was prepared to place at the disposition of 
the Member States concerned the centres which it had set up for training 
experts and for exchanging information and experimental data. It was willing 
to play a very active part in implementing the Agency's programme in that 
area, and was also interested in extending the work, on agricultural 
biotechnology carried out at Seibersdorf. Poland was also prepared to 
participate in that work as far as it was able; it had in fact already 
provided the Agency with Polish-made equipment for setting up a new 
laboratory. The effectiveness of that co-operation resided primarily in the 
exchange of scientific, technical and economic information, the International 
Nuclear Information System and in public information work. Those were of 
particular interest to Poland, but naturally did not exhaust all the 
possibilities for co-operation between Poland and the Agency. Those matters 
had been studied during the latest visit to Poland by the Director General and 
the Deputy Director General for Nuclear Energy and Safety. 
88. Poland was currently constructing its first nuclear power plant, but 
had wide experience in the operation and use of research reactors. The EWA 
pool-type reactor, constructed in 1958 with Soviet assistance, had been 
converted by Polish experts, while the 30 WW MARIA reactor had been designed 
and built in Poland; Poland's research reactor experience could, in 
collaboration with the Agency, benefit developing countries. Poland was, 
moreover, prepared to run courses on research reactor operation, reactor 
technology and isotope and radiopharmaceutical production techniques. 
89. He announced that the Polish Government would be contributing the 
equivalent of US $213 000 in national currency to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund, an amount fully commensurate with its share of the assessed 
budget. Poland was, moreover, prepared to grant ten fellowships to candidates 
from developing countries so that they could study in Polish research centres. 
90. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland), speaking on behalf of his own country 
and of Liechtenstein, stated that the Agency, with its responsibilities, must 
be considered the driving force behind the peaceful utilization of nuclear 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 34 


energy on a world scale; the work of all its departments was of equal 
importance, and the Agency played a prime role in international technical 
co-operation and in the creation of a climate of confidence between States. 


91. International nuclear co-operation was particularly useful for small 
countries, and the Swiss Government had recently submitted to Parliament four 
proposals on the subject, relating to the ratification of a nuclear 
co-operation agreement with Egypt, signature and ratification of the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, ratification of the 
recent amendment of the Agency's Statute and, finally, the amendment of Swiss 
legislation on the import and export of nuclear materials. 
92. Three important events had taken place in Switzerland in the nuclear 
field. Firstly, towards the end of 1984, the Leibstadt power station, with a 
940 MW(e) boiling-water reactor, had been commissioned. The total nuclear 
capacity of the country had thus reached 2.8 GW(e) and the nuclear 
contribution to overall electricity production would rise to approximately 
40%. Secondly, in February 1985, the EDRA national radioactive waste storage 
company had submitted a report which showed that in Switzerland radioactive 
wastes could be eliminated in a lasting and secure manner by final storage. 
Finally, in March 1985, Parliament had approved the general licence for the 
Kaiseraugst plant: the next step would be the construction licence to be 
provided by the Swiss Government, and the plant was expected to be 
commissioned in 1995. 
93. Moreover, nuclear district heating systems had been installed using the 
Beznau station, and steps were being taken to identify sites for low- and 
medium-level wastes in the Alps and to store a reserve stock of enriched 
uranium at the Federal Institute for Reactor Research at Wiirenlingen. The 
Beznau station, Muhleberg and Gosgen plants had functioned with almost no 
technical problems, thus giving a high level of availability. Availability 
from Swiss reactors as a whole had been, moreover, among the best in the world 
in 1984, having reached 89%. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 35 


94. In research and development, Switzerland was continuing the activities 
it had undertaken more than 12 years previously on high-temperature reactors. 
The main parties concerned, apart from the authorities, were the machine 
construction industry and engineering design offices. Also, the Federal 
Institute for Reactor Research had contributed very actively to that work and 
had carried out studies, in co-operation with industry, on small reactors 
(10-50 MW(th)) for district heating; a test installation could be developed in 
a few years. The Institute had also launched a physics programme for advanced 
pressurized-water systems, and also a development programme for nuclear fuel 
in the form of mixed uranium and plutonium carbide or oxide microspheres. It 
was also carrying out major studies on nuclear safety, and an appreciable 
fraction of that work was being done as part of international projects. 
95. In thermonuclear fusion, work was continuing on tokamaks and on plasma 
heating, stability and confinement theory. That work, and also Switzerland's 
participation in the Joint European Torus (JET) project, were part of the 
collaboration between Switzerland and EURATOM; studies on plasma-wall 
interactions were being carried out using the International Energy Agency's 
"TEXTOR" experimental tokamak. A high-current proton ring accelerator was 
being used to study the mechanical behaviour under irradiation of the primary 
wall of a fusion reactor. In the field of superconductivity, Switzerland had 
in 1984 delivered one of the six giant coils for the "Large Coil Task" 
programme, carried out in the United States under the aegis of the 
International Energy Agency. 
96. The report showed that in 1984 world nuclear capacity had increased 
substantially from 190 to 220 GW(e). However, a period of stagnation was 
setting in, and should first and foremost be devoted to work on technical 
standardization, the simplification of licensing procedures, increasing plant 
availability and research into new nuclear applications and technologies. 
Switzerland considered the Agency's activities very useful, and his delegation 
emphasized particularly the importance of the NUSS programme, at present 
nearing completion, and of the nuclear heating programme, which it felt should 
have a place among the Agency's future priorities. 

GC(XXIX)/OR..272 
page 36 


97. Eight meetings of experts or consultants would have taken place in 
Switzerland during the period 1984-1986. In addition, preparations were being 
made for the International Symposium on the Packaging and Transport of 
Radioactive Materials (PATRAM), to be held at Davos in June 1986. Organizing 
four or five events of that kind each year was a major effort for a small 
country such as Switzerland; to which must be added its participation in other 
Agency meetings, as Switzerland had been represented in 1984 at 12 symposia or 
seminars and at 38 meetings of technical committees or working groups. He 
therefore hoped the Agency would do all in its power to reduce the number of 
meetings, regrouping them by priority sectors as required. 
98. The quantity of nuclear material under Agency safeguards had increased, 
and progress had been made in applying safeguards in the nuclear-weapon 
States. The Agency's activities in the field of safeguards had enabled useful 
experience of verification procedures to be acquired, which could be used in 
implementing future agreements on disarmament. It was, however, cause for 
concern that some non-nuclear-weapon countries were operating installations 
which were important from the point of view of safeguards, but not subject to 
them. For that reason, nuclear co-operation with those countries was 
considered to present a risk of nuclear-weapon proliferation; it was therefore 
imperative, in the interests of non-proliferation and co-operation, that those 
countries should show a spirit of solidarity and submit all their nuclear 
activities to safeguards. 
99. The Agency was an authority of primary importance for developing a 
global co-operation regime, within which supplies could be assured more 
predictably and over a longer term, taking into account mutually acceptable 
considerations of non-proliferation. At present CAS was primarily responsible 
for that task; in its current work, it seemed that it had defined, in a 
balanced manner, the requirements for both security of supply and for 
non-proliferation. If the members of CAS maintained a constructive attitude, 
approval of the principles being elaborated should be possible. During the 
discussions of the Committee, the idea had been put forward that it might be 
possible to move on to a permanent study of the nuclear supply situation. 

GC<XXIX)/OR.272 
page 37 


That study might be considered, to a certain degree, to be the counterpart of 
the Agency's work concerning assurances of non-proliferation, and would enable 
abnormal supply situations to be avoided or to be corrected if they arose. 


100. He was very gratified by the results of the Third NPT Review Conference 
and hoped that the provisions adopted in the Final Document would be observed, 
and would thus facilitate the developments of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. 
101. Mr. KATTAN (Saudi Arabia) recalled that the Agency's mandate was 
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, with the goal of bringing 
happiness and prosperity to humanity. It was therefore for the General 
Conference, on the one hand, to consider the work accomplished up to the 
present time, and, on the other, to prepare for the future by taking all steps 
likely to develop its activities and raise efficiency. Its responsibility 
under the Statute was also to condemn acts contrary to the goals of peace and 
prosperity which it had set itself, and prevent a recurrence of such acts 
where they did arise. 
102. He supported the Secretariat's efforts to improve the presentation of 
the budget and hoped that they would continue. In that respect, he 
particularly welcomed the consultations between the Secretariat and Member 
States. 
103. The technical assistance programme, whose importance no longer required 
proof, must be a subject of particular attention for the Secretariat, 
particularly in the matter of planning multi-year programmes and following up 
their implementation. 
104. Concerning the increase in the number of Professional staff from Third 
World countries in conformity with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, particularly in 
senior and policy-making posts, Saudi Arabia shared the Director General's 
opinion that the Agency's policy on the subject should be based first and 
foremost on applying the criterion of competence. From that point of view, 
activities aimed at training experts from developing countries were 
particularly useful, and it was his firm belief that they should continue. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 38 


105. In 1984, world nuclear production of electricity had increased by 17% 
and no less that 34 power reactors in 13 countries had been linked to the 
grid. Moreover, the production costs of energy from conventional sources were 
tending to increase relative to the cost of electricity from nuclear sources. 
The Agency was therefore encouraging research into small and medium power 
reactors suited to the economies and distribution networks of developing 
countries, with a view to promoting the introduction of power reactors in 
those countries. Saudi Arabia was awaiting the results of that research with 
interest, as the development of such reactors would most likely give a fresh 
boost to the peaceful nuclear industry and would thus be in the interest of 
suppliers themselves. 
106. With regard to nuclear safety, the developed countries and the 
Secretariat should strive ceaselessly to find technologically and ecologically 
reliable solutions for the final storage of wastes. In that respect, he 
wished to reaffirm that the marine environment should never be considered as a 
repository for high-level wastes. In addition, given the exorbitant cost for 
small countries of acquiring power reactors, it would be in their interest, as 
the Director General had suggested, to conclude agreements with suppliers 
aimed at setting up joint enterprises for the construction and operation of 
power stations. 
107. It had become apparent at the Third NPT Review Conference that some of 
the articles of the Treaty must be amended if it was to become acceptable to 
all. Moreover, it seemed that the moment had arrived to consider what 
progress had been made in the disarmament negotiations: it was in fact high 
time that tangible results were obtained. 
108. As the Director General had emphasized at the NPT Review Conference, 
nuclear power was less likely to gain wide acceptance if there were no 
agreement on the matter of the threat of armed attacks on peaceful nuclear 
installations; it would be necessary to adopt a legal instrument, acceptable 
to all countries, which formally prohibited such attacks. Nevertheless, it 
was essential that no new restrictions should thereby be applied to the 
transfer of peaceful nuclear technologies - restrictions which some might use 
as a pretext for applying even more rigorous conditions than before to such 
transfers. 

GC<XXIX)/OR.272 
page 39 


109. As to the need for prohibiting military attacks against peaceful 
nuclear installations, delegates would recall that Israel was the only State 
so far to have carried out such an attack. Israel, and South Africa also, 
were driven by belligerent designs; they refused to abide by the safeguards 
regime and were attempting in every way to develop their nuclear capacities 
for purpoes of domination and aggression. On that subject, it was known that 
only recently an American company had delivered to Israel a timing device 
which it could use for its nuclear weapons; that country had moreover 
purchased uranium from two European countries with ulterior motives which were 
certainly not peaceful. Only adhesion to NPT gave proof of the peaceful 
intent of a country's nuclear programme. 
110. With regard to the technical assistance programme, delegates would 
recall that under the terms of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388 the Board of 
Governors had been requested to take steps to ensure that technical assistance 
would be funded through the Regular Budget or through other comparably 
predictable and assured resources. It was in fact unthinkable that the 
current situation should continue; technical assistance was one of the most 
important activities of the Agency and it was absolutely normal that it should 
be funded through the Regular Budget, which would guarantee its continuity and 
expansion. 
111. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), in answer to a statement made at the previous 
plenary session, stated that in his earlier speech he had demonstrated that 
Iran was responsible for continuing the war. That country had rejected all 
peace initiatives, including those of the non-aligned countries and of the 
Secretary General of the Islamic Conference. It had also refused those of 
Iraq and insisted on continuing the war. Under such circumstances, Iran alone 
bore the responsibility for all the consequences of that war. 
112. As to the allusion to the Bushehr site, he drew the attention of the 
General Conference to the letter dated 12 March 1985, which the Resident 
Representative of Iraq had had distributed through the Agency. As the 
Director General of the Agency had made clear before the Board of Governors on 
19 February 1985, the Bushehr site contained no nuclear material, had no 
facility attachment and was not subject to Agency safeguards; therefore, it 
could not qualify as a "nuclear facility". 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 40 


113. Iraq had always affirmed its undertaking not to attack peaceful nuclear 
installations, particularly those subject to the Agency's safeguards, and had 
also urged all States to reach an agreement to that effect. Iraq had, 
moreover, repeatedly rejected and refuted Iran's groundless allegations. It 
had not attacked the Bushehr plant, although it was located near the port of 
Bushehr, which fell within the zone of military operations as defined by 
Iraq. It was also evident that the only solution to that problem and to all 
the other problems emanating from the aggressive war waged by Iran against 
Iraq, lay in putting an end to that war, so that the two countries might live 
in peace. 
114. It was to be noted that every time an international forum discussed 
Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear research centre, Iran reiterated 
its allegations and unfounded accusations. Iraq would not allow itself to be 
influenced by those manoeuvres and would not alter its basic position; Iraq 
and Iraq alone had been the victim of both Israeli and Iranian aggression. On 
that subject, he referred delegates to an article published in the 
International Herald Tribune that very day. 
115. Mr. ASADI (Islamic Republic of Iran), in exercise of the right of 
reply, returned to the Iraqi delegate's allegations concerning attacks on 
civilian areas. Apart from the fact that those allegations were completely 
groundless, they were totally out of context and were irrelevant to the 
discussions. It was his opinion that the President ought to have called that 
delegate to order and requested him to keep to the subject under discussion. 
116. The Iraqi delegate had resorted to that hypocritical manoeuvre in order 
to divert the attention of the General Conference away from the question at 
issue, namely, that of the armed attacks perpetrated by his country against 
the Bushehr nuclear power plant and against the Tehran nuclear research 
centre. In that respect, documents GOV/INF/471 and Add.1, GOV/INF/472 and 
GOV/INF/480 sufficed to support Iran's position concerning the Iraqi military 
attacks against Iranian nuclear installations. He called anew upon the Agency 
to dispatch a fact-finding mission to enquire into the matter and to prepare a 
report. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.272 
page 41 


117. Despite his delegation's reluctance to raise the subject, it was bound 
to remind the General Conference that it had been established, as United 
Nations documents showed, that the Iraqi regime had taken the initiative in 
attacking civilian areas during the war which it had imposed since 
September 1980 on the Islamic Republic of Iran. Concerning the undertaking 
concluded with the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 12 June 1984, he 
referred the General Conference to Security Council document S/16897 of 
16 January 1985, which clearly established that the said undertaking had been 
violated by the Iraqi regime. Finally, he cited the statement by the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations of 2 July 1985, in which the 
Secretary-General had particularly deplored Iraq's announcement that that 
country would resume military attacks against civilian areas in Iran. 


118. Although the Iraqi delegation feigned ignorance, the international 
community was well aware of the blatant and continued violations of 
international law and conventions committed by its regime. His. delegation 
left it to the General Conference to judge whether it was fitting for Iraq to 
make before it its hypocritical pleas for a travesty of peace. 
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
April 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 25 September 1985, at 10.20 a.m. 


President: Mr. MANOUAN (Coted'Ivoire) 
later: Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


General debate and annual report for 
1984 (continued) 1 - 129 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Malaysia 1 -14 
15 -37 


Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 


38 -54 


Belgium 
55 -76 


Sweden 
Syrian Arab Republic 77 -93 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 94 -100 


Mexico 101 -112 
Commission of the European Communities 113 -129 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 9 October 1985. 


**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 

86-1414 
0348e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr.1) (continued) 


1. Mr. SALLEHUDDIN MOHAMAD (Malaysia) recalled that one of the 
reasons why the international community had established the United Nations was 
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The fear of nuclear 
holocaust and the desire to place the benefits of the atomic discovery at the 
service of mankind had prompted the United Nations to establish the 
International Atomic Energy Agency in 1957. In view of the deteriorating 
international and economic situation, nations should rededicate themselves to 
the objectives for which the Agency was established and not allow world 
political tensions and differences to interfere with the vital role the Agency 
was playing in the promotion and acceleration of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
2. His country attached great importance to the Agency's role in promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and believed that the development of 
nuclear technology and its application in agriculture, medicine and industry 
had greatly contributed to the socio-economic development of Member States. 
In view of the increased expectations regarding the Agency's role in that 
area, it was all the more important that assured and adequate resources be 
made available to the Agency. His country supported the Board of Governors 
recommendation of a 12% annual increase in the indicative planning figures for 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for the period 1987-1989 and 
was pleased to announce its own pledge of US $27 000 to the Fund for 1986. 
3. Malaysia continued to receive valuable assistance under the Agency's 
technical assistance programme in the area of nuclear science and technology 
in the form of expert services and the provisions of equipment and training in 
various fields related to nuclear energy. 
4. Food preservation was essential in order to overcome nutritional 
deficiencies and to raise living standards, particularly in developing 
countries. In the South East Asian region, 15 to 30 per cent of the food 
produced had reportedly perished due to spoilage. In order to prevent that, 
storage techniques and methods of extending the shelf-life of products would 
have to be improved. Ionizing radiation had proved to be safe, efficient and 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 3 


energy-saving. The long-term outlook of its application was positive. The 
short-term outlook, however, would depend on the attitude of consumers in 
accepting the technique and the rate at which regulatory obstacles were 
overcome and the International Codex Alimentarius Standards were accepted. 
His country supported the second extension of the International Facility for 
Food Irradiation Technology (IFFIT), for a further two years as from 
January 1986. 


5. His country appreciated the Agency's efforts in promoting the 
development of nuclear power among Member States and particularly welcomed the 
Small and Medium Power Reactor (SMPR) Project Study. The high prices of 
fossil fuel had imposed considerable strains on the economies of the 
developing countries and as those countries continued to develop, it was 
important that they should have the option of considering the development of 
nuclear power as a cheaper alternative source of power generation. The more 
developed nuclear Powers should demonstrate greater readiness in helping 
developing countries in that respect. Since the financing of nuclear power 
plants presented serious difficulties for developing countries, the Agency 
should establish a financial assistance fund to assist those countries in the 
development of nuclear power programmes. 
6. As more and more countries adopted nuclear power as a source of energy, 
the assurance of uninterrupted supplies became increasingly important. 
Significant progress had been made by the Committee on Assurances of Supply in 
that respect. 
7. Access to the whole range of the fuel cycle was particularly vital to 
countries with small nuclear programmes as well as to countries intending to 
establish such programmes. Small and medium power reactors had been found to 
be economically competitive compared to coal-fired plants in certain 
situations, although there were obstacles which still had to be overcome. 
Some countries might opt for large reactors to meet increased expectations, 
either individually or on a regional basis, and to maximize scarce trained 
manpower, materials and financial resources. That should be encouraged since 
it would lessen the threat of international conflict and encourage the 
development of international regional programmes for fuel cycle and 
radioactive waste management facilities. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 4 


8. On the question of nuclear safety, Malaysia supported the priority 
given to the question of nuclear safety and appreciated the advice and 
assistance provided by the radiation protection advisory team. 
9. The facilities provided under the International Nuclear Information 
System programme were an important means of acquiring and sharing knowledge 
and his country would continue to participate fully in that programme. 
10. International co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would 
only be meaningful if it were coupled with the transfer of technology. As the 
scale of research and development on nuclear energy increased emphasis had to 
be placed on specific research and development fields. Some of the RCA Member 
States had assisted Malaysia in that respect. Australia and Japan, for 
example, were helping Malaysia determine specific research and development 
fields through bilateral technical co-operation. To be effective and 
beneficial, consideration also should be given to projects which would involve 
several donor countries and span several years. 
11. The Agency's safeguards activities were very important and the Agency 
should work towards a system of safeguards that was universally accepted. The 
continued refusal of South Africa to subject all its nuclear installations to 
safeguards, despite the repeated calls of the international community, was 
cause for deep concern. The illegal exploitation of Namibia's uranium 
resources by South Africa was also deplorable. The international community 
should take all the necessary measures to give effect to the relevant 
resolutions on that issue. 
12. With reference to the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear research 
reactor, the Director General's efforts in pursuance of resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 were appreciated but it was regrettable that Israel 
continued to refuse to withdraw its threat to renew such attacks. 
13. The Third Review Conference of the NPT had reached agreement in some 
areas but it was disappointing that consensus had not been reached on the main 
concerns. As a small country, Malaysia placed great emphasis on the NPT and 
believed that the NPT would help ensure the country's security. 
14. In conclusion, he expressed the plea that nuclear energy be used for 
the benefit of mankind and for peace. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 5 


15. Mr. VISHNEVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) pointed out 
that the present General Conference was being held on the occasion of the 
fortieth anniversary of the United Nations Organization, the foundation of 
which had been made possible through victory over the forces of fascism. That 
victory had cost the Soviet Union alone the lives of 20 million of its 
citizens. The people of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic had lost more 
than five million of their finest sons and daughters. The tragic lessons of 
the Second World War compelled all honest people of the globe to take a 
resolute stand against the threat of another war, which would sound the 
death-knell for human civilization. 
16. The present session was also taking place in an atmosphere of acute 
international tension created by the dangerous acts of the imperialist 
forces. Those forces continued to escalate the arms race and were jockeying 
for military superiority; they were seeking to undermine strategic stability 
and were engaged in gross interference in the internal affairs of sovereign 
States. Their plans to turn space into an arena for military rivalry and 
their attempts to inveigle their allies into creating first-strike space 
weaponry were particularly hazardous. 
17. Nevertheless, the preconditions for a radical volte-face from 
confrontation to co-operation and to normalization of the international 
situation did exist. As Mr. M.S. Gorbachev, General Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, had pointed out, what 
the Soviet Union wanted and what it was working for was peaceful co-existence, 
equal and dependable security for both the parties concerned, reduction in the 
level of military confrontation and in world military and political tension as 
a whole, and also the prevention of hegemony in any form. 
18. The new peace initiatives put forward by the Soviet Union and the other 
Socialist countries for examination at the current fortieth anniversary 
session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York were patent 
corroboration of that policy. 
19. The Soviet Union and the other Socialist countries had set themselves 
the task of ending the arms race, not in words, but in deeds; they stood for 
the most radical solution to the problem of nuclear weapons, that of banning 
and destroying them completely. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 6 


20. The consistently peaceful foreign policy of the Soviet Union had once 
again been affirmed in Mr. Gorbachev's replies to the American magazine , 
"Time", which constituted an important political document. The Soviet Union 
aimed at breaking the vicious circle of the arms race and pulling the arms 
limitation process out of an impasse, in particular, through its unilateral 
decision to halt all nuclear tests and not to renew them after 1 January 1986, 
if the United States did the same, as well as through its other proposals 
concerning peaceful co-operation and the prevention of an arms race in space. 
The Soviet Union was against preparations for "Star Wars", and offered a 
different prospect to the world community - that of wide-ranging co-operation 
in the peaceful exploration and exploitation of space under conditions where 
it would not be militarized. Those and other Soviet proposals were a sound 
platform for discussion at the summit meeting to take place in November 1985. 
21. Prevention of nuclear proliferation in the world was a central theme in 
averting the threat of nuclear war, limiting the arms race, and maintaining 
strategic stability on both a regional and world-wide plane. The results of 
the Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT, which had confirmed the 
leading role to be played by the Treaty in meeting those challenges, was to be 
welcomed. 
22. As pointed out by Mr. M.S. Gorbachev in his message to the Review 
Conference in Geneva, the Soviet Union, true to its commitments under the 
Treaty, had been doing and would continue to do everything it could to prevent 
the spread of nuclear weapons and to halt the arms race. Confirmation of that 
stand was the voluntary submission by the Soviet Union of some of its peaceful 
nuclear activities to Agency safeguards, the relevant agreement on which had 
entered into force on 10 June 1985. However, the fact could not be overlooked 
that certain countries, more especially Israel and South Africa, did not seek 
to conceal their nuclear ambitions and stubbornly evading accession to the 
Treaty. Such efforts were a serious threat to peace and security, above all 
on the African continent. 
23. Measures aimed at strengthening non-proliferation need not be in any 
way a barrier to international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Hence his delegation actively supported the Agency's work in further 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 7 


developing nuclear power and the nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear safety and 
environmental protection, INIS, controlled nuclear fusion, and technical 
co-operation, which were of interest to all countries. 


24. The considerable work, done by the Agency in 1984 in rendering 
assistance to Member States in the peaceful uses of atomic energy was also 
very much appreciated. In that connection, the Secretariat was to be 
commended on the preparation of such important documents as the annual report 
for 1984 and budget for 1986. Attributing great importance to the furtherance 
of co-operation with developing countries, the Ukrainian Government had 
decided to increase its voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund to 334 000 roubles in national currency. 
25. His delegation wished to point out some of the results obtained by the 
Ukrainian SSR in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
26. Nuclear power was moving more and more to the forefront in a number of 
countries, including the Ukraine. There were four nuclear power stations now 
operating in the Ukraine, the overall capacity of which was some 8 million kW, 
or almost three times more than the capacity of the power stations operating 
in 1980. In 1984, 40 000 million kwh of electricity had been produced by 
those stations, enabling more than 20 million tonnes of conventional fuel to 
be freed for use by the national economy. It was planned to build new units 
at the existing plants and to construct two new power stations and one heat 
and power station. 
27. The main types of reactor employed were the water-cooled, watermoderated 
WWER-440 and WWER-1000 reactors, which had an output, respectively, 
of 440 and 1000 MW(t), as well as the RBMK-1000 uranium graphite channel 
reactor, with an output of 1000 MW(t). Experience had shown that they were 
reliable in operation and met all the requirements of modern technology. A 
standardized design had been worked out for a high-power generating unit which 
could be built by the "production line" process on the basis of highly 
developed industrial techniques. The introduction of it would improve labour 
productivity and substantially simplify plant construction. 
28. The successes achieved had been made possible in many respects by the 
fact that the Ukraine conducted programmed scientific research in various 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 8 


areas associated with the peaceful use of nuclear energy. For that purpose 
the country possessed numerous up-to-date devices for studies in nuclear 
physics, for example an isochronous cyclotron producing proton energy of up 
to 100 MeV and a 2 GeV linear electron accelerator. Those devices were used 
for a broad range of basic and applied nuclear physics research problems. 


29. The results obtained therefrom on the interaction of neutrons with 
various structural materials were being applied in the design and construction 
of nuclear power plants. Simulation of radiation damage using heavy-ion beams 
had made it possible to establish the particular effects of irradiating 
different materials. New data on core physics, fault diagnosis and conditions 
for optimum use of nuclear fuel, etc. enabled scientists to improve the 
performance of power generating units and to make the fuel cycle more 
efficient. 
30. Research was also going on into the construction of fast breeder 
reactors using a dissociating coolant and high-temperature gas-cooled 
reactors. A single radioecological model for the Ukraine had likewise been 
constructed; it described the migration of radionuclides through the 
environment and on the basis of it recommendations for the most effective 
siting of atomic power stations had been formulated. 
31. The Ukraine was giving particular attention to the training of 
personnel for nuclear power production, including such special fields as 


design, construction and operation. Since 1980, more than 1700 specialists 


had been trained. 


32. Radiation techniques had been used as a basis for devising new and 
progressive technologies for considerably improving labour productivity, for 
automating many production processes and for dealing with certain problems 
that could not be resolved by other methods. 
33. The achievements of radiobiology had opened up new ways of intensifying 
agricultural production. Radioisotopes had helped to devise an optimal system 
for plant nutrition and for establishing the basic regularities that governed 
crop yield and formation of the harvest. Radiation-induced selection had made 
it possible to breed economically advantageous mutants of winter wheat, 
barley, maize and other crops. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 9 


34. There were now more than 70 laboratories in the Ukraine for clinical 
diagnostics based on the use of radioisotopes. They were conducting research 
into the functional state and providing early diagnosis of diseases of almost 
all the body organs. 
35. Those were some of the results obtained in the Ukraine in the use of 
nuclear energy. They showed convincingly that the peaceful atom had become a 
component part of the scientific progress of the country. Such achievements 
would not have been possible without a large number of highly-qualified 
scientific and engineering personnel. In that connection he wished to express 
his concern with regard to the representation of different Member States on 
the staff of the Secretariat, which was still unsatisfactory. 
36. Ukrainian scientific research institutes maintained a close connection 
with a number of foreign research centres working in the nuclear field. 
Ukrainian scientists were taking an active part in various international 
discussion groups and were happy to act as hosts to foreign scientists. The 
scientific co-operation between the Ukrainian SSR and the Agency was 
progressing satisfactorily; every year his country received three or four 
groups of specialists from the developing Member States of the Agency, who 
made study tours or attended training courses. His country was actively 
engaged in the exchange of information with the Agency, more especially under 
the INIS and nuclear data programmes. 
37. In conclusion, the Ukrainian delegation wished to join those 
delegations which had favourably viewed the Director General's report and 
extended his congratulations to the Director General in connection with his 
reappointment for a further term of office. The Ukrainian SSR would continue 
to assist the Agency in its work of strengthening peace and security and 
developing international co-operation in the nuclear field. 
38. Mr. ERMBMAMM (Belgium) said that nuclear power had accounted for a 
record 61% of Belgium's electricity in August 1985, while for the year 1984 
the figure was 52%; electricity production had begun to rise again since 1983, 
and had increased by 5% in 1984. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 10 


39. The operational record continued to be satisfactory. In 1984 the 
weighted capacity factor for Belgian nuclear power plants as a whole, all of 
which were the PWR type, had exceeded 85%. That figure had to be compared 
with 68% for the PWR units in operation in the western world. With the 
commissioning of two new units during the next few months - Doel 4 and Tihange 
3, each with a capacity of 1000 MW(e) - nuclear power in Belgium would account 
for more than 60% of the total electricity production in 1986. 
40. With regard to future investments, the French and Belgian Governments, 
together with the corresponding utilities, had agreed in 1984 to Belgian 
participation in the two French nuclear power plants - Chooz Bl and B2, each 
of which had a capacity of 1430 MW(e). 
41. The share of the investments and production was to be 75% for France 
and 25% for Belgium. Lastly, the decision had been taken to build a new 
1280 MW(e) unit, for which the site and date of startup would be decided on in 
the near future. 
42. Since the previous General Conference there had been the following 
developments in the fuel cycle: favourable progress in the industrial 
recycling of plutonium in light-water power plants through creation of the 
industrial and commercial undertakings necessary for that operation. 
Investments were currently being made in the mixed uranium plutonium fuel 
fabrication plant at Dessel, which was owned by Belgonucl6aire. That plant, 
which had started up in 1973 and had an annual capacity of 10 t of 
plutonium-bearing fuel, which would be raised to 35 t of recycled fuel 
fabrication for PWRs, for which there would be a market in Belgium and in the 
neighbouring countries in the coming years. 
43. In October 1984, the new Commox company (with 60% participation by 
COGEMA and 40% by Belgonucleaire) had been set up to promote the sale of mixed 
fuel pins, thereby combining the technology and capacities of the Dessel and 
Cadarache plants. Hence the recent statements by EDF in favour of plutonium 
recycling for its light-water reactors would have adequate services and 
facilities to back them up. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 11 


44. The year 1984 had also witnessed the establishment of industrial 
facilities for resuming the reprocessing of spent fuel. For example, the 
Belgian company Belgoprocess had been formed in November and was ready to 
start investments for adapting amd extending the site of the former 
international company Eurochemic, and decisions would be taken by the end of 
1985. Foreign clients would have an opportunity of having their fuel 
reprocessed there with effect from 1992. 
45. Concurrently with the present General Conference, an important meeting 
was being held on the London Dumping Convention. Those taking part would be 
dealing, among other things, with the dumping of low-level radioactive 
wastes. His delegation wished to pay tribute to the work of the international 
scientific community which had been called once again to express an opinion on 
the scientific justification for dumping. The studies carried out, both by 
the Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD) and by the group of experts (IAEA and ICSU) 
had clearly arrived at conclusions that cast no doubt on the acceptability of 
dumping for human beings and the ecosystem from the radiological standpoint. 
For the time being therefore the Belgian Government would opt for dumping. 
46. With regard to international safeguards, his delegation was gratified 
to see that in 1984, as before, no anomaly indicating diversion of nuclear 
material had been detected. Furthermore, 127 non-nuclear-weapon States party 
to the Treaty had fulfilled their commitments under Article II and had not 
sought to increase the number of States possessing nuclear weapons. 
47. The political aspect of applying safeguards, more especially the fact 
that placing the facilities of a State under Agency safeguards was voluntary, 
had always to be kept in mind. The burden of the safeguarding should always 
be assessed in the light of that fact and he believed that the cost was 
already too high. It was to lighten the burden on the operators that Belgium 
was collaborating with the Agency, through its support programme, in the 
search for improved methods of inspection and control. 
48. Furthermore, it was heartening to see that the Soviet Union, by making 
two of its reactors open to Agency inspections, had joined the other 
nuclear-weapon depositaries of NPT which had accepted the principle of Agency 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 12 


safeguards on some of their civil nuclear facilities. Although a symbolic 
gesture, it was a step in the right direction and lessened the discriminatory 
aspects in Article III.l of the Treaty. 


49. Nevertheless, the ultimate aim was and should always be the application 
of safeguards to all civil nuclear activities in the world. Agency safeguards 
could not be fully effective unless that condition was fulfilled. Their 
application had to be just as effective in States that did not possess nuclear 
weapons and were not party to NPT as in those that had nuclear weapons. In 
the case of the latter the acceptance and application of safeguards to all 
their civil facilities would be of definite exemplary value. Until that time 
the nuclear-weapon States should take over a greater share of the safeguards 
budget. 
50. With regard to technical co-operation, he noted that, although there 
had been a slowdown in nuclear power programmes throughout the world, it could 
be explained by the economic crisis that had adversely affected a large number 
of both developed and developing countries. 
51. It had to be realised, however, that despite that major handicap, 
efforts at bilateral or multilateral co-operation had continued, as shown by 
the nuclear co-operation agreements of the last few years and the exchange of 
research workers and trainees organized with the aid of the Agency as well as 
through the individual backing of States. Belgium was taking part as best it 
could in that co-operation and was promoting both bilateral and multilaterial 
exchanges. Since the previous General Conference, Government agreements had 
been negotiated with Egypt and China. 
52. In his report to the General Conference, the Director General had 
pointed out that the bulk of the Agency's work consisted in being an instrument 
for the exchange of experience, for drafting common guidelines for the 
transfer of knowledge and technology and for the harmonization of action. For 
Belgium, the success of the meeting in February 1985 of senior staff from the 
Agency and the Mol Nuclear Energy Research Centre was an illustration of the 
quality of the Agency's work in that field. Belgium's offer to receive 
trainees from developing countries who were applying for the job of safeguards 
inspector for the course to be held in 1986 would strengthen still more its 
collaboration with the Agency. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.2 73 
page 13 


53. Belgium had been on the Board of Governors for the last two years as a 
designated Member. Its activities had mainly concerned the following six 
areas: the budget, with a view to applying a policy of zero growth; the 
safeguards budget, with a view to limiting its scope to industry, more 
especially sensitive facilities; the definition of new bases for applying 
safeguards in the light of acquired experience; the financing of safeguards, 
so as to strive for more equality and request the industrialized States for 
greater contributions; the revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole, 
so as to arrive at a more equitable representation of certain developing 
countries, and also the European countries highly advanced in nuclear 
technology; and, finally, the distribution of technical assistance, since it 
was questionable whether it was fair that nearly 20 per cent of the funds 
donated by States for technical assistance had been channelled between 1981 
and 1984 in the direction of countries that were not developing, and that in 
1985 the figure might reach 25 per cent. 
54. Despite its relative efficiency, the Agency was rather too fossilized 
in its approach. The Board of Governors went back year after year to the same 
problems, sometimes the most important ones. It was essential that everyone's 
voice should be heard. Nuclear energy was a matter for everyone and to seek 
to hinder its development was hardly an enlightened attitude. 
55. Ms. DAHL (Sweden) said that she first wished to congratulate the 
President on his election and also to extend her good wishes to the Director 
General on the occasion of his reappointment for a further term of office. 
56. As far as nuclear developments in Sweden were concerned, the last two 
power reactors in the Swedish twelve-reactor programme - the Forsmark 3 and 
Oskarshamn 3 - had recently been put into commercial operation. Sweden now 
had an ample and safe supply of cheap electricity based almost equally on 
hydroelectric and nuclear power. There would not be any further need for a 
large electricity-generating facility in Sweden for at least another decade. 
57. Effective economy measures, including the introduction of new 
technologies and the increased use of indigenous fuels, had enabled Sweden to 
cut down its oil imports by half and attempts were being made to reduce 
further the energy demands. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 14 


58. Her delegation believed that national energy policies should not be 
based on conventional forecasts, which had already proved to be obsolete in 
the experience of many countries, including her own. Such forecasts 
underestimated, for example, the possibilities of increased efficiency, 
renewable sources of energy, and also the potential sources of hydroelectric 
power so far largely unexploited in the developing countries. Bach country 
had to find its own optimum solution. Sweden's own energy strategy for the 
future would be a step-by-step approach to the choice between available 
alternatives, with environmental effects and safety as the prime 
considerations and emphasis on renewable supplies. 
59. Efforts to improve nuclear safety in Sweden were concentrated, in the 
waste management area, on direct disposal of spent fuel without reprocessing. 
Sweden was anxious to exchange experience in further developing such concepts 
and all countries were urged to reassess their fuel cycle planning with regard 
for alternatives which minimized the production, movement and storage of 
Plutonium and other weapons-usable materials. 
60. Sweden's central intermediate storage facility for spent fuel (CLAB) 
had been put into operation in 1985, according to schedule. The facility was 
able to house all fuel from Swedish power reactors and would give ample time 
for planning the ultimate disposal of high-level wastes. Her delegation 
wished to stress once again in that connection that waste management was 
essentially a national responsibility and that strict minimum safety 
requirements should be agreed upon internationally. 
61. As the Director General had stated, certain countries with limited 
nuclear energy programmes hoped to be able to rely on other States with regard 
to the back-end of the fuel cycle. Her delegation felt, however, that 
inasmuch as spent fuel was a potential source of weapons-usable material, 
international collaboration in that area had to be designed to enhance the 
reliability of the non-proliferation regime and not add to the risks of 
horizontal and vertical proliferation. 
62. With regard to the current meeting of the contracting parties to the 
London Dumping Convention, which was to consider the Agency's definitions and 
recommendations relating to radioactive wastes, Sweden was among the countries 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 15 


which considered that no dumping at all of radioactive waste should be 
permitted. Sweden's own central underground facilitiy for ultimate disposal 
of low- and intermediate-level waste was now under construction, hence the 
problem was being solved without any need to dump radioactive waste into the 


sea. 


63. The Agency's Annual Report for 1984 showed that it had continued to 
satisfy the expectations of Member States. An increased emphasis on safety 
issues in the Agency's programme, with the new constructive initiatives, was 
very much to be welcomed. Her delegation appealed to all Member States to 
sign the International Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material, which still lacked the necessary ratifications for it to enter into 
force. 
64. Sweden regarded the Agency's safeguards activities as essential and 
therefore planned to join those countries participating in the special support 
programme. It was gratifying to note, as in previous years, that no diversion 
of safeguarded material had been brought to light by inspections in 1984. 
65. It was commendable that the Agency had been able to increase the funds 
available for technical co-operation in the previous year by over 20%, mainly 
through more streamlined administrative procedures. Though that high growth 
rate might not be attained in the coming years, she felt sure that the funds 
available would be used effectively for longer-range planning of the Agency's 
activities. 
66. The Agency's endeavours to make savings and reduce costs were 
impressive. Clearly, however, if the goals that had been set were to be 
achieved there would have to be a limit on the economizing. Her delegation 
believed that the allocations for safeguards and technical assistance would 
have to be increased. The fact that there was need to strengthen the Agency's 
safeguards system further if it was to carry out effective safeguards 
operations in all States justified a special regime for financing safeguards 
and it was hoped that a final formula would be agreed on in that regard. 
67. Technical co-operation and assistance, as the Agency's second priority, 
also warranted greater funding. Sweden was already providing extrabudgetary 

GC(XXrx)/OR.273 
page 16 


resources and urged all other donor countries to step up their contributions 
to extrabudgetary funds, in addition to their increased contributions to the 
Regular Budget. 


68. Nevertheless, in the present period of economic constraints, the right 
balance between the Agency's activities would have to be found, without an 
overall budget growth. The Agency was to be commended on having adopted 
successful measures to save and reallocate resources in the past. The Board 
of Governors, however, should go into greater detail at an earlier stage when 
considering alternative programmes. Open discussions of that kind by the 
Board would help the Agency to utilize the means available more effectively. 
69. For a long time the question of a more equitable form of representation 
on the Board of Governors had been under discussion. The distribution of 
elected or designated seats did not reflect the change in membership in the 
various regions of the world or in the technological capabilities of a number 
of countries. Sweden believed that the amendment of Article VI of the Statute 
was called for but that it would have to be considered within the context of 
the whole Article and not only in terms of the individual categories of 
elected or designated seats. A proposal to that effect co-sponsored by Sweden 
had been transmitted to the General Conference. 
70. The Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT had now finished and 
it had been clear throughout that it was the wish of the signatories to 
support and strengthen the Treaty. The adoption of a final document by 
consensus was proof of that fact. However, the lack of progress in 
disarmament had continued to place the non-proliferation regime under severe 
strain. Within that context Member States should realize the urgent need for 
achieving a complete test ban. Almost all States had responded to the call by 
the Review Conference, in its final declaration, for the resumption of 
trilateral negotiations in 1985. Her delegation urged nuclear-weapon States 
to negotiate and conclude a complete test ban treaty as a matter of the 
highest priority. 
71. The meeting which was to take place shortly in Geneva between the 
Soviet and American leaders would be an opportunity to demonstrate a genuine 
will to achieve specific results. The two Superpowers were urged to strive 

GC(XX1X)/0R.273 
page 17 


for the necessary dialogue that could finally break the chain of setbacks and 
disappointments of recent years. 


72. With regard to the review of Articles of NPT of immediate concern to 
the Agency (Articles III and IV), the deliberations of the Review Conference 
and the final document had reflected a unanimous appreciation of the Agency's 
work during the period covered. During the discussion of Article IV great 
hopes had been placed on the work of the Agency and its continued role as an 
instrument for channelling nuclear technology between signatory States, with 
special emphasis on the developing countries. 
73. As far as Article III was concerned, the Swedish Government was pleased 
to see that all the Parties to the Treaty had agreed that supplying countries 
should require from non-nuclear-weapon States which had not acceded to the 
Treaty the same non-proliferation commitments as had been accepted by the 
parties to NPT. All Member States were urged to establish a standard in that 
respect as a necessary basis for extended trade and international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
74. South Africa had recently been a focus of attention because of its 
abhorrent apartheid policy and, in the nuclear field, because of the concern 
that South Africa might be a potential nuclear Power. It was essential for 
South Africa to place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
Until it did so Sweden would not be able to offer that country any 
co-operation in the nuclear field. 
75. At the previous General Conference the Swedish delegation had called 
upon nuclear-weapon Member States of the Agency to separate their civil and 
military nuclear activites. They were now further urged to undertake the same 
commitments and to submit to the same verification under Agency safeguards in 
relation to all peaceful nuclear activites under their jurisdiction as the 
non-nuclear-weapon States party to NPT. It was heartening to note in that 
connection that the NPT Review Conference had reached a consensus in urging 
all nuclear-weapon States to take steps to eliminate that inequality. She 
particularly wished to stress that the Review Conference had reached unanimous 
agreement on the principle of universal application of the Agency's safeguards 
system to all peaceful nuclear activities in all States. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 18 


76. In conclusion, the Swedish delegation hoped that the above principle 
could be taken as a new point of departure for future relations with Member 
States of the Agency that had not acceded to NPT. It was the responsibility 
of everyone to harness advanced technologies available in such a way as to 
benefit mankind and at the same time ensure that there was no threat to 
mankind's survival. 
77. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic), recalling his statements on 
some organizational aspects of the General Conference at its preceding 
sessions, stressed the importance of saving time and concentrating on the 
truly substantial issues. Furthermore, there should be better co-ordination 
between meetings - those of the Committee of the Whole were held at the same 
time as the general debate, where delegates delivered speeches, proposed 
ideas, provided information, and exchanged views. In order to enable 
delegates to attend both, he suggested that the Committee meet in the 
mornings, leaving the afternoons for the general debate. Should it be thought 
that such a procedure would reduce the time devoted to the general debate, the 
solution would be to impose a time limit on speakers and to ask them to adhere 
strictly to topics on the agenda. If delegates wished to inform the 
Conference of their own national activities, nuclear potentials, etc., they 
could do so by circulating printed material. Speakers might save time by not 
dwelling too long on compliments and by focusing on the agenda items and on 
the development of the Agency's work in general. 
78. Referring to the latter subject, he wished to draw attention to the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics. Although the Centre was doing 
excellent work under the able guidance of Dr. Abdus Salam, the idea of setting 
up an international organization for one aspect of physical research was 
rather erroneous. There was no denying the fact that the Centre had offered 
valuable services to a large number of States and that many scholars all over 
the world had greatly benefited from its scientific and training activities. 
It was therefore unfortunate that the funds allocated to the Centre were 
meagre, and insufficient for its growing activities and ambitions. Neither 
the Agency nor UNESCO had provided it with resources which might enable it to 
achieve its objectives. In view of its record of conducting on a modest 
budget programmes and activities which were of much greater and more tangible 

GC(KXIX)/OR.273 
page 19 


value than some other activities of the Agency on which enormous amounts were 
spent, he commended to the Conference's attention the following suggestions: 


(1) The Centre should be renamed "The International Centre for Physics"; 
(2) Funds allocated to the Centre by the Agency should be increased at least 
to US $10 million per annum; (3) The Centre should have under it a higher 
institute to teach physics and to award scientific degrees with a view to 
meeting the pressing needs of the developing world. 
79. Observing that little progress had been achieved in settling a number 
of important issues which had been included in the Conference's agenda year 
after year, he hoped that the IAEA would not become a victim of political 
stalemate like many other international organizations. Consisting mainly of 
scientific and technical people, the Agency could be expected to take its 
decisions and make its recommendations in a more businesslike fashion. In 
that connection, he suggested that no item should remain on the agenda for 
more than three years, during which period decisions should be arrived at in a 
democratic and objective manner. 
80. The first of such "stale" topics, which appeared in the agenda of the 
twenty-ninth General Conference was the consequences of the Israeli military 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research reactor and the standing threat to repeat 
that attack for the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in 
Iraq and in the entire region. 
81. Israel had been given enough time to withdraw its threat to destroy 
nuclear plants in the area. During the preceding three years it had not 
respected any of the resolutions adopted by the United Nations or by the 
Agency. It had indeed shown no sign of even intending to do so. 
International will had been persistently ignored by Israeli obstinacy and 
intransigence. No heed had been paid even to nations with which it had 
special relations. Juridically speaking, intention to commit murder was 
murder. Since leniency and diplomatic endeavours had failed to deter racist 
and aggressive Governments, penalization unfortunately seemed to be the more 
effective weapon; bearing that in mind and also to avoid any future crimes, he 
called upon the Conference to do justice to history and humanity and to 
implement operative paragraph 3 of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, wherein it 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 20 


had decided to withhold Agency research contracts to Israel, to discontinue 


the purchase of equipment and materials from Israel and to refrain from 


holding seminars, scientific and technical meetings in that country. 


82. Similar to the agony of the Arab and Middle Eastern States was that of 
countries in Africa. The racist regime in South Africa was threatening other 
countries in the region with its nuclear weapons and thus endangering world 
peace. Receiving assistance from Israel and enjoying some international 
facilities, that regime challenged the good will of the world and took, no 
notice of the resolutions of the United Nations or of the Agency. Syria 
therefore called upon all Member States to adhere strictly to resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/423 and the Conference to adopt any resolution which would put 
pressure on South Africa and curb its nuclear hegemony. 
83. Another matter worthy of the Conference's attention was the poor 
representation of the regions of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia on 
the Board of Governors. For ten long years the topic had been discussed every 
year both at the General Conference and in the Board, and in spite of ample 
justification no progress had been achieved. It was high time that the 
Conference do justice to those regions and adopt a definitive resolution 
amending Article VI.A of the Statute. 
84. Mention should be made in that context of another kind of pressure 
applied on States belonging to those two regions and to other developing 
countries under the pretext of the financing of safeguards and technical 
assistance. 
85. Although some Member States were particularly interested in safeguards, 
it was well known that safeguards were not applied to all States 
irrespectively. In spite of certain benefits of safeguards, it must be 
pointed out that they were not the most effective weapon against nuclear 
proliferation owing to their non-applicability to all States alike and to the 
unwillingness on the part of countries in the critical regions of the world to 
accept them voluntarily. Nevertheless, the Agency spent out of its Regular 
Budget as much on safeguards as it did on its other activities although 
safeguards inspection and control were limited to facilities intended for 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 21 


peaceful purposes. If such a situation continued, it could not be expected 


that desirable efforts would be made to prevent the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. The sad fact was that while the Agency spent generously on 
safeguards, a small part of its Regular Budget was allocated to the building 
of the technical, scientific and nuclear infrastructure for peaceful purposes 


in the needy States, which formed the majority, so that such expenditure had 
to be met from special contributions for technical assistance. Therefore, in 
order to rectify that unfair and lopsided situation, he suggested the 
establishment of a special fund, to be financed basically by nuclear nations 
and by voluntary contributions from other countries, to cover the expenditure 
on NPT safeguards, while technical assistance could be financed essentially 
from the Regular Budget, supplemented by contributions from developed and 
developing countries. 


86. As for the implementation of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 concerning 
staffing of the Secretariat, there had been an improvement in the situation, 
for which the Director General should be commended. However, he wished to 
propose some change in the recruitment procedure: instead of individual 
assessment of applicants one after another, there should be collective 
evaluation of candidates by a committee appointed by the Director General. 
87. At the preceding session, Syria had made a practical proposal calling 
for the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, which had 
received the Director General's attention. It was thought that Israel might 
respond favourably, especially since it had frequently called for the 
establishment of such a zone. Israel's answer to the proposal was complete 
silence, followed by a practical response - the erection of missiles with 
nuclear warheads in southern Syria occupied since 1967. That action by Israel 
endangered not only Syria, but all States in the region and threatened world 
peace. The international community should view that development with serious 
concern. It meant an escalation of the Arab-Israeli conflict and a 
qualitative step towards more wars. It also meant that in order to maintain 
the arms balance in the area, Syria and the other Arab countries might seek a 
similar weapon for self-defence. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 22 


88. It was undoubtedly the duty of the international community to realize 
the danger of that situation and to try to remedy it before it was too late. 
It should respond to the call of the United Nations Secretary-General for the 
establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, who must have sensed 
Israel's concealed intentions to possess nuclear weapons in order to impose 
its hegemony on the entire region. 
89. A European State had for a year been negotiating with Israel for 
nuclear co-operation. He appealed to that State to terminate those 
negotiations. The latter should remember that Israel did not abide by its 
commitments, as had been shown by history. Israel's sole interest was selfinterest, 
and it disregarded even the interest of its so-called friends. 
Syria hoped that all other States would refrain from offering nuclear 
assistance to Israel in any form unless it undertook to comply with the 
requests of the United Nations and the IAEA by placing its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. 
90. Replying to a comment from a European delegate during the preceding 
year's Conference to the effect that enough had been said about the Israeli 
issue and that the question of the Israeli attack against the Iraqi reactor 
and of further Israeli threat should be closed so that attention could be paid 
to other matters, he said that the Arab countries were not fond of speaking 
about Israel at the Agency, but that they were legitimately defending 
themselves by peaceful means. The Agency had been created for peaceful 
purposes, to provide an opportunity for peace lovers to remove the danger of a 
nuclear disaster and to protect mankind. It was certainly Israel which caused 
all that talk, all that conflict and all that tragedy. It was Israeli jet 
fighters which had violated the air space of three Arab countries when they 
had gone to bomb the Iraqi nuclear reactor and to destroy it. Then it had 
announced quite calmly, even confidently, to the world what it had described 
as a victory. The so-called triumph had been followed by the notorious threat. 


91. It was Israel which was involved in the secret and dubious deal 
concerning Krytron timers against the United States laws for the purpose of 
using those in nuclear armaments. Nor could one ignore the shady deal about 
the shipping of uranium from Luxembourg to Israel in violation of Luxembourg's 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 23 


commitments to the United Kingdom, in contravention of the safeguards 
agreement and in total disregard of the Agency's resolutions on the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 


92. It was to be regretted that the United States should have accepted 
Israel's claim that the Krytron was for peaceful purposes. It was equally 
regrettable for the United Kingdom to accept that the uranium was to be used 
for peace and not war. 
93. It was his duty to sound the alarm. If one continued to be indifferent 
and took no decisive measures, the day would soon come when Israel would drop 
its nuclear bomb on an Agency Member State and would say that it was an act of 
peace intended for the welfare of humanity. He hoped that on that day the 
conscience of the sympathizers of Israel would be aroused and that they would 
be bold enough to recognize that Israel's nuclear bomb was not for peace but 
for war and destruction of mankind. 
94. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
the forthcoming 40th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations should 
serve to remind the world of the powerful force which was represented by a 
union of countries and nations in the name of just and noble goals inspired by 
a desire to save human civilization from the threat of destruction. The 
lesson to be learnt from history was that the threat of war must be resisted 
as long as possible before weapons spoke - all the more if they were nuclear 
weapons. 
95. The present level of development of science and technology was such as 
to create an entirely new situation which could lead to a qualitatively new 
phase in the arms race. The Soviet Union, conscious of its responsibility for 
the fate of the world, was taking all the steps it could to halt that 
dangerous process and to break through the vicious circle of the arms race to 
a state of mutual co-operation and agreement between the Soviet Union and the 
United States of America with regard to the most important international 
problems. One such step had been the announcement - on the 40th anniversary 
of the Hiroshima tragedy - of a unilateral moratorium on all nuclear 
explosions and the invitation to the United States to follow suit and to 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 24 


resume negotiations for a comprehensive test ban. The Soviet Union had also 
proposed world-wide co-operation in the utilization of outer space on 
condition that its militarization could be prevented. The adoption of those 
proposals would constitute an important step towards the ultimate goal of 
abolishing nuclear weapons and strengthening world security. 


96. An important event for the international non-proliferation regime had 
been the Third NPT Review Conference, recently held at Geneva, at which the 
Soviet leader, Mr. Gorbachev, had pointed out that no new State had acquired 
nuclear weapons since the conclusion of NPT, that no other treaty relating to 
armaments had so many parties to it as NPT, and that the international 
non-proliferation regime based on NPT had become a genuine instrument of 
peace. He had also attributed to the IAEA an important role in maintaining 
that regime and in solving problems relating to energy and other problems of 
concern to all mankind. 
97. The efforts of the Soviet Union and the other Socialist countries were 
directed towards resolving the fundamental question of the nuclear age 


whether atomic energy would serve to meet the growing needs of mankind or 


whether it would be used to turn the planet into a lifeless desert. 


98. The IAEA also was called upon to play an important part in that 
endeavour. His delegation on the whole appreciated the Agency's work and 
considered that the annual report for 1984 and the budget for 1986 should be 
approved. While remaining within sensible budgetary constraints by applying 
rational planning procedures and keeping administrative costs low, the Agency 
was successfully conducting its major programmes in the fields of nuclear 
power, nuclear safety and environmental protection, the fuel cycle, 
safeguards, nuclear information, technical assistance and thermonuclear 
fusion, and should be encouraged to continue to do so in the future. In 
particular, his delegation welcomed the further improvements in the Agency's 
safeguards. The reliability, credibility and objectivity of inspection 
results and the high qualifications of the staff were incontestable; 
nevertheless, further efforts must be made to perfect and standardize 
procedures, methods and documentation, to develop and apply new techniques and 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 25 


equipment for non-destructive testing and observation, to computerize all the 
principal data-handling operations, and to set up a system for the evaluation 
and control of the results of inspection activities as applied to all types of 
reactor and fuel cycle facility, including uranium enrichment and plutonium 
recovery plants. 


99. His delegation also noted with satisfaction the improvements in 
planning methods and the increased volume and effectiveness of the technical 
assistance programme, which was aimed at establishing and developing a nuclear 
infrastructure, training highly qualified scientific and technical personnel, 
and introducing nuclear technology and isotope techniques in agriculture, 
medicine and industry in the developing countries. Unfortunately, the actual 
delivery of technical assistance still fell short of the financial resources 
available; none the less, his country was prepared to go along with the 
proposed increase in the target for voluntary contributions to US $30 million 
and would itself be contributing 92 000 roubles in national currency. In that 
connection it was worth pointing out that, if both voluntary contributions and 
direct and indirect expenditure under the Regular Budget were taken into 
account, the funds available for technical assistance and co-operation were 
growing faster than those for any other activity. It therefore seemed wise to 
maintain the traditional system of financing technical co-operation on the 
basis of voluntary contributions in national currency. 
100. In the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic the range of application 
of atomic energy and radiation in the various sectors of the economy, in 
science and in the public health services was steadily being enlarged. A 
dual-purpose nuclear power and heat supply plant was under construction near 
Minsk which would consist of two units, each with a standard WWER-1000 reactor 
having a thermal output of 3000 MW. Supplying the cities of Byelorussia with 
nuclear heat was facilitated by the fact that all the cities had been rebuilt 
after World War II and therefore had modern district-heating networks. 
Research and development work continued on a pilot industrial plant with a 
300 MW(e) fast reactor based on a new type of coolant - chemically reactive 
nitrogen tetroxide. Various institutions were successfully pursuing basic and 
applied research in all the major branches of contemporary science. Special 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 26 


irradiation devices were being used for research purposes, in medical centres 
and for the production of fertilizers and new materials. His country was also 
participating actively in a number of Agency programmes, including those 
relating to nuclear data and the International Nuclear Information System 


(INIS). 


101. Mr. ROSENZWEIG-DIAZ (Mexico) thanked Member States for their 
expression of solidarity with his country following the disasters which had 
occurred a few days previously. 
102. His country was intending to use nuclear power to help meet its 
electricity needs. The installed capacity of electrical power in his country 
had reached 20 202 MW and it was estimated that demand would increase at an 
average of 7% over the following few years. Work on the two Laguna Verde 
nuclear power units was being accelerated and the first one was due to be put 
into commercial operation in 1986 and the second in 1988. 
103. With regard to the Agency's activities, his country believed that the 
Agency had three main objectives: technical co-operation, safeguards and 
nuclear safety. The annual report, contained in document GC(XXIX)/748, showed 
the Agency's success in those areas despite regrettable budgetary restrictions. 
104. Technical assistance was the main way in which the Agency could spread 
the benefits of nuclear energy throughout the world and reduce the 
technological disparity which was a source of imbalance and conflicts between 
developing and industrialized countries. For that reason, technical 
assistance should be given priority over all other considerations. It was 
unfortunate that financing of technical assistance, unlike safeguards, 
remained uncertain owing to the voluntary nature of contributions which were 
always dependent on the economic and political situation in the donor 
countries. The decision taken by the Board of Governors to fix the average 
increase in indicative planning figures for the period 1987-1989 at only 12% 
was regrettable. Although more efficient organization had made some increases 
in technical assistance programmes possible, the limited available staff 
resources meant that such increases were finite. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 27 


105. With regard to the staffing of the Secretariat, the increase in the 
number of nationals from developing countries was most welcome but further 
increases were necessary. The Agency needed more staff from developing 
countries in high-level Professional posts in order to improve its 
understanding of the needs and views of the Third World. The Director General 
should continue to report annually to the Board of Governors and to the 
General Conference on the staffing of the Secretariat. 
106. The Commmittee on Assurances of Supply had achieved some modest 
results. It was urged to continue its work, in a positive spirit since with 
the political will of all the participants, work, on the principles of 
international co-operation could and should be concluded in the near future. 
107. Mexico had participated actively in the Third NPT Review Conference, 
defending the principle of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the 
promotion of international co-operation for the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The General Conference should examine the results of the Third Review 
Conference since the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy was the main 
objective of both the Agency and NPT. The final document of the Review 
Conference did not reflect the legitimate aspirations of developing countries 
regarding the application of the whole Treaty but was simply a compromise text 
which gave unbalanced emphasis to the national interests of certain parties to 
the Treaty. The Third Review Conference had not brought any constructive 
elements to promote a realistic and balanced development of the NPT system. 
108. There continued to be a lack, of genuine political will on the part of 
certain groups of States to promote both international co-operation in the 
nuclear field and to apply nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposes. It 
was deplorable that, 15 years after NPT had entered into force and 30 years 
after the establishment of the Agency, the nuclear Powers continued to neglect 
their obligations under Article IV of NPT. 
109. It was to be hoped that the United Nations Conference for the Promotion 
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy would 
make a positive contribution to the development of the Third World. It was 
essential that specific decisions be taken on the establishment of a genuine 
system of international co-operation in the nuclear field. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 28 


110. With regard to the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi Nuclear 
Research Reactor, the Director General's efforts in accordance with 
paragraph 4 of resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 were commendable. Special 
attention should be given to studying the possible use of revised mechanisms 
to avoid military attacks on nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards and 
the possible implementation of the technical aspects of verification which 
might be necessary. 
111. His country reaffirmed its confidence in the effectiveness of the 
Agency's safeguards system but stressed the need to adopt, in the appropriate 
forum, an international legal instrument which would specifically ensure 
protection against military attacks on all nuclear facilities subject to 
Agency safeguards. 
112. His delegation condemned the racist regime of South Africa and drew 
attention to the resolutions 38/181A/B and 38/39A of the United Nations 
General Assembly relating respectively to the implementation of the 
declaration on the denuclearization of Africa and South Africa's nuclear 
capability and the apartheid policies of the South African Government. That 
Government was urged to place forthwith all its installations under Agency 
safeguards. The South African Government was flagrantly violating the 
Agency's Statute and was not acting in conformity with the principles of the 
United Nations Charter. 
113. Mr. AUDLAND (Commission of the European Communities) recalled that 
in January 1986 the European Community would be enlarged to include both Spain 
and Portugal and would then have a population of some 320 million. Its 
economy, with a GDP similar to that of the USA, would rely heavily on nuclear 
energy and its nuclear energy production capacity, likely to exceed 79 GW(e), 
would be greater than that of any other major industrialized region in the 
world. 
114. While individual Member States had been pursuing their own energy 
policies long before, it was only in the second half of the 1970s that real 
efforts began to be made to establish a coherent and comprehensive approach to 
energy in the Community. A major step was the agreement, reached in 1980, on 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 29 


Community energy objectives for 1990. The main aim was to reduce dependence 


on imported oil and specific objectives had been set for reducing reliance on 


oil generally for improving energy efficiency and for increasing the 


contribution from other fuel sources, especially coal and nuclear sources. 


115. All Member States undertook, to pursue energy policies, at national 
level, which would contribute to the attainment of those objectives. However, 
the situation in each Member State was very different, and there was never any 
suggestion that they should all follow the same path. 
116. All Member States had agreed that in order to reduce dependence on oil 
it was necessary to increase the use of nuclear and solid fuels. They had 
also recognized that nuclear energy, in Community conditions, often gave a 
competitive advantage over coal, and still greater advantage over oil for 
electricity generation. 
117. Although some Member States had not adopted nuclear programmes, all of 
them had agreed that it was important for the Community as a whole to develop 
further the use of nuclear energy including the use of reprocessing and 
serious consideration of the possible use of fast breeder reactors. 
118. An in-depth review of progress made in 1984 suggested that the targets 
for 1990 would all be attained. 


119. In other words, by 1990 the Community would be depending on oil for 
only 40% of its energy, instead of over 60% which had been the case in 1973; 
its energy efficiency would have improved by at least 25%; and some 83% of its 
electricity generation would be from solid fuels and nuclear sources, as 
compared to just over 50% in 1973. 
120. In 1973, nuclear had provided less than 2% of the Community's energy 
requirements. By 1990, nuclear's share of electricity production would be 


about 35%, satisfying 14% of the Community's overall demand for energy. 


121. Community energy ministers had agreed that efforts should be continued 
after 1990, with the restructuring of the Community's energy policy and had 


asked the Commission of the Communities to propose new energy objectives on a 


longer time-scale. Those objectives for 1995 had been published recently. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 30 


Further substantial improvements in energy efficiency were envisaged. Energy 
demand was expected to rise by a quarter, by the end of the century; most of 
that increased demand would be met by nuclear electricity which was expected 
to account for 40% of all the Community's electricity. That figure would of 
course vary greatly among Member States. By 1995, nuclear generation would 
continue to rely almost entirely on existing reactor types. However, the 
Commission was also encouraging the development of a fast breeder reactor 
within the Community. The Commission had suggested that it would be sensible 
and realistic to aim to construct fast breeders which were fully competitive 
with LWRs within 20 years. 


122. The results of a recent Community-wide public opinion poll on energy 
policy, organized by the Commission, showed that despite easier energy 
markets, the majority of those questioned considered that the energy problem 
was serious and would remain so for at least a decade. Almost half of those 
questioned favoured further measures to reduce dependence on imported energy, 
and especially imported oil. Forty-three per cent of those questioned 
regarded nuclear power as worthwhile, while 38% were opposed to it, and 
expressed particular concern, firstly about the disposal of radioactive waste, 
and secondly about radioactive emissions. 
123. With regard to research and development, over the four-year period 
1984-1987, the Community would spend about US $3.6 billion on research and 
development of all kinds, of which about US $1.8 billion would go to the 
energy sector, and over half of the latter figure would be spent on nuclear 
development. 
124. Fusion would account for a major proportion of research and 
development. It was hoped that, in the long term, fusion would make a major 
contribution to energy supply. However, its development was very expensive. 
That was why all work on fusion in the Community was closely integrated. 
Sweden, Switzerland and Spain had long ago joined with the Community in 
constructing JET, which was continuing to perform well and to establish world 
records in fusion energy performance. The Community would allocate 
US $520 million to fusion research and development over the years 1985-89. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.273 
page 31 


125. The fusion programme planned to demonstrate successively: the 
scientific feasibility of fusion, which was the objective of JET and of the 
support equipment in national laboratories; its technological feasibility, for 
which purpose a study group had been set up to plan the Next European Torus 
(NET), which would be a high-technology machine; and its commercial 
feasibility, which would be the objective of a power and demonstration reactor 
(DEMO) to be built early in the 21st century. 
126. Community research work in the nuclear fission field covered reactor 
safety programmes, the management and storage of radioactive waste, nuclear 
fuels and actinide research, the decommissioning of nuclear installations, and 
nuclear safeguards research. 
127. The radioactive waste research programme of the Community was directed 
to optimizing waste management in terms of safety and cost. For the final 
storage of highly active wastes, the research effort sought to evaluate and 
demonstrate the feasibility of final storage in various geological formations 
and to evaluate the safety of various options. 
128. Since its very beginnings, the Community had been sensitive to the need 
to help developing countries. Large Community funds were available for that 
purpose. The best known were those provided under the Lome Convention, under 
which the Community co-operated with 66 African, Caribbean and Pacific 
countries. There were also association agreements with a number of 
Mediterranean countries. In addition, funds were also available for 
co-operation with developing countries in Asia, Latin America and other 
areas. Developing countries were well aware that a long process of 
preparation was necessary before nuclear power could be introduced into a 
country. The Community was now well equipped to provide help and advice 
during the preparation stage. Over the previous five years, the Commission, 
working closely with energy institutes all over the world, had progressively 
developed a methodology for energy planning, specially designed to meet the 
needs of developing countries. It had also set up arrangements for helping 
individual developing countries in that field, either by advising them on how 
to use that methodology, or by providing training of energy specialists in one 
way or another. When the stage was reached in a developing country where the 
use of nuclear power was a practical possibility, Community funds could be 
used, at that country's request, to help work towards its introduction. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.2/3 
page 32 


129. As nuclear energy continued to develop around the world, it was 
increasingly clear that its widespread growth depended on international 
co-operation. In further enlarging such co-operation, the Agency could count 
on the Community's full support. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XX1X)/OR.274 
April 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 25 September 1985, at 3 p.m. 


President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


General debate and annual report 
for 1984 (continued) 138 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Sri Lanka 1 -8 
Czechoslovakia 9 -34 
Australia 35 -56 
Peru 57 -62 
Netherlands 63 -78 
Tunisia 79 -87 
Egypt 88 -98 
Bulgaria 99 -114 
Canada 115 -126 
Indonesia 127 -138 


*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 November 1985. 


**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-1420 
0396e 



GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr.1) (continued) 


1. Mr. DHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) said that the Sri Lankan nuclear 
energy programme, which was currently limited to non-power applications, had 
progressed smoothly during the past year. Areas which had received special 
attention were: sterilization of medical products, establishment of a human 
tissue bank, non-destructive testing in industry, use of environmental tritium 
137 


in hydrological studies, use of fallout Cs for erosion studies and use of 
nuclear techniques in medical diagnosis. 


2. Sri Lanka, which was a developing country with a rapidly growing 
electrical grid and had no coal or oil resources, was dependent for its 
electricity mainly on hydropower. In the long term, requirements exceeding 
its hydroelectric capacity would need to be covered by imported coal and 
nuclear power. For that reason, Sri Lanka had had to undertake certain 
preparatory programmes, such as training activities. The Master of Science 
course on nuclear science, which had begun three years earlier, had been 
successful, and a second course was about to begin. The Master of Science 
course on electrical engineering, 40% of which was devoted to nuclear 
engineering, and a post-graduate diploma course in electronics would also 
commence shortly. The Sri Lankan training programme for electronics 
technicians would continue. 
3. It was now necessary for the country to expand its resources for 
developing training, for producing short-lived isotopes needed in medicine, 
industry and research and for providing industry with neutron activation 
analysis and neutron radiography services. Food preservation by the use of 
gamma radiation was also a very important activity for the country. 
4. His delegation thanked the Agency for providing assistance with almost 
all its programmes and for giving appropriate priority to the project on small 
and medium power reactors (SMPR). It requested the Director General to 
proceed with the next stage in the project. 
5. He wished to point out once again that it was urgent to put an end to 
the "brain drain" of scientists and technicians from developing countries. 
Sri Lanka had taken steps to design its training programme in such a way that 
scientists would be encouraged to put their knowledge at the disposal of the 

GC(XX IX)/OK.2/4 
page 3 


country's development activities. It was as important to retain people who 
had been trained as it was to train them. His delegation had stated at the 
previous session of the General Conference and wished to reiterate its view 
that the Agency could provide a particularly valuable service to Member States 
at minimum cost by opening up its laboratories to scientists from developing 
countries in the same way that the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics had opened its doors to limited categories of such scientists. 


6. He welcomed the decision taken by China to join the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for Asia. With China, the group of KCA countries 
represented over half of mankind. RCA programmes were now well established 
and had proved their worth. Scientists engaged in those programmes were at 
the same time ambassadors of peace in the region, and Sri Lanka strongly 
supported the Agency's RCA activities. 
7. His delegation wished to congratulate India on the very important stage 
it had reached during the current year where nuclear power was concerned, in 
particular with the commissioning of Indian-built power reactors and of an 
experimental breeder reactor. Success in the Indian fast breeder programme, 
which would open up the thorium-uranium cycle, would result in a large 
increase in the nuclear fuel available. 
8. The vital importance of peaceful uses of nuclear energy for improving 
and maintaining adequate living standards for people in all countries was now 
universally accepted. Non-peaceful uses of nuclear energy were, however, 
known to be capable of wiping mankind off the face of the earth. In order for 
non-military applications to have the largest possible impact, the nuclear 
community had to be able to convince people that the other path was not open. 
It was therefore necessary to put an end not only to horizontal proliferation 
but also to vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons. His delegation 
believed that it was the duty of every nation to renounce the option of 
nuclear weapons and that the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) should be applied to all countries on equal terms. It was only 
in that way that the benefits of nuclear energy could be extended to the 
majority of mankind. 
9. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia) said that 1985 represented a landmark 
in the modern history of mankind. Many countries had been commemorating the 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page A 

fortieth anniversary of the victory over facsism and militarism and also of 
the end of the Second World War, events which had influenced the destiny of 
the peoples of Europe and of the whole world and had enabled them to advance 
on the path of peace, democracy and social progress. It was also forty years 
since the first two atomic bombs had exploded over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the 
first instances of the use of nuclear energy for military purposes. The 
common wish of nations not to see tragedies like the Second World War repeated 
had led to the establishment of the United Nations. Czechoslovakia, which had 
been one of its founding members, had always been concerned to carry out the 
objectives of the United Nations Charter and had played an effective part in 
the development of the organization's activities in all spheres, in particular 
those relating to the prevention of war and the strengthening of peace, 
security and disarmament. At the first session of the United Nations General 
Assembly, Czechoslovakia had declared itself to be strongly in favour of the 
very first proposal aimed at arms reduction, at the prohibition of the use of 
nuclear energy for military purposes and at the exclusion of nuclear weapons 
and other weapons of mass destruction from the arsenals of countries. At the 
time, in November 1946, the Czechoslovak delegation had supported that 
proposal as a whole, expressing its conviction that the world situation 
required disarmament, which would guarantee and strengthen co-operation 
between all countries of the world. 


10. The twenty-ninth session of the Agency's General Conference was being 
held at a time when the international situation was extremely serious, not 
only because of the continuation of the arms race but also because of the 
United States' plans to extend that arms race to outer space. Humanity was 
now faced with a task of crucial importance, that of concluding mutually 
acceptable and verifiable agreements to ensure that militarization did not 
extend to outer space and that the accumulation on earth of nuclear missiles 
and other weapons ceased. There was probably no nation on the planet which 
did not feel concerned about the American plans to militarize outer space. 
The execution of those plans would compromise negotiations on disarmament and 
would considerably increase the danger of a global military conflict 
beginning. It was necessary, on the other hand, for the countries of the 
world to unite their efforts to expand collaboration with a view to using 
outer space for the benefit of all and in conformity with the peaceful needs 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 5 


of nations. That was the intention behind the concrete proposals made by the 
Soviet Union at the fortieth session of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations in respect of co-operation in the use of outer space for non-military 
purposes. Experiments with a system of space defence in the United States 
had, however, very recently given rise to serious concern among peace-loving 
nations. Czechoslovakia entirely approved the measures which the Soviet Union 
intended to take in response. In any case, the member countries of the Warsaw 
Pact, which had met on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the 
signing of that agreement and its extension, had indicated that their 
proposals were purely defensive in character and that they would be forced to 
strengthen their defence capacity while the military build-up of NATO 
countries continued. 


11. On a number of occasions the Soviet Union had set an example by taking 
unilateral steps, thereby making essential contributions to the formulation of 
agreements on arms limitations and on the ending of the arms race. Recently, 
with a view to facilitating progress in the reduction of nuclear arsenals, it 
had declared a moratorium on all types of nuclear explosion. The conclusion 
of a mutual moratorium of that nature between the Soviet Union and the United 
States would create favourable conditions for the adoption of an international 
treaty on the total and universal banning of nuclear-weapons tests and would 
contribute to a more complete application of NPT. In that connection, he drew 
the Conference's attention to the importance of the new negotiations between 
the Soviet Union and the United States in relation to the problem of nuclear 
and space weapons as a whole, and he approved the constructive approach by the 
Soviet Union, stressing the importance of all peaceful initiatives on the part 
of the other countries of the socialist community and of progressive 
revolutionary countries of the Third World. 
12. Czechoslovakia had the strong political will to work for peace, for the 
prevention of war and for the reduction of the level of arms until nuclear 
weapons were completely banned and destroyed. That will also took the form of 
a striving for detente and for the creation of normal good-neighbourly 
relations and mutual co-operation with all countries, irrespective of their 
social systems: for that reason it was interested in all the negotiations 
currently taking place in Geneva, Stockholm and Vienna. It considered a 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 6 


quantitative and qualitative freeze on nuclear weapons in the countries which 
possessed them - as had been proposed two years earlier by the Soviet Union to 
be extremely important. Similarly, an undertaking by all the 
nuclear-weapon States not to make first use of nuclear weapons, which would be 
in keeping with the proposal also made by the USSR, would be a very important 


initiative which would represent a political landmark and would contribute to 
the strengthening of confidence throughout the world. The drawing up and 
conclusion of a treaty on the universal and total banning of nuclear-weapons 
tests would constitute an important step in the direction of nuclear 
disarmament. Lastly, Czechoslovakia attached importance to proposals aimed at 
establishing denuclearized zones in different parts of Europe and in other 
regions of the world. 


13. By virtue of its functions in connection with non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, the Agency was playing an ever more important role in that 
context. His Government had thus embarked with a keen sense of responsibility 
on preparations for the Third Conference of the Parties to Review the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and now welcomed the positive 
results which had been achieved. It attached high priority to NPT and to the 
safeguards provided for by the Treaty. It was entirely in agreement with the 
conclusions of the Conference, according to which NPT was an authoritative 
document where the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was concerned. Agency 
safeguards demonstrated convincingly that commitments in that sphere were 
respected. That represented an important argument in favour of the efforts 
being made to ensure the universality of the Treaty. It would be essential in 
future to seek ways of ensuring that further countries acceded to the Treaty, 
in particular, those whose nuclear industries were already advanced or would 
be soon. His delegation greatly appreciated the gesture of goodwill by the 
Soviet Union, which had proposed that certain of its peaceful facilities 
should be placed under Agency safeguards, and in that connection it welcomed 
the first steps made in that direction by the People's Republic of China. 
14. Czechoslovakia had analysed in detail the application of Article III 
of NPT. It appeared that the Agency was carrying out the tasks entrusted to 
it satisfactorily. On the basis of its inspection and evaluation activities, 
the Agency was able to conclude that there had been no diversion of nuclear 

GC(XXLX)/0K.2M 
page 7 


material for the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive 


devices or for purposes unknown. Moreover, the annual Safeguards 


Implementation Reports showed that the Agency had so far not detected any 


significant non-compliance by the various States which might give rise to 


suspicions that nuclear material had been diverted. 


15. Czechoslovakia was contributing to the Agency's safeguards system by 
re-examining its national system of accountancy for and control of nuclear 
material. It was not only interested in the proper functioning of that 
system, but was also taking steps which were contributing to the strengthening 
of the effectiveness of the Agency's inspection activities. Recently, it was 
particularly concerned with standardizing the accountancy system at its 
various nuclear facilities. When carrying out an inspection in 
Czechoslovakia, Agency inspectors received information in a standardized form, 
which facilitated their inspection activities and reduced the time needed for 
administrative tasks so that they could concentrate on the physical 
verification of nuclear material. In future, Czechoslovakia would focus its 
efforts on research and on the development of new technical systems likely to 
strengthen and improve safeguards activities. Czechoslovakia proposed once 
again to make available to the Agency its resources, for example, for the 
training of experts or for co-operation on improvements in safeguards 
technology and methods. 
16. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic was intensively developing its 
nuclear power programme, which was being carried out within the framework of 
close international co-operation. During the current year Czechoslovakia had 
commemorated the thirtieth anniversary of the first co-operation agreement 
which it had concluded with the Soviet Union for the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. It was not only operating nuclear power plants, but had also become 
an industrial manufacturer of components for WWER-440 reactors, in particular 
of primary-circuit components, and was expanding its component fabrication 
activities for reactors of the WWER-1000 type. International co-operation in 
research and experimental studies was essential, and Czechoslovakia was thus 
participating actively in the work of the Agency, which played an important 
role in that respect. 
17. Czechoslovakia did not believe that NPT would have a negative effect on 
nuclear development or that it would slow down the rapid introduction of 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 8 


nuclear technology and international co-operation. NPT, which had been the 
result of the collective efforts of many countries, had demonstrated its 
viability in practice. Since its conclusion, no new nuclear-weapon State had 
appeared. The non-proliferation regime based on the Treaty had become an 
effective instrument for peace. The slowing-down in the growth of atomic 
energy had in reality been due to a number of factors which bore no relation 
to the Treaty, such as the re-evaluation of energy requirements, the 
elaboration of energy savings programmes, the influence of public opinion, 
political considerations, technical problems, stricter requirements relating 
to safety and legislation and, in particular, financing problems. The 


situation was even more complex in developing countries, which, in addition, 
had difficulties in the areas of infrastructure, planning, training and 
construction, as well as with the problem of optimizing the power level of 
reactor units. Developed countries had for some time been moving in the 
direction of reactor units with capacities of approximately 1000 Mw, which 
would not suit most developing countries. For that reason, Czechoslovakia 
welcomed the efforts being made by a number of supplier countries in proposing 
reactors of lower power which could be used in developing countries and also 


in other countries as heat sources in suburban areas. 


18. International co-operation in the nuclear area was feasible, as had 
been demonstrated by the experience of recent years, and would be essential in 
the future. His delegation was convinced that, if States strengthened 
co-operation with a view to applying NPT, a number of the problems currently 
faced would soon be overcome. In that connection, he welcomed the results of 
the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), which had contributed 
to a linkage of principles for an effective system for the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons with the advantages of international exchange of technology 
and nuclear material. 
19. The Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 
represented another political instrument contributing to the strengthening and 
extension of the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The text of 
the Convention had been approved on 26 October 1979 but it had not yet entered 
into force. For that, in accordance with its Article 19, it was necessary for 
21 instruments of ratification to be deposited, whereas only 14 countries, 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 9 


including Czechoslovakia and other members of the socialist community, had 
deposited theirs so far. He made an appeal to the delegations of Agency 
Member States attending the Conference for their Governments to speed up 
ratification of the Convention; its entry into force would make it possible to 
meet further objectives of physical protection relating, in particular, to the 
physical protection of nuclear facilities. 


20. The development of nuclear power had been the focus of particular 
attention during the preparation of the eighth Czechoslovak Five-Year Plan. 
Nuclear power at present met slightly over 3% of primary energy requirements. 
That share should increase to at least 15% in the year 2000, to 28-307. in 2010 
and to approximately 507o in 2030. Nuclear power should provide approximately 
16% of electricity production in 1985, approximately 30% in 1990, 53% in the 
year 2000 and almost 65% in 2010. It would not only be a matter of meeting 
new electric power requirements but also of finding a substitute for a large 
proportion of the electricity currently produced by coal-fired plants. In 
that way a large quantity of fossil fuel would become available for the 
process needs of industry, and harmful effects on the environment would be 
reduced. Nuclear plants were also to be developed for heat production. 
21. The nuclear power plant construction and operation programme had been 
definitively drawn up for the sites of Jaslovske Bohunice, Dukovany, Mochovice 
and Temelin. Of those plants, the first three would each be equipped with 
four WWER-440 reactors and that of Temelin with four WWER-1000 reactors. By 
the year 2000 the pilot operation of a further WWER-1000 unit was to begin in 
either Eastern Slovakia, Northern Moravia or Eastern Bohemia. Thus, by the 
year 2000 twelve WWER-440 reactors and five WWER-1000 reactors should have 
been commissioned. So far, four WWER-440 reactors had begun operation at 
Jaslovske Bohunice and one other at Dukovany, where a second was to be 
commissioned early in 1986. In the near future one WWER-440 was to be 
commissioned every 10-12 months at Dukovany and later also at Mochovice. The 
first 1000 MW unit at Temelin was to be commissioned in 1992. 
22. Czechoslovak experts attached particular importance to improvements in 
the reliability and safety of nuclear power plants. Czechoslovakia thus 
welcomed the Agency's activities relating to the formulation of safety 
regulations and standards, in which Czechoslovak experts participated. In 
addition, his country had joined the Agency's Incident Reporting System in 
1985 and participated actively in it. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 10 


23. Czechoslovakia attached great importance to the training and 
qualifications of nuclear power plant operating staff. In late 1984 a 
simulator for nuclear power stations equipped with WWER-440 reactors had 
entered into service, representing an important step forward where the 
training of operators was concerned. 
24. Further progress had also been made in the use of ionizing radiation in 
agriculture, the food industry and nuclear medicine, a sector in which 
Czechoslovakia was one of the foremost countries of the world, having 
developed various radioactive preparations and radioimmunology apparatus for 
genetic engineering and biotechnology. In that connection, it was also 
interested in participating in Agency research programmes and, in particular, 
would like to provide effective assistance to developing countries with the 
use of radionuclides in different branches of the economy. 
25. One of the most important items on the agenda was the budget for 
1986. The Czechoslovak delegation welcomed the fact that, without any 
increase in the financial contributions requested, it would permit the 
expansion of a number of specific programmes which were important for the 
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. His delegation supported 
the draft budget as recommended at the Board meetings in June, in particular, 
as regards safeguards, nuclear power, nuclear safety and the extension of the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS). Czechoslovakia wished, 
however, to ask the Secretariat to demonstrate maximum concern for savings on 
all unproductive expenditure by the Agency. 
26. As regards the measures and changes proposed with respect to the 
staffing of the Secretariat, he was able to support only those which were in 
keeping with his Government's basic policy on the Agency and which would not 
lead to less equitable geographical representation for qualified staff in the 
Agency. 
27. With regard to certain specialized programmes, he proposed that the 
Agency pay particular attention to the practical problem of managing the 
construction of nuclear power plants and to the economic aspect of that 
question. Experience showed that that was one of the basic problems of 
optimum development of nuclear power in a number of countries. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 11 


28. Czechoslovakia welcomed the Secretariat's work on technical assistance 
and was in favour of the effective use of all financial resources available 
for technical assistance, with due regard for the principle of their voluntary 
nature. His delegation was ready to develop economic, trade, scientific and 
technical links with all States wishing to have them. In 1986 Czechoslovakia 
would pay to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund an amount 
corresponding to its assessed share of the target established for that year. 
In addition, as in the past, it would be offering short and longer fellowships 
at establishments of advanced education and at scientific and technical 
institutes for the training of experts from developing countries. 
29. The proposal for amendment of Article VI.A.1 of the Statute had been 
submitted for the approval of the Czechoslovak Government. With regard to the 
revision of that Article as a whole and the proposal, put forward on a number 
of occasions by a group of Member States, for the amendment of Article VI.A.2, 
his delegation's view had not changed. It was in favour of the Board's 
composition remaining such that its capacity for action was maintained, and 
believed that its present composition was representative of the Agency and 
sufficiently well balanced. 
30. It was regrettable that the Republic of South Africa was still not 
complying with the decisions deriving from the resolution adopted by the 
previous session of the General Conference with respect to "South Africa's 
nuclear capabilities", according to which that country had been asked to 
accede to NPT and to place all its nuclear activities under Agency 
safeguards. The present situation could not in any way be considered 
satisfactory. 
31. The application of resolutions adopted on the subject of Israel was an 
equally important problem. Czechoslovakia welcomed the efforts made by the 
Secretariat to carry out the mandate entrusted to it under those resolutions 
where Israel was concerned and to establish the means for implementing the 
resolutions adopted. 
32. Czechoslovakia also attached fundamental importance to the efforts made 
by the Agency and a number of its Member States to introduce protective 
measures for nuclear facilities intended for peaceful purposes against 
conventional or nuclear armed attack. 

GC(XXLX)/OR.274 
page 12 


33. He noted a positive development in that an agreement had been concluded 
between Czechoslovakia and Austria for governing the relationship between 
those two neighbouring countries where the development of nuclear power was 
concerned. In May 1985 Austrian and Czechoslovak experts had met in 
Czechoslovakia and had discussed a number of questions of mutual interest 
relating to the operation of nuclear facilities. The next meeting was to 
take place before the end of 1985. 
34. In conclusion, he wished to congratulate the Director General on the 
action and positive measures he had taken to resolve a number of delicate 
issues. 
35. Mr. SADLEIR (Australia) said that the current session of the 
General Conference was taking place immediately after the Third NPT Review 
Conference held in Geneva. The latter Conference had shown that the parties 
to the Treaty remained firmly committed to it. NPT was widely considered to 
be an effective means of preventing nuclear proliferation, and thereby of 
increasing the security both of States which were parties to the Treaty and of 
those which were not. NPT offered a framework in which nuclear co-operation 
and trade were facilitated by the assurances provided by the Agency's 
safeguards system, and it created the necessary trust among parties. 
36. Nevertheless, the NPT Review Conference had also shown the 
dissatisfaction of parties with the absence of progress on nuclear 
disarmament. The Conference had left the nuclear-weapon States in no doubt 
that the world community was disturbed at their failure to honour their side 
of the NPT bargain. It was now up to them to respond politically to that 
opinion, which had been expressed vigorously, and Australia urged them to do 
so. 
37. However, measures against vertical proliferation would matter little if 
the line were not held against horizontal proliferation. NPT would not have 
been able to fulfil its function without the role played by the Agency and 
without the confidence which the Agency had inspired - and continued to 
inspire - as a result of the application of its safeguards system. The number 
of nuclear-weapon States had not increased, and almost all other countries had 
reaffirmed both that they supported the objective of non-proliferation and 
that they had no intention of developing nuclear weapons. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 13 


38. Nevertheless, the nuclear programmes of certain States which were not 
parties to NPT were a source of growing concern. There were facilities which 
had no evident relationship with nuclear power requirements; some were 
sensitive from a weapons development viewpoint and were not subject to 
safeguards. The international community was asked to accept that the reason 
for their existence lay in the desire for energy independence and security. 
However, that did not meet the level of assurance required by the 
international community. The operation of peaceful nuclear installations was 
not compromised by safeguards inspections. Agreement to binding 
non-proliferation commitments neither compromised nor complicated security of 
supply. On the contrary, such undertakings enhanced it. 
39. Following a report by the Australian Science and Technology Council on 
national nuclear policy, in May 1985 the Australian Government had reaffirmed 
the importance it attached to the effective role of the Agency and had 
committed itself to renewing its efforts to support the Agency. The 
Government had again indicated that the mining and export of uranium would 
continue, subject to strict safeguards; it would, however, be limited to 
three deposits: the existing Nabarlek and Ranger mines and the major new 
Olympic Dam deposit at Roxby Downs. In addition, the Government had decided 
not to permit the introduction of further stages in the nuclear fuel cycle in 
Australia. Australia understood the contention that participation in certain 
of those stages might offer non-proliferation benefits. It would, however, 
need convincing evidence in any specific case for the Government to consider a 
review of its position. With regard to radioactive waste management, the 
Australian Government would continue to support research and development on 
the advanced containment form known as "Synroc". Under that programme the 
Australian Atomic Energy Commission was constructing a non-radioactive pilot 
plant to demonstrate the feasibility of manufacturing full-sized blocks of 
"Synroc". The Government was also encouraging international co-operation in 
that sphere, and bilateral agreements had been concluded with Italy, Japan and 
the United Kingdom. 
40. The Science and Technology Council recommended that Australia ratify 
the London Dumping Convention. That had been done on 21 August 1985. 
Despite the valuable contributions made recently by IMO and the Agency in 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 


page 14 


respect of the scientific and technical aspects of the sea dumping of 
radioactive waste, a complete understanding of that operation had not yet been 
gained. No comprehensive comparison had yet been made between sea dumping and 
waste disposal on land. Legitimate doubts remained and found their expression 


in continued strong opposition to sea dumping in many areas of the world. In 
those circumstances Australia saw no reason to modify its stand against sea 
dumping. It fully shared the concern of countries of the South Pacific in 
that respect and would participate constructively in the search for a forumula 
which avoided sea dumping of wastes while maintaining the integrity of the 
regime set up by the Convention. In addition, on 6 August 1985 at a meeting 
of heads of Government of the South Pacific Forum at Raratonga in the Cook 
Islands, Australia, together with seven other member countries of the Forum, 
had signed a treaty creating a nuclear-free zone in the South Pacific. Since 
then Papua New Guinea had also become a signatory to the Treaty. A key 
provision of the treaty was that each party undertook not to dump radioactive 
wastes and other radioactive matter within the zone, to prevent anyone from 
carrying out such dumping within its territorial waters, not to assist or 
encourage dumping by others in the zone in question and to support the 
conclusion of a convention relating to the protection of the natural resources 
and environment of the region. 


41. The South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty had however, wider 
significance. It reflected the deep concern of the South Pacific community 
about nuclear issues and stipulated that no party should develop, manufacture, 
acquire or receive from other countries any nuclear explosive device. In 
addition to the non-dumping, it contained provisions against nuclear tests and 
the stationing of nuclear explosive devices in the region as well as further 
provisions in support of strictly peaceful uses of nuclear energy subject to 
verification in the context of full-scope Agency safeguards. The treaty 
contained three draft proposals. The first invited France, the United Kingdom 
and the United States to apply key provisions of the treaty to their 
territories in the South Pacific. The other two protocols asked the five 
nuclear-weapon States not to use or to threaten to use nuclear explosive 
devices against parties to the treaty and not to test such devices within the 
zone. The South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone was only the second such zone in 
an inhabited part of the world. It represented an important contribution to 
disarmament, to arms control and to the maintenance of peace and stability in 
the region as well as in the world as a whole. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 15 


42. During the past year, like its Member Governments, the Agency had 
continued to function in a climate of intense budgetary stringency. That 
climate of restraint on expenditure was unlikely to change in the near 
future. In fact it was likely to be an enduring feature of the operations of 
international bodies. Those who worked in governmental and international 
organizations tended to see only the negative side of such restrictions. 
Desirable programmes had to be foregone, and it was not always possible to 
expand the resources available to meet worthy aims. Restrictions on 
expenditure and the need for zero or near-zero real growth in expenditure 
were, however, useful to the extent that they helped to focus attention on the 
essential aspects of programmes and on future trends. That was what had 
happened at the Agency. The Australian delegation welcomed the fact that a 
budget showing zero-growth in real terms had been proposed for 1986 and 
appreciated the fact that the Agency was taking the concerns of Member States 
into account when deciding where savings could be made and administration 
improved. The Australian delegation also welcomed the execution of programme 
budgeting, the move to biennial budgeting and the greater transparency in the 
presentation of the budget. It hoped that it would be possible to eliminate 
management and administrative problems reflected in under-expenditure on 
particular programmes. 
43. The Agency faced a major challenge in meeting its growing safeguards 
responsibilities. Not only did safeguards have to be applied to an 
ever-increasing number of facilities in more and more countries, but new 
nuclear fuel cycle technologies were giving rise to new requirements. 
Australia would contribute as much as it could in order to assist the Agency 
in meeting that challenge. Australia welcomed the assurances provided by the 
Agency's safeguards activities as reflected in the Annual Report for 1984. 
The Australian delegation greatly welcomed the fact that China had joined the 
Agency and noted with satisfaction China's intention voluntarily to place some 
of its civilian nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. Another new 
development, which Australia considered to be an important step forward, had 
been the conclusion of a voluntary-offer safeguards agreement between the 
Agency and the Soviet Union. 
44. Australia had clearly stated that it believed that the highest level of 
assurance would be achieved by all present and future nuclear facilities being 

GC<XX1X)/0R.274 


page 16 


placed under safeguards. It strongly supported the appeal made to all States 
by the Third NPT Review Conference that they should take into account the 


safeguards needs of the Agency when planning, designing and constructing new 
nuclear fuel cycle facilities and in any modification of existing 
facilities. In addition, Australia actively supported agreements concluded 
with a view to obtaining, as a necessary basis for the transfer of nuclear 


supplies, non-proliferation undertakings backed up by the acceptance of 
full-scope safeguards. 


45. In that context, Australia welcomed the conclusion of new agreements 
with the Agency since the last session of the General Conference. With the 
agreements concluded by Nauru and Sri Lanka in the framework of NPT, in the 
area of Asia and the Pacific the Agency's safeguards were finding virtually 
universal acceptance as stipulated by the Treaty. 
46. The Australian Government had reaffirmed that Australia would continue 
to participate constructively in the Agency's safeguards programme. Australia 
called on all States to co-operate fully with the Agency in its efforts to 
make rational use of its inspection resources and to facilitate inspection 
planning. For its part, Australia had a regular programme of bilateral 
assistance for research and development work on Agency safeguards. Among the 
topics involved were the development of safeguards instruments and approaches 
for enrichment plants and surveillance of spent fuel ponds. Australia was 
studying with the Agency the possible structure and content of a three-year 
programme for the period from June 1986. 
47. In recognition of the vital role played by States' systems of 
accountancy and control (SSACs) in the effective application of safeguards, 
Australia was to co-host with the Agency a regional training course on matters 
relating to SSACs. That course would be held in mid-1986 and would be 
designed to meet regional needs, notably those relating to the application of 
safeguards to nuclear research programmes. Australia was also considering 
other forms of regional co-operation in safeguards. 
48. Australia would continue to urge that sensitive facilities, especially 
enrichment and reprocessing plants, should be located in as few countries as 
possible. The joint ownership and supervision of such facilities at both 
world and regional levels and the application to them of the strictest 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 17 


safeguards were desirable. Australia would continue to encourage, within the 
IAEA, the establishment of an effective international plutonium storage scheme. 


49. Australia's attitude towards the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS) remained positive. A particularly difficult part of the Committee's 
work was still the development of an agreed set of principles of international 
nuclear co-operation. His country believed that assurances of supply could be 
provided only after non-proliferation concerns and the central role of the 
principles underlying NPT had been adequately recognized. The Committee would 
have made greater progress if the agreed texts on back-up and revision 
mechanisms could have been put into effect. His country was still in favour 
of the implementation of those recommendations and within CAS would continue 
actively to seek agreement on ways in which nuclear exchanges could be 
encouraged in a manner consistent with non-proliferation. 
50. With regard to the increasing amounts of resources made available for 
technical assistance, Australia believed that it would be important in future 
years for the Agency to take the necessary measures to ensure that they were 
employed effectively, namely, by internal co-ordination of the programme, 
careful study of technical assistance requests, concentration on efficient 
programme delivery and effective evaluation. Implementation rates would 
provide an important measure of project delivery and would inevitably have an 
effect on the attitude of donor countries. 
51. The application of indicative planning had worked well in improving the 
predicatbility of funding for technical assistance and co-operation. As 
previously, in 1985 Australia had actively worked towards agreement on a 
further significant increase over the next three years in the indicative 
planning figures for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. It 
welcomed the fact that the Board had agreed on an annual increase of 12%. The 
existing Fund should remain the principal source of financing for technical 
assistance in the nuclear sphere. Such assistance should not be financed from 
the Agency's Regular Budget, and his delegation did not see any need for new 
institutional arrangements for financing it. It was necessary for both donor 
and recipient countries to show flexibility and moderation so that the 
financing of technical assistance would represent a source of strength and not 
a cause of division within the Agency. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 18 


52. Australia, for its part, had given and would continue to give active 
support to the Agency's technical co-operation activities, with particular 
stress on countries in the Asia-Pacific region. Australia was providing 
Agency fellows with special training courses at Australian institutions. More 
than 160 Agency fellows had received training in Australia. In addition, 
Australian experts and consultants had continued to carry out short-term 
projects in developing countries on behalf of the Agency. 
53. Much of Australian nuclear assistance was provided under the Agency's 
Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for countries in Asia and the Pacific, 
which Australia had joined in 1977. That agreement had a very substantial 
record of achievement in the practical applications of nuclear energy in 
medicine, agriculture and industry. Australia welcomed the fact that China 
had formally acceded to the RCA in the previous month. 
54. He wished to announce that, in 1986, Australia would pay in full its 
assessed share of voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund, amounting to 665 000 Australian dollars. In addition, 
during the current Australian financial year, 395 000 dollars would be made 
available for nuclear co-operation projects in the region. 
55. Australia was actively engaged in bilateral co-operation with countries 
of the region for the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In 
1985, Australia had entered into a second three-year nuclear co-operation 
agreement with Malaysia, had recently begun a project together with Indonesia 
and had had preliminary discussions with Thailand on possible nuclear 
technical assistance. His country would be similarly active in hosting, in 
co-operation with the Agency, a large conference on radiation protection in 
1988. That conference was to take place at Sydney in Australia's bicentennial 
year; it would be timed so that there would be no gap between it and the 
Seventh International Congress of the International Radiation Protection 
Association (IRPA). 
56. By taking an active part in the Agency's work, the Australian 
Government demonstrated the importance it attached to the Agency's unique role 
and statutory functions. The organization could rely on Australia's strong 
support in its efforts to further the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while 
reinforcing barriers against its misuse. It was important that, at the 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 19 


current session of the General Conference, delegations shoud not lose sight of 
that dual responsibility dictated by the Statute, nor of the need to make best 
use of the resources made available to the Secretariat. The common objective 
should be to enhance and not to compromise the Agency's ability to carry out 
its responsibilities. The activities of all Member States should be measured 
against that yardstick. 


57. Mr. MORELLI PANDO (Peru) said that the sessions of the General 
Conference afforded an opportunity to review the Agency's activities in a 
world-wide perspective and in the light of events in the international 
organizations responsible for maintaining peace. It had been repeatedly 
confirmed, and the General Conference could not ignore the fact, that it was 
no longer possible to lend any credence to the efforts made by the nuclear 
Powers which claimed to be engaged in an effort to put an end to the nuclear 
arms race. It could likewise not be forgotten that the negotiations at the 
Conference on Disarmament had reached a deadlock. The few results which had 
been achieved such as the only partly satisfactory ones recorded at the Third 
NPT Review Conference, were not sufficiently encouraging, considering that 
some States, including two which were depositaries of the Treaty, had not yet 
agreed to resume negotiations aimed at arriving as soon as possible at the 
prohibition of all nuclear-weapon tests. 
58. Referring to the Third NPT Review Conference, the Director General had 
made some relevant remarks about the Agency's objectives, which included 
preventing the use of nuclear energy for military purposes. It should be 
emphasized that the safeguards system was a very valuable precedent in the 
verification of nuclear activities since it was an example which could be 
followed in nuclear disarmament discussions. In the wider context mentioned 
by the Director General there was a striking and basic contradiction between 
the nuclear arms race, in other words vertical proliferation, and the 
acceptance by the nuclear Powers of the Agency's safeguards which were, by 
their very nature, limited to peaceful installations. In spite of those 
reservations, within the actual sphere of competence of the Agency, the 
gradual recognition of the full applicability of safeguards was in itself a 
considerable step forward and gave grounds for hoping that a universal and 
homogeneous application of safeguards without discrimination might be achieved 
eventually. 

GC(XXLX)/OR.274 
page 20 


59. However, alongside the application of safeguards, another essential 
task of the Agency was to encourage and promote the research, development and 
practical applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes as part of a 
genuine policy of exchanging scientific and technical information and 
experts. The Agency should both increase the quantity and improve the quality 
of its work in that area in order to achieve an authentic tranfer of 
technology. His delegation was well aware of the Agency's efforts to 
encourage the exchange of scientific information but considered that it was 
still possible to increase such exchanges further. That was why, as it had 
already made clear, his delegation attached very great importance to the 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). It was to be hoped that all 
Member States of the Agency would participate actively in the preparations for 
that Conference so that it would mark a positive stage in the pursuit of the 
noble objectives of international co-operation. 
60. During the past year his country had continued its peaceful nuclear 
power programme within the limits of its financial and technical 
possibilities. His Government was grateful to the Agency and to UNDP for the 
valuable support which they had provided during recent years in the form of 
technical co-operation and assistance. In addition to assistance with 
projects, training programmes in the area of nuclear energy and missions by 
Agency experts on safety, radiation protection, nuclear medicine and other 
specialized subjects, had been regularly provided. The programme to control 
the fruit fly which caused immense damage in the south of the country had 
produced remarkable results. 
61. He wished to mention that a reserve of 3500 tons of uranium had been 
detected in the south east of Peru. In addition, the construction of the 
Huarangal nuclear research centre near Lima had almost been completed; that 
project was being implemented in co-operation with Argentina. Peru was also 
following with interest the research on small and medium power reactors since 
they were suitable for developing countries. 
62. His country's views were in accordance with its commitments as a 
non-aligned developing country and were also based on its specific 
characteristics, notably its pacifist tradition and genuine commitment to the 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 21 


cause of disarmament. The Ayacucho Declaration sponsored by Peru in 1974 and 
the various similar statements made by President Alan Garcia in his inaugural 
speech and, still more recently, in his speech to the United Nations General 
Assembly were evidence of those commitments. 


63. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) pointed out that the Director General 
had managed to promote the objectives of the Agency without ignoring the major 
political questions and hoped that the General Conference would also be able 
to preserve the integrity and efficiency of the Agency without unwarranted 
politicization. The international community was celebrating the fortieth 
anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations Charter. The Agency, as a 
member of the United Nations family, could not remain indifferent to that 
anniversary nor to the numerous comments which it had occasioned concerning 
the successes and failures of the United Nations. Although the Agency's 
mandate was limited, it covered areas which were of vital importance for the 
international community. Its task, which was also that of its Member States, 
was not easy: a just balance had to be found between adhering to the Agency's 
specific mandate and taking into account the relevant aspects of wider policy 
interests. Although it might sometimes be difficult, it should never be 
forgotten that the Agency was only one part of the United Nations system and 
that it should not attempt to resolve the problems of the system as a whole. 
64. The Director General's annual report had showed that the Agency's 
record, from a strictly technical point of view, was excellent. The Agency 
should continue its task and achieve even better results. The draft budget 
and the way in which it had been prepared could serve as an example to many 
other international organizations. His delegation would comment on the draft 
in the Committee of the Whole, but wished to point out already that his 
country found it generally acceptable although in future both safeguards 
activities and technical assistance activities should be further increased. 
65. His Government had recently decided to construct at least two nuclear 
power plants with a minimum capacity of 2000 MW. He had mentioned at the 
previous session that his country was engaged in a major debate on the overall 
electricity supply for the next few decades and that considerable attention 
was being given to the use of nuclear power in preference to other energy 
sources. At the end of lengthy discussions involving substantial public 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 22 


participation, his Government had decided to develop its nuclear power 
programme and that decision had been fully endorsed by Parliament. An 


important factor affecting the Government's choice was the estimates of 
electricity demand of all sectors of his country's economy by the year 2000. 
In order to meet all those needs, after allowance for the contribution of all 
energy sources including renewable energies, 5300 MW would still have to be 
supplied; resort to new oil-fired power plants and increased use of natural 
gas had been excluded and the authorities had based their decision, among 
other factors, on international commitments and economic considerations. A 
comparative analysis had been made of safety, public health, environmental 
protection, particularly the implementation of an adequate radioactive waste 
policy, and non-proliferation. His Government had concluded that by the year 
2000 at least two new nuclear power plants in addition to the two exisitng 
plants, would have to be constructed. Electricity companies in his country 
had been invited to take the necessary steps for the further development of up 
to a maximum of 4000 MW. Following that decision, the site selection process 
had begun and early in 1986 the Government would choose two sites from the six 
that had so far been selected. After a parliamentary debate on the choice of 
sites, steps would be taken to begin construction of the first plant at the 
end of 1988 so that it could become operational in 1995. 


66. The Agency had an important role to play in the implementation of his 
country's national nuclear programme. For example, Dutch safety regulations 
were based on the codes and guides that had been developed under the Agency's 
NUSS programme. Since it did not as yet have a large nuclear infrastructure, 
the Netherlands considered that it was more desirable to follow 
internationally established codes and guides; his country was very satisfied 
with the Agency's work in that area, and would be happy to collaborate with it 
in future. 
67. The agreement by Parliament to develop nuclear power was conditional 
upon a satisfactory solution being found for radioactive waste. An acceptable 
solution would be long-term interim storage; a decision had been taken to 
establish a storage facility of that type and the site would be selected early 
in 1986. With regard to final disposal, Parliament had decided that it was 
worth considering international solutions. His Government was very active in 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 23 


that area and had taken initiatives in the NEA of the OECD, to study the 
possibility of establishing international facilities. In the meantime, the 
Netherlands would continue its own research programme on final disposal in 
geological formations. 


68. The Agency's Annual Report for 1984 suggested that waste management was 
receiving less attention than would be desirable. The problem should be given 
adequate attention as soon as possible, and his country supported the Director 
General's remarks on the development of international co-operation in the 
management of spent fuel and in waste disposal. Furthermore, the Agency 
should not confine itself to radioactive waste resulting from nuclear power 
programmes, but should also develop its work on other types of radioactive 
waste. Work carried out internationally could certainly help in finding 
solutions and setting up facilities for waste which did not result from power 
production. It was to be hoped that the document on the Management of Wastes 
Produced by Radionuclide Users in Medicine and Industry, mentioned in 
paragraph 154 of the annual report, would encourage further developments in 
that area. 
69. His delegation had listened with interest to the Director General's 
remarks on technical co-operation and assistance. The rapid increase in the 
Agency's activities in that area was commendable. The fact that the resources 
available for technical assistance had doubled between 1980 and 1984 showed 
that Member States regarded those activities as important and appreciated the 
Agency's role as an intermediary. It appeared that the Agency, in 
collaboration with the developing countries concerned, had developed an 
effective project identification and implementation system and the donor 
countries, concerned with value for money, appreciated that development. 
70. During the Director General's visit to the Netherlands in April 1985, 
technical co-operation had been discussed. Following those conversations, 
experts in his country were now seeking ways of strengthening co-operation 
between the Netherlands and the Agency and were exploring the possibilities of 
financing specific projects particularly in the areas of agriculture, food and 
health. The Director General had mentioned the success of the sterile male 
technique for the eradication of the tsetse fly, and that technique certainly 
had interesting possibilities. Following the Director General's visit, it had 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 24 


also been decided to extend for two more years the agreement on the 
International Facility for Food Irradiation Technology (IFF1T) in Wangeningen 
which would entail further substantial financial support from his country. 


71. In his country, food irradiation was regarded as a technique with many 
advantages. It should be considered alongside other techniques such as 
sterilization, pasteurization, deep freezing and so on; it could partially 
replace the use of chemical products for food preservation. In developing 
countries, in particular, food irradiation should make it possible to avoid 
losses, and further research in that area should be carried out through the 
IFF1T. At present, national regulations for food irradiation were being 
developed in his country. Initially, only products which presented 
significant health risks, such as herbs and spices, would be selected, but 
regulations would later be extended to other products. At the international 
level, there was a real need to develop a universal system of irradiation 
units and safety and monitoring procedures; a system of that kind would 
greatly facilitate international trade in irradiated food, and the Agency 
should play an important role establishing such a system. 
72. Full support should be given to the application of safeguards by the 
Agency since that was an essential condition for international nuclear 
co-operation and was a means of creating confidence between all States. 
During his remarkable statement to the Third NPT Review Conference, the 
Director General had emphasized that verification was a sine qua non for 
creating and maintaining confidence in the full implementation of arms control 
and disarmament agreements. He had pointed out that the Agency was 
responsible for managing the first on-site inspection system. Safeguards were 
therefore essential at the present time and would also have considerable 
importance in the future as a possible model for arms control agreements. 
73. The Director General had told the General Conference that the 
safeguards system had given rise to an unusual amount of comment in 1985. It 
was gratifying to note that the safeguards system was the object of constant 
scrutiny, constructive critisism and sound advice which could help very 
effectively to improve it. The Secretariat was right to take those comments 
into account and to seek systematically the advice of outside experts. 
However, some of the remarks mentioned by the Director General were of a 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 25 


different type and much more politically oriented. It had been suggested, for 
example, that safeguards should be considered relevant only for industrialized 
countries since they did not benefit other Member States. It had also been 
suggested that the application of safeguards to nuclear facilities which had 
been developed indigenously was not a matter of any great urgency. Apart from 
the fact that such reasoning was inconsistent with the Statute, it was hardly 
logical: if the idea was accepted that it was in the interest of all States 
to strengthen international security, then those safety measures which had 
been agreed upon internationally were relevent to all States and should be 


supported by all States. The safeguards system contributed to international 


security and as such deserved the political and financial support of all 
Member States. His country was opposed to any major changes in the present 


system of financing safeguards. 


74. In future, it would be very desirable for the two per cent 
unsafeguarded nuclear facilities in non-nuclear-weapon States to be placed 
under safeguards. It would also be very useful to conclude successfully the 
establishment of an international plutonium storage system managed by the 
Agency. His country continued to be convinced of the need for such a system. 
It was pleased that discussions had taken place on that subject at the Third 
NPT Review Conference, and that the Conference had recommended the 
implementation of such a system in accordance with Article XII.A.5 of the 
Agency's Statute. In addition, it was necessary to develop a safeguards 
approach for reprocessing and enrichment facilities, as well as for breeder 
reactors. Nuclear-weapon States could offer their facilities for the training 
of inspectors or for actual inspections. With regard to ultracentrifuge 
enrichment facilities, a satisfactory safeguards approach had already been 
agreed upon and the facility attachment for the Almeb enrichment plant had 
entered into force on 1 June 1985. 
75. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had made progress in its 
work during the past year. A decisive stage had been reached in the attempt 
to reach an agreement on a set of principles of international co-operation in 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy. His country would show a spirit of 
compromise so that solutions could be found to the few remaining problems. 
76. The sixth session of the Preparatory Committee of UNCPICPUNE would be 
held shortly. Like other international organizations, the Agency had prepared 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 26 


background papers for the Conference which were of high quality. The subject 
matter of the Conference was directly linked to the Agency's work and the 
Agency should profit from the Conference. The Netherlands, which was 
participating actively in the work of the Preparatory Committee, believed that 


the Conference should aim to strengthen the Agency's objectives and enable it 


to carry out its mandate in accordance with the Statute more satisfactorily. 


77. With regard to the question of attacks on nuclear facilities, his 
country was convinced, firstly, that a treaty on that subject should be drawn 
up by a competent organ. The Geneva Conference on Disarmament had already 
laid the foundations for such work and no efforts should be spared to achieve 
that objective. Such a treaty should combine prohibition of the use of 
radiological weapons with a prohibition of "radiological warfare", in other 
words attacks on nuclear facilities which might result in mass destructive 
effects. Secondly, the Agency should reaffirm that a country should not 
attack nuclear facilities under any circumstances whether they be under 
construction, inoperative or operative and irrespective of the radioactive 
risk. The application of Agency safeguards to those facilities should be 
regarded as proof of their use for peaceful purposes. 
78. The NPT Review Conference had adopted an important final document which 
his Government considered a major success at a time when there was so much 
criticism of multilateral diplomacy. That document proved beyond any doubt 
that an overwhelming majority of countries were committed to the 
non-proliferation objectives laid down in NPT: that was an important fact for 
the Agency and its work had thereby been strengthened. The NPT Review 
Conference had made many specific recommendations, such as the improvement of 
safeguards application techniques, the implementation of Article XII.A.5 of 
the Statute concerning international plutonium storage, the possible 
application of Agency safeguards to a larger number of facilities in nuclearweapon 
States and the separation of civilian and military facilities in those 
States. Another point to be emphasized was the importance which the 
Conference attached to the commitments made by nuclear-weapon States not to 
use for military purposes any material provided by non-nuclear-weapon States. 
Finally, the NPT Review Conference had invited the Chinese Government to 
submit voluntarily its peaceful nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards: the 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 27 


statement by the delegate of China on that subject was very welcome. The 
Netherlands was grateful to that country for having taken a decision which 
augured well for the future of the Agency. 


79. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) had taken note of the Director General's 
statement on the recent developments in nuclear energy, the problems of 
technical assistance, the application of safeguards systems and budgetary and 
staff management. 
80. It had to be admitted that nuclear energy continued to mark time, 
particularly in the developing countries. Although in many industrialized 
countries the contribution of nuclear power to electricity production was 
continually increasing, the prospects of nuclear power production in the 
majority of developing countries remained uncertain. Various obstacles 
continued to hamper the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
particularly in Africa. Usually those obstacles were related to the high cost 
of nuclear facilities, the organizational structure, the lack of qualified 
staff and the shortage of research facilities, as well as restrictions on the 
transfer of technology and nuclear supplies. It was obvious that, given such 
a situation, specific initiatives and practical measures had to be taken in 
order to open up new prospects for strengthening the Agency's promotional role 
and increasing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing countries. 
81. Tunisia was fully committed to the statutory objectives of the Agency 
and attached great importance to its role. It was particularly grateful for 
the Agency support it had received under the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme in the form of expert services, supply of equipment and 
staff training. His Government considered that the Agency's assistance was 
particularly valuable in areas such as agriculture, food, industry, geology, 
hydrology, health and scientific research, which were all vital sectors of the 
economy. Tunisia had itself taken steps to extend and diversify the 
prospecting of exploitable uranium resources. His country was particularly 
committed to the technical assistance projects recently submitted to the 
Agency concerning the formulation of the integrated nuclear power programme 
and assistance to the Tunisian Electricity and Gas Company (STEG) in the 
planning and utilization of nuclear energy. The technical co-operation 
projects between the Agency and Tunisia had been implemented most 
satisfactorily and it was to be hoped that such fruitful co-operation would 
continue. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 28 


82. The record of the Agency's activities since the twenty-eighth session 
of the General Conference seemed reasonably satisfactory despite the 
constraints of a zero-growth budget. Technical assistance was one of the main 
reasons for the existence of the Agency. The implementation rate of the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund was fairly encouraging since it had 
increased from 587o in 1983 to 65% in 1984. Faced with the growing demand for 
assistance, the Department of Technical Co-operation had made it possible for 
a number of countries to carry out priority projects in the areas of isotope 
application and nuclear power planning and training. However, despite those 
positive results, the technical assistance provided had not met the needs of 
developing countries. His delegation supported the position held by the Group 
of 77 regarding the assistance effort and considered that the resources 
allocated to safeguards, about one third of the Regular Budget resources for 
1986, were unfairly balanced in relation to those allocated to technical 
assistance and adversely affected the Agency's promotional role. In any 
event, his country supported the recommended annual increase of 12% in the 
indicative planning figures for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1987, 1988 and 1989. 
83. The preparation of the budget for 1986 had provided the opportunity for 
dialogue and consultations between the Secretariat and regional groups of 
Member States. The experience had been positive and should be continued. 
Similarly, the new presentation of the budget, which laid the emphasis on 
targets, had increased transparency and made it easier to examine and follow 
the Agency's main programmes. 
84. It was gratifying to note that no anomaly indicating a diversion of a 
significant quantity of nuclear material under Agency safeguards had been 
detected since the previous session of the General Conference. Tunisia, which 
was a party to NPT, wished to reaffirm its commitment to the Agency's 
safeguards system. It hoped that the results of the Third NPT Review 
Conference would help to establish better international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in the search for an adequate response to 
the problem of vertical proliferation. 
85. Since the previous session of the General Conference, the situation 
regarding the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi research reactor and its 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 29 


multiple consequences continued to cause concern. Statements made by the 
Director General showed that the contacts which he had established had not 
produced results in line with the provisions of resolution 
GC(XXVIIl)/RES/425. Israel continued to act in defiance of the Agency's 


safeguards system and had seriously damaged its credibility. The abovementioned 
resolution had to be implemented in full if confidence was to be 
restored and if the threat hanging over peaceful nuclear activities in Iraq 


and other countries was to be removed. 


86. His country's views on South Africa's nuclear capability were also well 
known. That problem remained a source of concern for Africa and the entire 
international community. The apartheid regime continued to defy the relevant 
resolution of the United Nations General Assembly and those of the Agency. 
The racist regime of South Africa was developing its military co-operation 
with Israel to produce nuclear weapons and continued to exploit and pillage 
Namibian uranium resources. 
87. His delegation regretted that the problem of the under-representation 
of the regions of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia on the Board 
continued to be a subject of discussion in the Agency after eight years. The 
Agency's Statute laid down the principles of the sovereign equality of all 
Member States of the Agency and of their equitable representation. Those 
principles were not, however, reflected in the number of seats given to those 
two regions on the Board of Governors. The General Conference had regularly 
adopted resolutions on the question since its twenty-second session. It could 
not be said that the Board of Governors was functioning properly, given the 
continuing injustice to which the Member States from those two regions were 
subjected. The example of various other organizations in the United Nations 
system had shown that a moderate increase in a deliberative organ did not 
affect its smooth operation or its efficiency. Moreover, there was no magic 
number figure for the number of seats. That being so, his delegation 
understood the aspirations of certain European countries which had reached an 
advanced stage in nuclear energy technology and which had introduced a draft 
amendment to Article VI as a whole. Tunisia appreciated the effort shown in 
the draft of those countries to improve the representation of the regions of 
Africa, the Middle East and South Asia. In any amendment of Article VI.A.2 of 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 30 


the Statute or of Article VI as a whole, it was important to do justice to 
those two under-represented regions. A more clearly defined political 
determination would undoubtedly enable the General Conference to approve an 
amendment which would ensure an equitable and modest increase in the Board of 
Governors, or prepare the way for such an amendment. The Tunisian delegation 
hoped that the new opportunity offered by the present session of the General 
Conference to resolve the problem, which had been pending since 1977, would 
not be missed. 


88. Mr. SHASH (Egypt) said that the General Conference was taking 
place shortly after the end of the Third NPT Review Conference, and he was 
convinced the success of the latter meeting would have a favourable influence 
on the deliberations of the General Conference. The NPT Review Conference had 
considered the problem of nuclear disarmament and had urged the nuclear-weapon 
States to respect, the commitments made under the Treaty and, in particular, to 
put an end to all their nuclear tests and to the nuclear arms race. Many 
topics considered by the Conference had also been of relevance to the Agency's 
activities, such as various aspects of non-proliferation including Agency 
safeguards and the role of the Agency in international co-operation on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Conference had expressed its conviction 
that Agency safeguards provided assurance that States were honouring their 
commitments and that they served to strengthen confidence between Member 
States and to increase their collective security. Safeguards also played a 
very important role in nuclear non-proliferation. The Conference had stressed 
the consequences that activities not subject to safeguards had for 
non-nuclear-weapon States and the serious danger in terms of proliferation 
that they represented. The Conference had stated that it was essential to 
continue to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system, 
which was one of the Agency's principal functions. The Final Declaration of 
the Conference also contained specific proposals relating to the measures 
which the Agency could take to strengthen international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
89. The protection of peaceful nuclear facilities was an urgent matter. 
The General Conference had already condemned attacks against such facilities 
and had stressed their consequences and the dangers they represented. Such 

GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 31 


attacks constituted an encroachment on the right of all countries to use 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, a right which was fundamental to the 
Agency's aims. Egypt was ready to collaborate actively on the development of 
an effective international safeguards system for protecting peaceful nuclear 
facilities and for dissuading any party from attacking or threatening such 
facilities. 


90. In connection with the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system, 
Egypt had learned with some concern from the Safeguards Implementation Report 
submitted to the Board of Governors in June that an amount of irradiated 
uranium had been exported without due notification. His delegation hoped that 
measures would be taken to consolidate the verification system and to prevent 
any loophole from being exploited for the export of nuclear material without 
safeguards. 
91. Egypt shared the fears of the international community with regard to 
the nuclear activities of Israel and South Africa. More and more reports and 
other information on that subject were being received, and they should serve 
as a warning. According to United Nations experts, Israel would soon be capable 
of producing nuclear weapons, if it had not already acquired that 
capability. The United Nations had adopted a number of texts on that subject, 
and the Agency's General Conference had approved a resolution urging the two 
countries to place their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. However, 
Israel and South Africa continued to ignore those decisions. The application 
of full-scope safeguards was urgently needed to reassure the international 
community and the neighbouring countries of those two States. It was time 
that the General Conference found a way of ensuring the implementation of the 
relevant resolutions which it had adopted in the past and that it examined the 
position of Israel with regard to resolution GC(XXVllI)/RES/425, and 
especially the undertaking called for in operative paragraph 3, which Israel 
should make clearly and unequivocally. It was also time to take steps to 
ensure that South Africa put an end to the mining, milling and export of 
uranium from Namibia, which it continued to occupy in violation and defiance 
of the principles of the Charter and of resolutions of the United Nations. 
92. Since 1974 Egypt had been requesting the creation of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the Middle East. The United Nations General Assembly had so far 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 32 


taken twenty decisions on that subject, the last of which had been adopted 
without opposition from Israel. Moreover, Egypt considered that the 
denuclearization of Africa was necessary in view of the threat hanging over 
South Africa's neighbours. Egypt had reaffirmed its position on that subject 
before the NPT Review Conference and hoped that measures would soon be taken 
to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle east and in Africa. 


93. The provision of technical assistance was one of the Agency's principal 
functions. Such activities should be intensified and diversified in order to 
further the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in particular for electricity 
production and also in view of the financial and technical difficulties faced 
by developing countries with the implementation of their projects. For that, 
however, the Agency needed sufficient and reliable resources. If the use of 
indicative planning figures were to continue to be satisfactory, the system 
would have to be able to provide sufficient funds for meeting technical 
assistance requests each year. 
94. Egypt appreciated the work done - since its establishment in 1980 - by 
the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) with a view to formulating 
principles of international co-operation on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. It welcomed the agreement reached with regard to emergency and 
back-up mechanisms and revision mechanisms. The peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy required security of nuclear fuel supplies on a stable, equitable and 
non-discriminatory basis, and Egypt was concerned about restrictions which 
certain supplier countries wished to impose on exports in addition to those 
foreseen in the context of Agency safeguards. There was a certain irony in 
the fact that some supplier countries applied such additional restrictions to 
countries which had submitted their nuclear facilities to full-scope Agency 
safeguards, while demonstrating considerable indulgence towards others which 
obstinately rejected the safeguards system despite repeated appeals from the 
international community. His delegation regretted the lack of strictness in 
the verification of exports of nuclear materials, in particular, to countries 
which had nuclear programmes considered dangerous by the United Nations; 
co-operation with those countries should cease. 
95. The General Conference had long been expressing its conviction that the 
areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia were the least well 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 33 


represented, despite the large number of their Members in the Agency and the 
expansion in their nuclear activities. It was deeply regrettable that that 
question had been systematically ignored for seven years. The time had come 
for the Conference to adopt a decision whereby the imbalance in representation 
of those areas on the Board would be corrected. Egypt, which urged all 
delegates to the Conference to support that request, was convinced that it 
should be possible to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute in order to take 
those considerations into account without reducing the effectiveness of the 
Board. 


96. Convinced as it was of the importance of peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy for electricity production, Egypt had taken the first steps towards the 
construction of its first nuclear power plant as part of a programme which 
foresaw a large increase by the end of the century in the share of nuclear 
power in total electricity production. To that end it had concluded a number 
of co-operation agreements for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy with 
various Agency Member States and was co-operating with the Agency on the 
training of the technicians needed for the construction and operation of 
nuclear power plants. Egypt appreciated the Agency's co-operation in that 
sphere and was counting on the Agency and on Member States for aid in carrying 
out its programme. The phase of analysis and evaluation of technical and 
financial aspects of the first nuclear power plant had ended, and all that 
remained was to make a selection, in the coming weeks, from the tenders 
submitted by suppliers from various countries. 
97. With respect to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, Egypt was 
particularly interested in three projects. The first related to the 
construction in Egypt of a new research reactor with a power of 10-20 MW, a 
reactor simulator and a radioactivity monitoring centre; together, those 
facilities would form the core of a nuclear training establishment for the 
region. Egypt also intended to increase the capacity of the Lushah research 
reactor, first from 2 to 5 MW during the next two years and then from 5 to 
10 MW subsequently. Lastly, so that its services would cover the whole of the 
region, it wished to strengthen the nuclear safety group by means of 
ever-increasing co-operation from the Agency and Member States in that vital 
aspect of nuclear activity. 



GC(XX1X)/0R.274 
page 34 


98. The United Nations was celebrating the fortieth anniversary of its 
establishment. Egypt hoped that that occasion would encourage all countreis 
to redouble their efforts to attain the high goals set forth in the United 
Nations Charter and, in particular, to end the nuclear and other arms races 
and to intensify international co-operation in all spheres. 
99. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) noted that the twenty-ninth session of the 
General Conference was being held a few days after the completion of the work 
of the Third Conference of the Parties to Review the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. That Treaty was of particular 
importance now that the international situation had become complex and tense 
and that the arms race, in particular in the nuclear sphere, was proceeding 
uncontrollably and was taking on threatening proportions. 
100. The Bulgarian delegation considered that the Treaty benefited the whole 
of mankind and that its strengthening was in keeping with the vital interests 
of all States. For that reason the unilateral moratorium announced by the 
Soviet Union on all nuclear tests was a great step forward. 
101. Bulgaria greatly welcomed the Agency's activities with a view to 
strengthening the non-proliferation regime by carrying out effective 
international verification of the exclusively peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. With the expansion of nuclear power it was becoming more and more 
important to strengthen further the Agency's safeguards system, to increase 
its effectiveness, to consolidate its technical basis and to improve the work 
of the inspectorate. 
102. His delegation welcomed the agreement signed between the USSR and the 
Agency on the application of safeguards in the Soviet Union, which was 
consistent with the aim of making the safeguards system universal. 
103. Safeguards experience showed that the Agency's verification mechanism 
did not in any way represent an encroachment on the sovereign rights of States 
and did not hinder their peaceful nuclear activities. The expansion of 
nuclear power in Bulgaria, which had sumbitted all its nuclear activities to 
Agency safeguards, was a graphic demonstration of that fact. 
104. Bulgaria had associated itself with principles governing nuclear 
exports, thereby confirming its wish to contribute to the strengthening of the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 35 


non-proliferation regime. It thus participated actively in the work of the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply to formulate principles of international 
co-operation based on the strengthening of that regime. 


105. Bulgaria had ratified the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material and his delegation wished to join others in requesting States 
which had not yet ratified the Convention to do so without delay. Bulgaria 
was doing whatever it could to support the Agency's safeguards activities, 
including the development of new safeguarding resources and techniques to be 
used by inspectors. It was currently developing a national computerized 
nuclear fuel accountancy system which was compatible with the Agency's 
computer systems. An unprecedented experiment was also to be carried out 
involving a telecommunications link with the Agency's Department of Safeguards 
in Vienna for transmitting data and reports on nuclear material. 
106. The Bulgarian delegation had examined the Agency's Annual Report for 
1984 and wished to express its satisfaction at the extensiveness and 
effectiveness of activities aimed at solving important problems concerning the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
107. Bulgarian institutes and other organizations were assisting the Agency 
with the implementation of its programmes. A Seminar on Site Investigation 
and Assessment Techniques for Underground Disposal of Radioactive Wastes and a 
Technical Committee Workshop on Uses of Computer Codes for Safety Analysis had 
been held in Bulgaria. 
108. His delegation approved the Agency's programme and budget for 1986 and 
noted that, as a result of reductions in unproductive expenditure, there had 
been growth in programmes of priority such as nuclear power, nuclear safety, 
safeguards and technical assistance and co-operation. 
109. Bulgaria believed that the system of voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund of the Agency should be maintained, 
and it approved the increase in the target for voluntary contributions for 
1986. For that year it would pay a voluntary contribution of $54 000 in 
national currency. 
110. With regard to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and the 
revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole, the Bulgarian delegation 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 36 


believed that the current composition of the Board was well balanced and that 
the Board was operating effectively. Those questions required further study. 


111. Nuclear power represented the main basis for the expansion in 
Bulgaria's energy production. In 1984 the Kozloduj plant had supplied 
12 735 TWh, corresponding to approximately 307<> of the country's total 
electricity production. That plant had played an important role in the 
particularly harsh conditions of the previous winter. It had four Soviet 
reactors, with a capacity of 440 MW(e) each. Construction of the fifth and 
sixth units, which would each have 1000 MW(e) water reactors was proceeding at 
a rapid rate. A site was being prepared in the region of Belene for the 
construction of the first two units of another nuclear power plant also using 
1000 MW(e) reactors. Moreover, two units of the AST-500 type, which had been 
developed by the Soviet Union for district heating purposes in the capital, 
were to be constructed. 
112. Bulgaria attached particular importance to nuclear and radiation 
safety. At the beginning of the year it had joined the international Incident 
Reporting System, which was designed to facilitate the exchange of experience 
and information. Bulgaria's achievements in the sphere of nuclear power were 
due both to the mobilization of national resources and to co-operation with 
member States of the CMEA, in particular, the Soviet Union. 
113. Bulgaria was also greatly interested in other peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and had developed a national co-ordination programme for extending the 
uses of ionizing radiation in the economy during the period 1986-1990. By 
means of that programme it would be possible to raise the technical level of 
production as a result of automation and of the use of nuclear techniques, new 
materials and biotechnology. Bulgaria would be carrying the programme out 
with technical assistance from the Agency. 
114. In conclusion, his delegation welcomed the pre-eminent role played by 
the Agency as an international organization which brought together and 
co-ordinated the activities of Member States relating to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and which facilitated the strengthening of the nonproliferation 
regime. It was convinced that the twenty-ninth session of the 
General Conference would represent a new step forward on the path of 
co-operation between States for the strengthening of peace in the world and 
for international detente. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 37 


115. Mr. MORDEN (Canada) said that the Director General, with his usual 
wisdom and sense of balance, had raised a number of points in his statement at 
the beginning of the session- , and he wished to comment on some of them. 
116. The Canadian delegation believed that spent fuel management and waste 
disposal would take on considerable importance for the international community 
in coming years, and Canada had a ten-year research programme to the value of 
$300 million on those issues. The technical progress made so far and the 
conclusions to be drawn from the programme had been entirely satisfactory but 
there was still some distance to cover. Apart from scientific problems, each 
State had, as mentioned by the Director General, to deal with an important 
political factor. States would probably need to develop a very high degree of 
confidence in their own national approaches before international co-operation 
on a large scale became possible in that area. His delegation recognized, 
however, the validity of the Director General's comment that, in principle, a 
few large, well-organized and well-equipped facilities would seem preferable 
from virtually every point of view to a large number of smaller and widely 
dispersed sites. 
117. The Canadian delegation believed, like the Director General, that the 
safeguards system benefited all members of the international community and 
that it should be considered in that light. Safeguards were now being applied 
on all continents with the exception of Antarctica. It was legitimate to pose 
certain questions about the modes and methods of safeguards, but the value of 
the system itself should no more be the subject of discussion than the need 
for global health programmes, for example. States party to NPT and 
non-parties, nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States, Member States from 
East and West, North and South should all bear in mind that Agency safeguards 
made a signficant contribution to the well-being of each one of them. 
118. With regard to the preparation of the programme budget, a topic which 
had also been mentioned by the Director General in his statement, the Canadian 
delegation was in favour of the result-oriented approach and of the idea of 
preparing a biennial budget for 1987-1988. 
1/ GC(XXIX)/OR.269, paragraphs 46-124. 



GC(XXIX)/0R.274 
page 38 


119. Canada had recently celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
Canadian Nuclear Association, a body which had been set up to bring together 
the different Canadian organizations involved in the development of nuclear 
energy and radioisotopes for peaceful purposes. The past twenty-five years 
had seen enormous achievements by the Canadian nuclear industry, which devoted 
itself exclusively to placing the peaceful benefits of atomic energy at the 
disposal of Canada, its partners and mankind as a whole. 
120. For the first time since 1959, in 1984 Canada had again become the 
largest uranium producer in the western world, with a uranium production 
exceeding 11 000 tonnes. It was also the largest exporter of uranium in the 
world, with orders to the value of more than $10 billion currently on its 
books. During the past year the Key Lake mine, which was the uranium mine 
with the world's largest output, had reached full production capacity. The 
Cigar Lake deposit, which was still undeveloped, had proved itself to be the 
largest discovery of uranium in the world, with an average grade of 12%. A 
new uranium hexafluoride plant had been started up, and Canada now had 
sufficient production capacity to satisfy not only its own uranium oxide 
requirements but also to convert foreign uranium for export purposes. The 
Canadian uranium industry was now literally a "billion-dollar" industry. It 
was making an important contribution to the economic growth of Canada and to 
that of its industrial partners which shared Canada's commitment to 
non-proliferation. 
121. During the past twelve months three new CANDU pressurized-heavy-water 
reactors had been commissioned in Canada. The outstanding operating record of 
Ontario Hydro's CANDU units had been maintained, with five of those units 
being among the ten best in the world from the point of view of overall 
performance during their lifetimes. During the year a signficant milestone 
had been passed for Ontario Hydro's Nuclear Generation Division, namely 
100 million man-hours without a single radiation-related injury of any sort. 
Other CANDU units had also performed well. For example, Point Lepreau had 
achieved a gross capacity factor of 89.7%. Also, more than 40% of the 
construction work had been completed at the Darlington site. 
122. The ten-year high-level waste management programme to the value of 
$300 million had also made considerable progress. That programme was based on 

GC(XX1X)/0R.2 74 
page 39 


three major research facilities: an immobilized fuel testing facility, a 
hydrostatic testing facility and an underground research laboratory. The 
first two facilities were operational, and excavation of the horizontal 
experimental chambers for the underground laboratory had commenced. 


123. Canadians had long excelled in the application of nuclear techniques in 
medicine. After pioneering cobalt-60, cancer therapy machines, Canada had 
become one of the world's main producers of radioisotopes for use in 
diagnostic medicine. As the leading producer of cobalt-60, Canada was 
continuing to build equipment for the irradiation of food and medical supplies 
and for other industrial applications. 
124. Where international activities were concerned, the third reactor 
building of the CANDU site at Cernavoda in Romania had been constructed, and 
it had been slipformed in a record time of 281 hours. Orders worth about 
$200 million had now been placed with Canadian suppliers for the first two 
reactor units. At the CANDU plant at Wolsung in the Republic of Korea the 
660 MW reactor had, in less that three years, supplied more than 10 TWh to the 
Korean national grid. That power, which was equivalent to 20 million barrels 
of oil, represented savings of US $400 million if fuel cost differences were 
taken into account. In August 1985 a consortium led by Canadian enterprises 
had signed a memorandum of agreement with the Turkish Electric Authority, 
under which the latter had agreed to negotiate exclusively with Atomic Energy 
of Canada Limited for a given period with respect to the construction of a 
665 MW CANDU unit in Turkey. The financing arrangement contemplated 
represented an innovation. In fact, it was similar to the one mentioned by 
the Director General in his statement, since the consortium was to build the 
plant, which it would then operate for a certain period before Turkey assumed 
ownership. In addition, a CANDU 300 model, for which the capital costs were 
lower and construction times shorter, would improve CANDU's competitiveness on 
the world market in future years. 


125. With regard to the Conference of the Parties to Review the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which had recently ended, his 
delegation considered that more time would be needed before all its 
implications could be assessed, in particular, with respect to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and the Agency. Its first impression, however, had 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 


page 40 


been very encouraging. Certain non-signatories of the Treaty had naturally 


not participated in the Conference, and their absence had been regretted. 
Nevertheless, in a very real sense the international nuclear community had 
met: it had examined the Treaty article by article and clause by clause 
without glossing over those areas in which results under the Treaty had been 


insufficient, and it appeared to have reached conclusions which were balanced, 
positive and constructive. Canada hoped to be able to build on those 


important results in its future bilateral and multilateral activities. 


126. With regard to the role of the Agency itself, the Canadian delegation 
believed, first, that one should not lose sight of the really essential parts 
of its mandate, namely safeguards, technical co-operation and nuclear safety. 
The Agency had frequently been entrusted with other tasks, but his delegation 
believed that those three activities were fundamental. Secondly, Canada 
believed that the statutory activities of the Agency were so important, 
delicate and complex that further tasks should not be imposed on it unless the 
need for them was clearly demonstrated. It went without saying, however, that 
the Agency should adapt to changes in the nuclear world and to the new 
challenges which such changes posed. In that respect his delegation hoped 
that the Scientific Advisory Committee would, when it met in late 1985 to 
review the Agency's scientific programme, be asked to identify programmes of 
low priority as well as those of high priority. Thirdly, he considered that 
all delegations should collectively do what they could to lower the 
temperature of discussions at the Agency. There was no shortage of 
differences and divisions in the world at large. Member States should reflect 
on the potential cost, to each one separately and to all of them together, of 
allowing issues, solutions to which could not in any case be found in the 
Agency, to take root and flourish in the organization. It would be more 
advantageous and in the common interest to take the emphasis away from 
divisive issues and to concentrate on areas in which joint positive action was 
possible. 
127. Ms. SUDIRDJO (Indonesia) noted that the twenty-ninth session of 
the General Conference coincided with the fortieth anniversary of the United 
Nations. On the occasion of its anniversary, the peoples of the world were 
taking stock of the performance of that universal organization over the past 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 41 


four decades and were also looking forward to the contribution which the 
United Nations could make to the maintenance of international peace and 
security. The current session of the General Conference was also being held 
at a time of significant developments in international relations, with the 
resumption of negotiations on arms limitations between the United States of 
America and the Soviet Union, the forthcoming Geneva summit between General 
Secretary Gorbachev and Presdient Reagan and the gratifying conclusion of the 
Third Conference of the Parties to Review the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 


128. With regard to the Agency's activities and, in particular technical 
co-operation, she said that Indonesia, which was currently carrying out its 
fourth five-year development plan, attached considerable importance to 
international co-operation, especially on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and 
would continue to support the Agency's role and activities in connection with 
the transfer of nuclear technology. The Indonesian delegation noted with 
satisfaction the continuing increases in resources for the technical 
assistance and co-operation programme, which had amounted to a total of 
US $36 million in 1984, and wished to thank all donor countries. 
129. With regard to the financing of technical assistance, her delegation 
had stated twelve years earlier that the possibility of financing that 
activity from the Agency's Regular Budget should be considered. It had 
supported the temporary compromise solution which the indicative planning 
figure system applied since 1982 represented. Her delegation welcomed the 
agreement that had been reached in the previous week by the Board on 
indicative planning figures for 1987, 1988 and 1989, which were to be 12% 
higher in each successive year. It was to be hoped that the General 
Conference would endorse that decision. 
130. The Indonesian delegation welcomed the new approaches in the technical 
co-operation policies of the Agency that had been followed in 1984 and that 
aimed at improving the use of funds from the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund, at rationalizing procedures for the procurement of goods 
and services and at increasing the effectiveness of the Agency's development 
assistance. 
131. The Indonesian delegation considered that technical co-operation among 
developing countries should also be encouraged and that, in that context, 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 42 


regional co-operation played an important part. For that reason it attached 
considerable importance to technical co-operation activities under the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for Asia and the Pacific, and wished to 
thank donor countries which had contributed to the financing of various RCA 
programmes. In 1983 and 1984 Indonesia had hosted courses and demonstrations 
relating to the application of radiation in the vulcanization of natural 
rubber latex, which had been attended by participants from the RCA region. A 
first course on the use of radiation curing of the surface coating of wood 
products had taken place in Indonesia during the period November 1984February 
1985 with the participation of trainees from various countries of the 
region. At the end of the year, two other similar courses would be held. 


132. At the national level, the construction of a nuclear industry 
development centre at Serpong, approximately 30 kilometres to the south-west 
of Jakarta, was making rapid progress. The centre would include a 
multipurpose 30 MW(th) reactor and installations for experimental fuel element 
production, radioactive wastes and radioisotope production. In a second 
phase, a radiometallurgy laboratory, an engineering safety laboratory, a 
nuclear mechanical engineering laboratory and, later, a physics and chemistry 
laboratory would be added to that nuclear industrial complex. Also, a 
training centre for nuclear technicians had recently been opened. 
133. In the matter of safeguards and their financing, she said that, as a 
Member of the Agency and a party to NPT, Indonesia attached considerable 
importance to the Agency's verification activities and to the strengthening of 
its safeguards system. Her delegation welcomed the fact that in 1984 the 
Secretariat had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the diversion of 
a significant quantity of safeguarded nuclear material. It also welcomed the 
decision by the Soviet Union to place some of its peaceful nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards, a decision which reinforced the credibility of the 
Agency's safeguards system. With regard to the financing of safeguards, the 
proposals being submitted for replacing the system currently in force had very 
little in common with each other, and the only possible solution at present 
seemed to be to extend the arrangements currently being applied for at least 
one more year. 
134. The objective of safeguards, as specified by Article III.A.5 of the 
Agency's Statute, was to prevent the horizontal proliferation of nuclear 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 43 


weapons. The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones would make a 
considerable contribution to international efforts aimed at non-proliferation 
and, at the same time, would reinforce regional co-operation on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. Indonesia's interest in the concept of a nuclearweapon-
free zone went back to 1971, with the adoption by the Association of 
South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) of the Kuala Lumpur Declaration on the Zone 
of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality. In July 1985 the ministerial meeting of 
ASEAN at Kuala Lumpur had noted with satisfaction that the concept of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone as a component of the Zone of Peace, Freedom and 
Neutrality was now being actively studied. The meeting had also given 


instructions that consideration of the question should continue with a view to 


identifying in greater detail the principles, objectives and elements of such 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone and possible ways of setting it up. 


135. In that context, her delegation welcomed the denuclearization treaty in 
the South Pacific concluded on 6 August 1985 by the countries of that region. 
The application of Agency safeguards, mentioned in Article 8 and Annex 2 of 
the treaty, constituted yet further recognition of the credibility of the 
Agency's safeguards system. 
136. In the previous week, when the Board had examined the question of South 
Africa's nuclear capabilities, her delegation had stated that South Africa's 
persistent defiance of resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly and 
the Agency's General Conference on that subject was a matter of grave concern 
for all. Considering, as had been stated in preambular paragraph (e) of 
resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/423, "... that South Afrcia's unsafeguarded nuclear 
facilities enable it to acquire the capability of producing usable nuclear 
material for nuclear weapons," and that, according to operative paragraph 48 
of General Assembly resolution 39/50 A, "such acquisition constitutes a threat 
to peace and security in Africa while posing a danger to all mankind", 
Indonesia believed that the General Conference should once again demand that 
South Africa place all its nuclear establishments and facilities under Agency 
safeguards. 
137. With regard to the question of the amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute, her delegation would continue to co-operate with efforts to find a 
solution. However, it seriously doubted whether a solution could be found in 

GC(XXIX)/OR.274 
page 44 


the near future. First, the Members of the Agency did not all agree that 
Article VI.A.2, in particular, and Article VI as a whole needed to be revised; 
secondly, a number of countries, while being prepared to discuss the proposal 
to amend Article VI.A.2, would prefer a possible revision of Article VI as a 
whole; and thirdly, the matter had become more complicated and hope for a 
solution appeared to have receded with the introduction of a proposal, 
submitted for the first time at the present General Conference, to the effect 
that Article VI as a whole should be revised. The co-sponsors of that 
proposal considered that the revision of Article VI as a whole would at the 
same time constitute a solution to the problem of the under-representation of 
certain geographical areas on the Board of Governors, and thereby also to the 
question of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. 


138. In conclusion, she congratulated the Agency and the Director General on 
the positive results obtained so far. 
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
April 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 


on Wednesday, 25 September 1985, at 8.10 p.m. 
President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 
later: Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annual report for 
1984 (continued) 1 - 134 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Panama 1 -12 
Cuba 13 -27 
Bangladesh 28 -44 
United Republic of Tanzania 45 -53 
Norway 54 -65 
Yugoslavia 66 -76 
Ireland 77 -84 
Viet Nam 85 -91 
Philippines 92 -108 
Thailand 109 -118 
Guatemala 119 -122 
Venezuela 123 134 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 9 October 1985. 


**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-1542 
0355e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr.1) (continued) 


1. Mr. KOREF (Panama) said that considerable progress and expansion 
had taken place in all the Agency's activites, especially technical assistance 
which was of particular importance for his country. Panama was receiving 
technical assistance with a view to benefiting from the use of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes in the fields of agriculture, medicine, training and 
mineralogy. Since it had sufficient hydropower resources, it would not be 
needing nuclear power plants in the foreseeable future. 
2. The whole world was rightly concerned about the enormous debts of 
developing countries which had been contracted with industralized countries 
when the former had required funds for industrial and agricultural development 
and the World Bank had been seeking ways of investing the large amounts of 
money deposited with it in the 1970s. The only solutions to that problem were 
the industrialization of the Third World, the improvement of its capacity for 
producing raw materials in agriculture and mining, and the opening of 
international markets to Third World products so that the income countries 
earned could be used for paying their debts and the interest on them. The 
Agency was, with other international organizations, certainly assisting most 
effectively with the development of Third World countries, and such activities 
should be expanded. In that connection he greatly welcomed the statement by 
the President of the United States of America against the restriction of 
imports into his country; that statement would certainly assist the Third 
World. He thanked the Secretariat and the Director General for their 
co-operation with Panama, which also appreciated the extrabudgetary 
contributions in cash and kind received from certain donor countries, enabling 
it to carry out projects not covered by the budget or by contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
3. The Agency's Annual Report for 1984 showed a further gratifying 
increase in funds available for technical assistance and also an increase by 
$6 million in technical co-operation disbursements as a result of streamlined 
procedures. He welcomed the fact that there had been some increase in the 
proportion of technical assistance received by Latin America, and hoped that 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 3 


that trend would continue. There had also been a considerable increase, by 
$3 million, in assistance with agriculture. The fact that the evaluation 
system was now covering 65% of projects, with positive results, was a further 
source of gratification. 


4. Panama was greatly interested in the Agency's involvement in the 
regulation of sea dumping of radioactive wastes since it had extensive 
coastlines on two different oceans, and fishing represented an important 
source of income for it. Other environmental aspects of nuclear energy were 
also of importance, since further nuclear power plants would doubtless be 
needed in the future; their contribution to the fight against pollution caused 
by other types of power plant needed to be demonstrated. 
5. His country was grateful to the Agency for assisting it with 
agricultural development with respect to soil fertility and irrigation, 
phytotechnics and plant genetics, and also the reproductive efficiency of 
cattle. 
6. Panama was also interested in food conservation by irradiation, 
especially for products with a limited shelf-life with a view to making them 
available throughout the year and to exporting tropical fruit and sea food. 
7. Although his country did not as yet have facilities requiring 
safeguards, he recognized their importance at a world level and thanked the 
Agency for its efforts to prevent nuclear catastrophe. Panama also 
appreciated the Agency's co-operation with it in order to prevent accidents in 
those of its facilities which used radioisotopes and to train its scientists 
both at home and abroad, especially at Seibersdorf. His delegation agreed 
that the facilities at Seibersdorf should be extended in order to accommodate 
technicians from developing countries who would not otherwise be able to 
receive training for lack of space. Even if the Secretariat's staff needed to 
be increased for that purpose, he considered that it would be a good 
investment if it resulted in the training of further Third World technicians. 
8. In that context his Government welcomed the fact that, according to 
document GOV/INF/467, the definition of developing country used by the General 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 4 


Assembly related only to the staffing of international organizations and not 
to those countries of the Third World which received technical assistance. 


9. The new format for the 1986 budget was to be welcomed since it provided 
a considerable amount of information in a form which was easy to understand. 
Panama was in favour of multi-year projects; the Secretariat should also be 
prepared to assist with the identification of priorities and with the drafting 
of technical assistance requests, which would save both time and money for all 
concerned. The budget showed the important place occupied by non-power 
nuclear applications and a modest increase in the assessment on Members as 
compared with the increase in miscellaneous income. With regard to the 
exchange rate, Panama was in favour of a large proportion of contributions 
being paid in Austrian schillings or in dollars with the amount varying as a 
function of the dollar-schilling rate. 
10. It was gratifying that efforts were being made to recruit more 
nationals of Third World countries to the Secretariat and as experts; it was 
only regrettable that those efforts were not being successful because of the 
lack of applications from appropriate candidates. Panama agreed that, as 
stipulated by the Statute, only well-qualified candidates should be appointed. 
11. The Committee on Assurances of Supply had been making progress, albeit 
slowly, and he hoped that a consensus on the matter of principles of 
international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy would be reached in 
October 1985. 
12. His delegation had welcomed the following recommendations of the Third 
NPT Review Conference, which had recently ended in Geneva: that negotiations 
should continue on the permanent banning of tests of nuclear explosions by 
nuclear-weapon countries; that a treaty on total nuclear disarmament should 
come into being; that further nuclear-weapon-free zones should be established; 
that assistance should be provided by nuclear-weapon States with the 
establishment of such zones, inter alia, in the Middle East, Africa and Asia; 
and that there should be co-operation between Member States in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. It would be appropriate for the General Conference to 
associate itself with those recommendations. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 5 


13. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) expressed the conviction that, in the 
present complex international situation, marked by the dangers of the 
armaments race and an atmosphere of global and local confrontation generated 
by certain warlike circles, the Agency's General Conference would embody the 
spirit of peace, dialogue and collaboration. 
14. The worst consequences of the international economic crisis were felt 
by the countries of the Third World, which had a huge and irremediable 
external debt. Such factors as trade imbalances, high rates of interest, 
dumping, and protectionism on the part of the major industrial Powers served 
only to dash the hopes of those countries. The struggle for a new 
international economic order, the fundamentals of which had been agreed upon 
in the United Nations General Assembly, had never before been so urgent. 
15. That worsening economic situation was also reflected in the pattern of 
world nuclear development. Only 4.3% of the world's installed nuclear 
capacity was in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and South Asia. By the 
year 2000, when nuclear power was expected to provide 20% of the world's 
energy, those vast areas, containing 80% of the world's population, would 
still have no foreseeable access to the increased energy resources which would 
enable them to meet basic human requirements. Statistical reports had 
indicated that any increase in the Third World's nuclear power resources up to 
the early 21st century would remain limited to the ten countries at present 
possessing or constructing nuclear power plants. Leading scientists had 
calculated that the underdeveloped world would need at least US $450 000 million 
between 1980 and 1990 to carry out energy programmes and to meet the 
challenge to their own survival. 
16. However, how would they be able to obtain such resources, when they 
already owed twice that amount and were not even capable of servicing that 
debt at US $100 000 million annually? How, for example, was Latin America to 
mobilize such amounts, when over ten years the interest alone on its debt 
would amount to US $400 000 million? The situation had become so serious that 
it called for constant analysis and attention. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 6 


17. The technical assistance and co-operation programme should be 
maintained and broadened. It was thus essential to guarantee the necessary 
financial resources and appropriate increases in the programme's budget. His 
country could neither understand nor accept that certain Governments, which 
had undertaken to co-operate for the benefit of those States most in need of 
assistance, should now call for "zero growth" in the budget, basing their 
argument on various pretexts and threats for the future. 
18. Cuba categorically rejected those arguments and considered them 
unfounded. It opposed the budgetary freeze and condemned the attempt to 
curtail the right of developing States to participate more fully and 
effectively in the development of nuclear power. 
19. As to the financing of safeguards - which were very important for the 
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in non-nuclear-weapon 
States - he pointed out that the Agency had so far, in that respect, accorded 
preferential treatment to developing countries. It was to be hoped that that 
would continue in the future. No proposal in regard to that matter should be 
to the detriment of developing countries, whose economies, in the majority of 
cases, were close to bankruptcy. 
20. The long-standing problem concerning the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of 
the Statute had now been further complicated by the inclusion in the agenda of 
an item aimed at revising Article VI as a whole. Cuba was ready to consider 
any proposal for resolving that matter, provided it was realistic and took 
into account the affected regions, including Latin America. 
21. With regard to South Africa's nuclear capabilities, his Government felt 
that the steps thus far taken by South Africa were insufficient and far from 
satisfying the basic requirement of resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/423 that South 
Africa should place all its nuclear facilities under safeguards. The partial 
measures adopted by South Africa were simply a means to gain time, to try to 
improve the image of apartheid in the eyes of the international community and 
to avoid the application of operative paragraph 7 of resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/423. South Africa was subjecting its black population to 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 7 


barbarous repression. It was continuing its illegal occupation of Namibia and 
preventing that country from gaining true independence. It continued to 
threaten and attack neighbouring independent States. There remained the 
possibility that the racist regime might use nuclear weapons, rather than 
permit its shameful system to come to an end. Pretoria's room for manoeuvre 
and false reforms, carried out with thinly disguised support on the part of 
certain western countries, was decreasing daily. The demand should therefore 
be firmly reiterated that South Africa comply fully with resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/423. 


22. Referring to the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear installation, he 
hoped that the General Conference would adopt effective measures to oblige 
Israel to respect and obey resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 of the previous 
year. No pressure or threat of reprisals against the Agency should be an 
obstacle to that. 
23. He was pleased to inform the General Conference that Cuba's peaceful 
nuclear energy programme had continued to develop at a rapid pace. Work on 
his country's first nuclear power plant, which would reduce present oil 
consumption by over 20%, was proceeding according to plan. Preparations were 
in hand for the extablishment of a nuclear research centre, while progress had 
been made with nuclear techniques in the fields of medicine, agriculture, 
industry and construction, and on the establishment of radiological protection 
and control services. 
24. Cuba was also actively involved in the training, both at home and 
abroad, of hundreds of specialists, professionals and technicians. 
25. With regard to its work in the nuclear field, Cuba acknowledged the 
co-operation given by the Soviet Union and other Socialist countries, 
Governments of friendly Third World States, and also that given by the IAEA 
and other specialized agencies within the United Nations system. The Cuban 
nuclear programme was a modest example of what could be achieved by bringing 
together independence, a just social system and effective international 
co-operation. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 8 


26. In conclusion, he recalled that the twenty-ninth session of the General 
Conference coincided with the year which marked not only the fortieth 
anniversary of the end of the Second World War and the establishment of the 
United Nations organization, but also the explosion of the first atomic bombs 
over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, an event which had unleashed the post-war drama 
of the Cold War, nuclear blackmail, the arms race and the balance of terror, 
which had continued to the present day. 
27. The Agency represented the rational and realistic face of nuclear 
energy, and he expressed the hope that the ideal of deriving from the atom 
only peace, well-being and prosperity for all the peoples of the world would 
triumph. 
28. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh), congratulating Mr. Blix on his 
reappointment as Director General and welcoming his statement at the 
Conference, was pleased to note that the latter had separately treated the 
needs of the least-developed countries in his report on "The Agency's 
Technical Co-operation Activities in 1984". Those countries were subject to 
continued crises, both man-made and natural. Owing to the protectionist 
policies in international trade, they were faced with a shrinking export 
market, deteriorating terms of trade and a dwindling employment situation. 
The scarce foreign exchange which they earned was spent mostly on food and 
fuel imports. 
29. In highlighting the problems of the least-developed countries, the 
Director General had referred to the Agency's technical assistance to them in 
priority fields such as agriculture, health, basic physics, nuclear 
engineering and technology and nuclear applications planning. It had also 
awarded fellowships and organized scientific visits. The Director General's 
report had underlined a very positive trend among the least-developed 
countries, namely their greater involvement in the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme. Some of them were in a position to play the role of 
suppliers of services to other developing countries, and had hosted training 
courses and provided experts for project assignments. He was further happy to 
note that the Agency was already implementing some of the recommendations of 
the Joint Inspection Unit, especially those relating to technical co-operation 
programming. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 9 


30. His delegation greatly appreciated the Director General's detailed 
account of the development of nuclear energy, and considered that the Agency 
should make concerted efforts in order to find a lasting solution to the 
energy requirements of the developing countries. 
31. The growth of nuclear power in the world had not been as encouraging as 
had been projected earlier. The programme had suffered especially in some 
developed countries because of a slower rise in electricity demand, high 
capital costs due partly to regulatory activites and delays. That, in its 
turn, had affected decision-making in developing countries. However, recently 
there seemed to be a gradual swing in favour of nuclear power. As the 
Director General had stated, despite the pessimism about nuclear energy, the 
total installed nuclear capacity in the world had increased by 17%, 34 new 
nuclear power units having been connected to the grids in 13 countries. 
32. In Bangladesh, where primary energy resources for electricity 
production were very limited, nuclear power was essential. Efforts to 
implement the first nuclear power project had not succeeded mainly for want of 
necessary funds. It seemed that the efforts of other developing countries 
with prospects for using small and medium power reactors (SMPRs) were 
suffering owing to various technical and financial problems. 
33. In that connection, the Agency's SMPR project initiation study was very 
relevant and useful to developing countries. Bangladesh was especially happy 
that the study was based on its 1982 proposal on establishing an international 
demonstration reactor. A number of meetings had already been held and some 
technical issues had been clarified. The Agency had recently organized a 
seminar on costs and financing of nuclear power programmes in developing 
countries. The holding of a scientific afternoon and technical committee 
meeting on SMPRs during the Conference should also be mentioned. 
34. The Agency's concern for SMPRs and its role in finding answers to many 
unresolved issues was laudable. However, a lot more remained to be done about, 
the cost of SMPRs and the financing of nuclear plants in developing 
countries. The Agency might especially take up the financing issues 
separately with international financial institutions. The latter's opinion on 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 10 


the role of nuclear power in general and SMPRs in particular might facilitate 
decision-making in many developing countries. At the same time, suppliers 
might also be encouraged to provide reasonably acceptable figures on the cost 
of SMPRs built in their own countries, which could be a basis for calculating 
the cost of such plants in buyer countries. 


35. On the question of financing he drew attention to resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/439 and to the request to the Agency by the Third NPT Review 
Conference to provide, upon request, assistance in securing financing from 
outside sources for nuclear power projects in developing countries and in 
particular the least-developed countries. He expressed his appreciation of 
the Agency's renewed efforts in assisting developing countries with nuclear 
power programme planning and infrastructure development. 
36. The reaffirmation by States party to NPT in the Third NPT Review 
Conference with regard to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and their 
commitment to Agency safeguards was a testimony to their support for what the 
Agency stood for. He was confident that the future programmes of the Agency 
would take into account the report of that conference wherein the latter had 
reaffirmed the undertaking of the Parties to the Treaty in a position to do so 
to co-operate in contributing, alone or together with States or international 
organizations, to the further development of the applications of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, especially in the territories of the nonnuclear-
weapon States party to the Treaty, with due consideration for the 
needs of the developing areas of the world and in that context, recognized the 
particular needs of the least-developed countries. 
37. Referring to his country's activities in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, he said that research and development work in the various branches of 
atomic energy was continuing and that Bangladesh was actively participating in 
all programmes sponsored by the IAEA and other agencies. In some fields like 
food preservation, it was concentrating on using the research findings in the 
commercialization programme. Moreover, the Atomic Energy Research 
Establishment (AERE) at Savar had developed a number of other facilities. It 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 11 


had installed the major components of a 3-MW TRIGA Mark-II research reactor, 
which was to become critical and operational by the year end. A radioisotope 
production laboratory was under construction and was expected to be completed 
the following year. He was grateful to the Agency for its generous technical 


assistance in the utilization of the research reactor and for the technical 


advice which its staff members had provided from time to time. He hoped that 
the quantum of technical assistance to Bangladesh would continue to increase 


in the future also. 


38. The Institute of Computer Science had been established in order to 
conduct research and development programmes in computer science and technology 
and to cater for the computational needs of the Bangladesh Atomic Energy 
Commission and of other users in the country. Those facilities were centred 
around a newly installed mainframe IBM System 4341 computer along with the 
required peripherals. Lastly, the neutron generator supplied by the Agency 
had been installed and tested and was being utilized for collecting nuclear 
data using 14 MeV neutrons. 
39. Bangladesh was supporting the Agency programmes under the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training related to 
Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA), and appreciated the financial assistance 
extended by some countries in the region as well as by UNDP and the Agency. 
He was pleased to note that the food irradiation programme had been further 
extended with the aim of technology transfer to the local industry. It was 
expected that the programme would soon have practical application with the 
support of the Agency. 


40. His country had made considerable progress in its food preservation 
programme and was interested in the commercialization of irradiated foods. In 
that connection, it would welcome financial support and co-operation from 
international financing agencies. 
41. It was high time that due consideration be given to the Bangladesh 
proposal concerning the establishment of a regional centre for research, 
development and application of nuclear science and technology in one of the 
Member States under the auspices of the RCA for South and South-East Asia, the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 12 


Pacific and the Far East, to be called the Institute of Nuclear Science and 
Technology for Asia (INSTA), which had been discussed at several RCA working 
group meetings since 1980 and also at the meetings of Government 
representatives held in Vienna in 1984. Such a centre would help in the cross 
fertilization of ideas on research, development and training among the 
participating Member States. It was worth mentioning that the UNDP industrial 
project under the RCA had been in operation for five years and that the Agency 
had established three regional centres in Italy, Monaco and Austria. 


42. His delegation was looking forward to the United Nations Conference for 
the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy (UNCPICPUNE) to be held in 1986, for which Bangladesh had proposed some 
items for inclusion in the agenda and submitted a paper. 
43. By adhering to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty a vast majority of 
countries in the world demonstrated their commitment to the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. However, the fear of proliferation was still 
very real and had resulted in the unwillingness of developed countries to 
transfer nuclear technology to the developing ones. An atmosphere of mutual 
trust was required for assurances of supply of nuclear materials, especially 
in the field of nuclear power and the Agency might help in creating such an 
atmosphere. In that connection, one could not ignore that South Africa's 
unsafeguarded facilities posed a danger, and world-wide condemnation seemed to 
have no effect on that country. 
44. In conclusion, his delegation wished to renew its pledge to co-operate 
with the Agency which, despite occasional difficulties, had been able to march 
forward towards its goal. 
45. Mr. CHAGULA (United Republic of Tanzania) commended the Director 
General for his statement and congratulated him on his unanimous re-election. 
46. His delegation wished to make a few remarks in connection with the 
Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) 
which had recently ended. When the NPT was being negotiated in the 1960s, 
great care had been taken to ensure a balance of obligations and 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 13 


responsibilites among the parties concerned. Under the Treaty, the 
non-nuclear-weapon States party to the Treaty had renounced the nuclearweapons 
option. While those States had respected that obligation and others 
contained in the Treaty, the nuclear-weapon States had not adhered to their 
undertakings and had deliberately violated some of the key articles of the 
Treaty, particularly Articles I, II and VI. The number of strategic nuclear 
weapons belonging to the nuclear-weapon States had risen from 6000 in 1970 to 
the current total of almost 20 000. In addition, research into space-based 
anti-ballistic missiles was now under way and, if such missiles were deployed, 
that would constitute a further flagrant violation of the NPT. The conclusion 
of a comprehensive test ban treaty, which, in the view of the majority, 
constituted the minimum condition for the super Powers to comply with 
Article VI of the NPT, had not yet been achieved, and in the meantime 
bilateral technical assistance in nuclear technology continued to flow to the 
South African regime and to Israel which in turn threatened the peace and 
security of their regions. 


47. The nuclear-weapon States were no longer the sole suppliers of nuclear 
technology. A number of other countries, including those which had not signed 
the NPT, now supplied nuclear technology and materials, sometimes on 
attractive terms. In view of that and the violations of the Treaty by 
nuclear-weapon States, there was little incentive for non-NPT members, 
particularly the "threshold" nuclear States, to sign the Treaty, while States 
already party to the Treaty might even be tempted to renounce their adherence 
to it. Thus, the world was not very far from the frightening situation where 
nuclear weapons proliferation would be out of control. Nevertheless, his 
delegation felt strongly that one last chance remained and full use should be 
made of it by universalizing the Treaty and ensuring the adherence of all to 
all its articles. The conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty 
would contribute significantly towards that goal and would pave the way for 
nuclear disarmament as well as comprehensive general disarmament. By not 
strongly condemning the nuclear-weapon States for their violations of 
Articles I, II and VI of the NPT, and by not agreeing unequivocally that the 
nuclear-weapon States party to the NPT should forthwith proceed to conclude 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 14 


negotiations for a comprehensive test ban treaty, the Third NPT Review 
Conference had again failed, which did not augur well for the future of either 
the non-proliferation regime or the NPT itself. 


48. When the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had been set up five 
years previously to formulate principles for international co-operation in 
nuclear energy, it had been envisaged that the principles would, among other 
things, provide a non-discriminatory guarantee of nuclear fuel and equipment 
supplies and promote the provision of assistance to Member States and 
facilitate the comprehensive application of safeguards in all their peaceful 
nuclear facilities. While welcoming the progress that had been made in some 
areas, his delegation was concerned that the Committee had not been able to 
produce practical results in all areas within its mandate. With another major 
effort and good will, however, he was hopeful that the Committee could 
complete its work in those areas. 
49. His country attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities. He welcomed the overall increase in the funds 
available for those activities, especially the rise in extrabudgetary 
resources which had enabled more footnote a./ projects to be implemented. 
Sincere thanks were due to those countries which had provided generous 
resources for the technical assistace programme. The overall increase in the 
technical co-operatiom programme fell short of the requirements of the 
developing countries, however, a fact which was demonstrated by the sharp rise 
in the number of footnote a/ projects. It was not surprising that the needs 
of the developing countries were increasing rapidly since most of their 
nuclear programmes were still in their infancy when assistance was needed 
most. Donor States should note, however, that as those programmes matured, 
the need for assistance would drop considerably. That had already been proved 
by those developing countries which were now providing assistance to other 
developing countries in the nuclear area. Also, the valuable catalytic effect 
of the money spent on technical assistance should not be forgotten. 
50. The twenty-fifth session of the General Conference had adopted a draft 
resolution requesting the Board to take the necessary measures so that 
technical assistance could be funded through the Regular Budget or through 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 15 


other comparable predictable and assured resources. It was regrettable that 
no progress had been made to implement that resolution to the satisfaction of 
all Member States. The interim system of indicative planning figures did not 
fulfil the requirements of that resolution since resources continued to be 
offered voluntarily. None the less, he warmly welcomed the consensus reached 
by the Board on a 12% annual increase in the target for contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for the three-year period 1987-1989 
and urged the Board to intensify its efforts to fulfil all the objectives of 
the General Conference resolution to which he had referred. 


51. With regard to the programming of technical assistance, his delegation 
welcomed the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit that the Agency 
should aim at establishing with each Member State a multi-year programme 
covering all Agency-supported projects in that State and that the present 
system of annual voluntary contributions for technical co-operation should be 
gradually changed so as to cover longer periods. He also commended the 
introduction of dynamic programming which had released funds for the 
implementation of footnote a/ projects and for general fellowships. The 
increasing participation of other Agency Departments in the technical 
co-operation programme was a trend which should be encouraged. He strongly 
commended the attention given to the training of nationals from developing 
countries which would undoubtedly enhance the ability of such countries to use 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
52. His Government wished to express its gratitude to the Agency for the 
training, experts and equipment so far provided following his country's 
decision to establish a National Radiation Commission. He trusted that such 
assistance would continue to be given until the Commission was firmly 
established and fully functioning. 
53. It was now more than eight years since the legitimate request for the 
amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had first been brought to the 
attention of the Board. During those years, there had been a long process of 
laborious and extensive consultations backed up by eight consecutive General 
Conference resolutions, each of which stressed the urgency of amending that 
Article in order to ensure the just and equitable representation of the two 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 16 


under-represented regions on the Board. The issue was still far from being 
resolved and, in an effort to kill it, the champions of the status quo were 
now fighting hard to block any further discussions of it by refusing to agree 
on the establishment of a mechanism which would carry the matter forward. 
Those parties were attempting to obscure the original issue by suggesting that 
the whole of Article VI be revised in order to meet the concerns of the 
under-represented regions as well as those of the advanced regions which 
wished to maintain the so-called technical and political balance of the 
Board. His delegation was ready to take part in an exchange of ideas on that 
question, provided such a revision did not detract from the revision of 
Article VI.A.2, which should continue to be given top priority. 


54. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) said that the current session of the General 
Conference was meeting following the successful outcome of the Third NPT 
Review Conference in Geneva, which had agreed by consensus on a final 
declaration. That Conference had emphasized the key role of Agency safeguards 
in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the role of the Agency 
in global nuclear co-operation. 
55. Subject to parliamentary approval, his delegation accepted the budget 
proposed and the target of US $30 000 000 for voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1986. That Fund, together with 
the Regular Budget, provided a reasonable balance between the Agency's 
regulatory and promotional activities. The substantial growth in the 
technical co-operation programme in recent years was a source of satisfaction 
to his delegation, which would be prepared to accept further reasonable 
increases in the future. He found considerable merit in the concept of 
indicative planning figures and saw no need to switch to any other method of 
financing. 
56. By 31 December 1984, 92.1% of the target for voluntary contributions 
had been pledged compared with 92.7% in 1983. He hoped that Member States 
would pay the contributions outstanding not only for 1984, but also for 1983 
and earlier years. He was disappointed that, by the end of 1984, 45 Member 
States had not pledged a voluntary contribution for 1984 and 14 Member States 
had pledged amounts smaller than their calculated shares. The rapid increase 
in the arrears of assessed programme costs in recent years was also a matter 
of concern, and every effort should be made to collect the outstanding amounts. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 17 


57. He noted with satisfaction that the implementation of technical 
assistance had increased by 44% in 1984 over the 1983 level and that there had 
been a substantial rise over the last few years in the amount of technical 
assistance provided to the 12 Member States belonging to the group of least 
developed countries. In addition to its regular contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund, Norway intended to contribute to the 
financing of footnote a/ projects. Norway had a strong commitment to 
non-proliferation and its main aim in contributing to selected footnote a/ 
projects would be to offer assistance and encouragement to countries which had 
foregone the nuclear-weapons option by signing the NPT and to support 
technical programmes. 
58. His delegation supported the trend towards more direct Agency 
participation in safety work through advisory missions and assistance to 
national regulatory bodies, and noted with satisfaction that the incident 
reporting system had become operational in 1984. The Agency's efforts 
regarding nuclear power and the fuel cycle were also important. The exchange 
and dissemination of Member States' experience through publications, symposia, 
panels and so forth were beneficial for all Member States. Among the 
highlights of the Agency's programme were the small and medium power reactor 
project, which might be of direct interest to a considerable number of Member 
States, and the INIS programme, which was an outstanding example of real 
international co-operation. 
59. Norway, together with several other countries, had consistently 
expressed the view that sea dumping of any type of radioactive waste should be 
avoided. His delegation trusted that the Agency would give proper attention 
to studying the effects of sea dumping. 
60. His country was pleased to note that a number of countries had signed 
the NPT in 1984 and that additional safeguards agreements pursuant to NPT or 
the Tlatelolco Treaty had been concluded. At the end of 1984, however, there 
were still 39 non-nuclear-weapon States party to the NPT which had not 
concluded safeguards agreements. After a long period of rapid increase in 
workload, the safeguards system had now entered a period of consolidation. 
The quantity of material controlled had not changed much from 1983 to 1984 and 
slightly fewer inspections had been carried out in a smaller number of nuclear 
intallations. There had been a remarkable increase from 1983 to 1984 in the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 18 


number of major facilities for which inspection goals had been fully attained, 
although the situation had not improved for all types of installations. There 
were many possible reasons for the non-attainment of inspection goals, some 
outside Agency control. He hoped Member States would be more co-operative by 
submitting reports on time, by being more flexible in designating inspectors 
and by speeding up the shipment of analytical samples, since that would result 
in a more reliable and cheaper safeguards system. It appeared that a number 
of facilities with an annual throughput or presence of more than one 
significant quantity of nuclear material had not been inspected in 1984. 
Since the available man-years of designated inspectors had risen by 19% from 
1983 to 1984, all important facilities should have been inspected. His 
delegation was aware of the efforts being made within the inspectorate to 
improve efficiency but doubted whether the abolition of the "Country Officer" 
concept had been a step in that direction. The former arrangement had given 
his country better and more direct contact with the Agency in the safeguards 
field. 


61. All countries participating in international nuclear trade must be able 
to feel confident that the material and equipment they exported could under no 
circumstances be put to nuclear explosive or military use. He urged the few 
non-nuclear-weapon States having nuclear installations not subject to Agency 
safeguards to conclude full-scope safeguards agreements with the Agency either 
within or outside the NPT framework. 
62. Four nuclear-weapon States had concluded voluntary safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. He welcomed the recent announcement by China that 
certain Chinese installations would be placed under Agency safeguards. 
63. His delegation supported in principle the Swedish proposal that steps 
be taken towards separating the civilian and military nuclear sectors of the 
nuclear-weapon States party to the NPT and that Agency safeguards be applied 
in the civilian nuclear sector in those countries. It was his Government's 
position that all Member States should participate in the financing of 
safeguards which were a collective responsibility and which benefited all 
countries. The extension of the safeguards system to cover the total peaceful 
sector of the nuclear-weapon States would result in a considerable increase in 
the Agency's safeguards budget. That should be taken into consideration in 
the discussions on the future financing of safeguards. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.275 
page 19 


64. His delegation was pleased to announce that Norway had ratified the 
International Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material on 
15 August 1985. 
65. It was to be hoped that the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) 
would soon reach satisfactory conclusions. It was in the interest of all to 
promote nuclear trade, the basic conditions for which were reliable supplies 
and a smoothly functioning non-proliferation regime. Finally, with regard to 
the composition of the Board of Governors, he noted that both equitable 
geographical representation and the degree of technological advancement should 
be taken into account. An agreement on changes in the Board's membership 
would most likely be achieved by revising Article VI as a whole. 
66. Mr. PRIBICEVIC (Yugoslavia) noted that the Conference was being 
held at a time when international political and economic relations were 
fraught with many negative trends adversely affecting the stability of the 
international situation and making the global picture very complex. The arms 
race was continuing, ever more sophisticated weapons for mass destruction were 
being developed and there was a dangerous tendency towards the militarization 
of outer space. Policies of force and pressure were being persistently 
applied, endangering the independence and stability of many countries. 
Despite new possibilities of scientific and technological development, the gap 
between developed and developing countries was further deepening and becoming 
one of the most dramatic contradictions of the contemporary world. Such a 
situation caused serious concern among all peace-loving forces, particularly 
in non-aligned and other developing countries which, at their recent 
ministerial meeting held in the capital of Angola, expressed their resolve to 
struggle for peace and for the democratization of international relations. 
67. The significance of nuclear power as the most reliable alternative 
energy source was indisputable. Although there had been a certain decline in 
the construction of new nuclear power plants in some developed countries, 
primarily due to surplus of capacity, some of them were already meeting over 
50 per cent of their energy needs from their nuclear plants and had ambitious 
plans for the future. Faced with a continuous energy shortage, developing 
countries, due to their economic difficulties and unfavourable conditions of 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 20 


international co-operation, were not in a position to carry out their plans 
for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was significant that of the 
34 nuclear plants which had begun operation in 1984 only one was located in a 
developing country. International efforts should be intensified to create 
more favourable conditions which would result in the more rapid introduction 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing countries. 


68. Co-operation between Yugoslavia and the Agency had developed 
successfully in various fields of peaceful uses of nuclear energy during the 
past year and it was hoped that such co-operation would be continued and 
expanded. 
69. Studies had shown that available classical energy resources were 
insufficient for his country's growing energy requirements. Therefore, 
notwithstanding the enormous burden involved, his country had adopted a 
long-term plan of nuclear power plant construction. That programme would help 
to satisfy his country's needs only if all other available energy sources 
continued to be exploited at the same time and only if economies were also 
made. 
70. His country particularly supported the Agency's activities in the areas 
of nuclear safety, waste disposal, the information system, the uses of nuclear 
energy in agriculture and so on, as well as other fields of its activities in 
the transfer of know-how and technology. In view of the growing needs of the 
developing countries, it was necessary for the Agency to intensify its 
activities in that important area. However, the maintenance of the Agency's 
budget on the same level for several years had made it difficult for the 
Agency to keep up its activities and even more difficult to increase them in 
accordance with the growing needs, especially those of developing countries. 
71. There was still a lack of balance between the promotional and 
regulatory activities of the Agency, since the Agency's assistance to 
developing countries was not at an appropriate level. As a result, some 
projects had to wait for additional resources from individual developed 
countries. Efforts should be made to ensure that all technically sound 
projects were financed in the same way and from the same sources. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 21 


72. His country firmly supported the views which had been expressed by the 
Group of 77 regarding the functioning of the Agency during the period 
following the previous regular session of the Agency's General Conference. 
73. With regard to South Africa, the events in the past months had shown 
that the racist regime and the policy of apartheid constituted a constant and 
dangerous threat to independence, stability and peace in South Africa. His 
country shared the concerns regarding South Africa's nuclear capabilities and 
was in favour of vigorous international action to ensure rapid full 
implementation of all relevant resolutions. 
74. It was also necessary that all resolutions concerning the consequences 
of the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi nuclear research reactor and the 
standing threat to repeat that attack be implemented fully and without further 
delay. 
75. It was to be hoped that the progress achieved at the fifth meeting of 
the Preparatory Committee of the United Nations Conference on the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) 
would create the basis for a successful and fruitful sixth meeting of the 
Preparatory Committee, in accordance with the interest of all the countries 
concerned. A successful outcome of the Conference would create more scope for 
the further promotion of the meaningful activities of the Agency which 
remained an irreplaceable instrument of international co-operation in that 
important field. 
76. In conclusion, he was pleased to inform the Conference that the Federal 
Assembly of Yugoslavia had ratified the Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material. 
77. Mr. THOMPSON (Ireland) said that his country attached great 
importance to the work of the Agency, even though it had no plans to acquire a 
nuclear electricity generating capacity. 
78. Since nuclear power now generated 13% of the world's electricity, it 
had an increasingly important and indispensable role to play in the world 
economy and in relations between States. Despite its manifold advantages, 
nuclear power also raised certain problems, such as nuclear safety, waste 
management, and the risk of nuclear proliferation. Since more than half of 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 22 


the world's nuclear reactors as well as a number of major fuel cycle 
facilities were located in Europe, his country was inevitably affected by such 
questions. It therefore greatly valued the regulatory work carried out by the 
Agency in the area of nuclear safety, such as the Incident Reporting System, 
the revision of the regulations for the safe transport of nuclear materials, 
and its work in connection with the London Dumping Convention. It had taken a 
special interest in the guidelines for mutual assistance among States in the 
event of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency. 


79. Developments in nuclear non-power uses were of particular interest. 
The promotional work carried out by the Agency in the areas of agriculture, 
food irradiation, environmental studies, and life sciences would in time be of 
great benefit to his country's economy and people. A seminar on food 
irradiation which had been held in his country had attracted a great deal of 
attention from the food processing industry and industrial irradiation was 
already being used on a large scale in his country for the sterilization of 
prepacked medical equipment. The Agency's work for developing countries was 
very important, especially in the areas of insect eradication and improvement 
of food supplies. In recognition of the importance of that work, his country 
was pledging US $30 000 to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 
1986. 
80. The Agency also played an extremely important role in the application 
of safeguards to nuclear installations. The Third NPT Review Conference had 
recognized that without the safeguards provided by the Agency it would not 
have been possible to agree on the NPT non-proliferation regime, nor 
subsequently to check the spread of nuclear weapons and other nuclear 
explosive devices. The primary purpose of safeguards was to provide mutual 
assurances of good faith in compliance with political commitments to the use 
of nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes. All Member States, 
nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States alike, should demonstrate 
that commitment by submitting all their peaceful nuclear facilities to Agency 
safeguards. It was a cause of grave concern that there were still six 
non-nuclear-weapon States with sensitive unsafeguarded installations. Those 
unsafeguarded installations posed not only a proliferation risk, but also 
exacerbated regional instability. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 23 


81. Many of those who had attended the NPT Review Conference had been 
convinced not only that the NPT regime had shown its viability, but also that 
the Conference had demonstrated the willingness of the parties to see the 
safeguards system develop to meet the challenges posed by the nuclear arms 
race. The NPT Review conference had recognized that the safeguards system 
ought ultimately to acquire a role in limiting vertical proliferation by 
providing assurances that stocks of plutonium in the nuclear-weapon States 
were not being diverted from peaceful to military purposes. Moreover, the 
safeguards system provided a model for international inspection and 
verification in the fields of arms control and disarmament. The recently 
concluded safeguards agreement with the Soviet Union could prove to be of 
special significance in that context, and it was hoped that it would be 
enlarged to cover a greater number of facilities. If that and the other 
voluntary offers could be extended to cover safeguards inspection of all civil 
nuclear plants in the nuclear-weapon States, as the Review Conference 
recommended, the nuclear-weapon States would be in a better position to fulfil 
their obligations under Article 6 of NPT. 
82. It was regrettable that insufficient attention had been given to 
international plutonium storage, and the NPT Review Conference's 
recommendation that the Agency should now establish such a system was very 
welcome. The growing use and movement of plutonium posed a serious 
proliferation risk and an IPS system was the best way to deal with that 
problem. All States should exercise due restraint in the separation of 
plutonium and recognize the importance of minimizing stocks surplus to civil 
requirements. 
83. It was pleasing to note that the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS) had made some progress towards reaching agreement on the establishment 
of principles governing nuclear supply. A universal consensus on the 
principles of non-proliferation would ease any problems of nuclear supply. 
The non-proliferation regime had been strengthened at the NPT Review 
Conference by the agreement reached there on the application of full-scope 
safeguards to all nuclear supplies. The confidence that the Agency's 
safeguards role was being fully and properly carried out was a necessary 

GC(XX1X)/0R.275 
page 24 


prerequisite for the development of technical exchanges and nuclear trade. 
Discussions in CAS and the preparations for the forthcoming United Nations 
Conference on the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses 
of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) had become more intense in the past year and it 
was to be hoped that those efforts would enable a wider consensus to be 
reached on the problems involved. 


84. In conclusion, he noted that the control of nuclear power for peaceful 
purposes had a direct bearing on international security and any undermining of 
the principle of universality would ultimately affect the well-being of all 
Member States. 
85. Mr. LE BA CAP (Viet Nam) said that the General Conference was 
taking place at a tense moment in international relations; the imperialist 
forces were intensifying the arms race, especially the nuclear arms race, by 
conducting major programmes and projects of a new and unprecedented nature 
which threatened humanity with a war of extinction. Through their aggressive 
and hegemonic policies, the imperialist and reactionary forces were increasing 
both their military presence throughout the world, particularly in the Asian 
and Pacific regions, as well as their efforts to sow discord amongst peoples. 
That was a grave threat to international peace and security, and to the 
independence, national sovereignty and economic development of States. 
86. The fundamental task of all peoples was to preserve peace, avert the 
danger of nuclear war and oppose all policies of aggression and hegemony on 
the part of the warmongering forces. It was more than ever necessary to 
encourage co-operation and friendship between peoples and to pursue a policy 
of peaceful co-existence rather than one of confrontation. 
87. His country particularly supported the initiatives taken by the Soviet 
Union with regard to a unilateral halt to nuclear-weapons testing, seeking 
rapid agreement on a halt to such tests and the demilitarization of space. 
Viet Nam also welcomed the initiatives taken by other countries aimed at 
ensuring that all disarmament talks should achieve positive results. A 
relaxed international climate could create favourable conditions both for 
friendly co-operation between peoples and for the development of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. 

GC(XXlX)/ORv275 
page 25 


88. The Agency, with its respect for national sovereignty, justice and 
non-discrimination, and with its particular emphasis on serving the needs of . 
developing countries, had been highly successful in its work since it was 
first created. 
89. Viet Nam had recovered from its ruins after 30 years of war for 
national independence. Through its own efforts and with the help of the 
Agency and friendly countries, it was now embarking upon a peaceful nuclear 
energy programme and was successfully applying nuclear techniques in 
agriculture, medicine and public welfare. 
90. His country had acceded to the Treaty on the Nori-Proliferatiori of 
Nuclear Weapons ("NPT) and had signed a Safeguards Agreement in'1981. Its 
first research reactor, with a capacity of 500kW, had come into operation in 
1984. Viet Nam supported the proposal aimed at establishing a nuclear-free 
zone in South East Asia. 
91. In conclusion, he wished to stress that Viet Nam's foreign policy was 
based on the principles of preserving world peace, maintaining friendship with 
all peoples and promoting international co-operation. Together with other 
South East Asian countries, Viet Nam was continuing in its endeavour to make 
that region an oasis of peace, stability and co-operafcidri, free from foreign-'' 
interference. His Government believed that the conditions were'ripe for the ' > 
achievement 6 that end. >:s , ... 
92. Mr. ROSARIO (Philippines) said that the present year was the 
fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations', booking back over 
those years one could recall many significant achievements in Whidh the United' 
Nations and the Agency had co-operated in their efforts td make the world a 
better place for mankind. Both organizations continued td' co-oerate, '' 
providing in that manner an- important forum'for cdutitries of the world5to ^ 
settle their differences" amicably alnd findoiptlmtim sdiutibns'for their ' -' 
bilateral and multilateral problems? His'delegation pledged' its7uH/and1 :; -' 
lasting support fdr'the^work'of the Agency and the United Nations system. 
93'. The "present"year was also the thirtieth' hhiversary? of tne 'creation of ,; 
the original' committee set u'p; to fio-brdinate the"series of conferences oh the * 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as well as the fifteenth anniversary of the 



GC(XXIX)/OR:275 
page 26 


Treaty on the Nbn-Proliferation of* Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The coincidence of 
those two anniversaries with the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations 
were surely significant. The: Super Powets continued to negotiate the 
limitation of nuclear weapons and other sensitive issues related to 
non-proliferation within the relevant, framework and his delegation wished to 
express its support for those international efforts, aimed at ending the 
nuclear arms race. 


94. In the present year, co-operation between the Philippines and the 
Agency had been intensified. Apart from the traditional activities related to 
technical assistance, research contracts and safeguards inspection, the Agency 
had been involved in the safety.aspects of the first Philippine nuclear power 
plant (PNPP-rl), which was.now ready to go into full operation. The two 
Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) missions in June/July 1984, and 
February 1985, were a response to the request by the Philippine Government to 
look into the safety of PNPP-I and to allay public concern regarding the risks 
involved in nuclear power production. The Agency missions had proved very 
useful. 
95. . The public hearings conducted by the Philippines Atomic Energy 
Commission <PAEC) had ended on 22 August 1985, with a ruling in favour.of the 
plant's entry into operation. The .ruling, however, was being appealed against 
by a small group of opponents for purely political reasons. It was hoped that 
the Philippine High Court would uphold the original decision. 
96. As .a developing country with its first nuclear power plant, the 
Philippines attached great importance to the Agency's activities in nuclear 
safety and radiation protection, in particular the NUSS and operational safety 
programmes. The Agency's codes of practice and safety guides had been of very 
great value to the Philippines in deciding on its approach to safety matters 
affecting PNPP-I, especially as far as siting, design and construction, and 
the physical protection pf the plant, were concerned. 
97. His delegation wished to express its appreciation.for the technical 
assistance and co-operation received in 1984. It was especially grateful for 
the.Agency's efforts to work.out a financial arrangement with the Government 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 27 


of the United States for the purchase of equipment needed for conversion of 
the Triga research reactor, which used low-enriched uranium as its fuel. 


98. It was heartening to see that in 1984 the adjusted programme for 
technical assistance had exceeded US $50 million. That development was very 
welcome and in conformity with Article II of the Agency's Statute. The 44% 
increase in the implementation of technical assistance over the 1983 figure 
was impressive. It was regrettable, however, that the extrabudgetary 
resources available in 1984 had declined slightly as against the 1983 level, 
and that the share of footnote a/ projects made operational had dropped from 
71.8% in 1982 to 65.4% in 1983, and then to 62.1% in 1984. 
99. His delegation appreciated the study made by the Joint Inspection Unit 
(JIU) of the Agency's technical assistance programme; it contained important 
recommendations for improving the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation programme. The Philippines supported those recommendations and 
also welcomed the decision by the Board of Governors in September 1985 to make 
the IPF (indicative planning figure) for 1987 12% higher than the target, and 
also to make the IPF for 1988 and 1989 12% higher than the figure for the 
preceding year. 
100. The problem of financing the Agency's safeguards programme was more 
serious than it might seem in view of the marked diversity of views and the 
political issues involved. His delegation was sorry to see that the Board of 
Governors had so far not been able to reach any agreement on financing 
safeguards that was applicable for a period of more than two years. 
101. The present financing system was clearly unsatisfactory and had to be 
reviewed every time the United Nations Contributions Committee reviewed the 
base rate of assessment. Hence there was need for a new and more stable 
system, especially in view of the increasing number of nuclear facilities in 
Member States being safeguarded. He therefore wished to reiterate his 
delegation's view that it was time for the nuclear-weapon States to decide 
whether the political, military and commercial value of the international 
safeguards system was worth more than their share 6f a few million dollars of 
the Agency's annual safeguards budget. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 28 


102. His country supported the Agency's programme for 1986, and a target of 
US $30 million for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund. While it was acceptable to maintain the Working Capital 
Fund at a level of US $2 million in 1986, the Secretariat should nevertheless 
study the need to increase the Working Capital Fund from 1988 onwards. At the 
present time the necessity for a higher Working Capital Fund might not be 
evident on account of the large annual unliquidated obligations and 
substantial savings. 
103. He associated himself with other delegations in expressing concern at 
the continuing zero-growth approach to the Regular Budget. The right approach 
would be to determine first the programme required by Member States and then 
provide the necessary resources. His country had only agreed to the zerogrowth 
approach so far because of the stable increases in the technical 
co-operation funds. In 1984, however, the total resources available for 
technical co-operation had increased by only 4% over the previous year. 
104. A further point was the problem of the assessed programme costs; it was 
hoped that the Board of Governors would be able to approve, at a future 
meeting, the Secretariat's proposals contained in document GOV/2193. The 
variation in the level of technical assistance for specific countries from one 
year to another made it extremely difficult for those countries to include 
their assessed programme costs for a particular year without knowing the 
amounts at the beginning of the preceding year, when their respective national 
budgets were being drafted. 
105. The Philippines was convinced that the General Conference would 
reaffirm the value of universality in membership of the Agency. That 
principle, however, had to be reflected by equitable representation of Member 
States on the Board of Governors and equitable representation of their 
nationals in the Secretariat. It was therefore regrettable that since 1977 
there had not been any solution to the problem of equitable representation on 
the Board of Governors. Even the proposal for an extra seat for Africa and 
one for Middle East and South Asia no longer seemed to command the required 
support. 

GC(XXtX)/QR.275 
page 29 


106. Although the representation of the developing countries had increased , 
from 74 in 1981 to 125. in 1985, an improvement that had been made in 
conformity with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, those States made up two thirds of 
the Agency's membership and could not be expected to accept a 22% 
representation in the Agency's professional staff; they should have at least 
30%. 
107. The Third Review Conference of Parties to NPT had just ended in Geneva; 
it had to be borne in mind that the basic quid pro quo of the Treaty was that 
in return for full-scope safeguards all parties to the Treaty must have full 
access to nuclear material, equipment and technology. There was, however, 
need for a clearer definition of the extent to which countries had a right to 
fuel cycle services guaranteed under NPT, with consideration for the special 
needs of the developing countries. With regard to the physical protection of 
nuclear material, it was hoped that all Member States would accede to the 
convention as soon as possible. 
108. In conclusion; he wished to express his congratulations to the Director 
General on his reappointment for a further term of office. 
109. Mr. PATUMASOOTRA (Thailand) said that, as a peace-loving country, 
his country firmly believed that while the final objective of NPT should be 
general and complete disarmament under effective international control, the 
immediate goal must be the elimination of the danger of nuclear war and the 
implementation of measures to halt and reverse the arms race. The Agency's 
Statute and the NPT Treaty both sought to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and to impede its military use. His delegation shared the view 
expressed by the Director General in his statement at the Third NPT Review 
Conference that the Agency system for on-site inspection could serve as a 
model for the development of a system for the verification of arms control and 
disarmament agreements. 
110. His country was very interested in the United Nations Conference for 
the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear-
Energy (UNCPICPUNE) which would be held in 1986 arid had also taken part in the 
Regional Expert Group Meeting for that Conference which had been organized by 
ESCAP in Bangkok early in 1985. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 30 


111. As a small and non-nuclear country, his country welcomed the fact that 
the world continued to have confidence in the Agency's safeguards system. The 
General Conference as well as the Board of Governors had discussed the 
financing of safeguards for several years and it had been decided at the 
previous year's General Conference that the arrangements of the assessment of 
Members' contributions towards the Agency's Regular Budget should be 
applicable for 1985 and 1986. Unless it was decided otherwise at the present 
General Conference, his delegation would continue to support the decision. 
taken by the General Conference in 1984. Despite the arguments between 
developing countries and developed countries regarding the share of the burden 
for the financing of safeguards, it was a matter of satisfaction to note that 
all Members of the Agency agreed in principle that the safeguards system must 
continue to function properly and recognized the great value of safeguards in 
creating a climate of international confidence. 
1.12. It was perhaps appropriate to mention that his Government was in the 
process of preparing legislation similar to the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage. 
113. With regard to the Agency's technical assistance programme, his country 
recognized that the application of isotopes and radiation technology bad 
considerable potential for strengthening the economies of developing 
countries. It was gratifying to know that the total available resources for 
the technical assistance and co-operation programme had almost doubled between 
1980 and 1984, to reach US $36 million in 1984. Since becoming a Member of 
the Agency, his country had received more than US $4 million worth of 
equipment, fellowships and expert assistance from the Agency and during 1985 
was receiving a total of about US $608 700 in technical assistance for six , 
projects including the radioisotope production facility project and the 
nuclear physics project. His delegation was grateful to the Secretariat and 
especially to the Department of Technical Co-operation for the assistance 
provided. 
114. His country had also hosted a number of meetings and training seminars 
and had co-operated with the Agency in organizing scientific visits by 
scientists from Member States to study the use of radioisotopes in 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 31 


agriculture. The sterile insect technique developed jointly by the Agency and 
FAO was being used in the north of the country to eliminate fruit flies and 
was expected to yield some results in 1988. 


115. In recognition of the services of the Agency in the field of technical 
assistance, his country was making a voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1986 of US $24 000. 
116. He was pleased to note that, during the past few years, the Director 
General had been gradually implementing General Conference resolutions 
relating to the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat. It was to be hoped that 
the trend would continue to permit more experts from developing countries to 
gain additional experience by serving in the Secretariat. 
117. Thailand welcomed the participation of the People's Republic of China 
in the UNDP/IAEA Regional Co-operation in the Industrial Application of 
Isotopes and Radiation Technology and hoped that China would soon join other 
RCA activities. With regard to technology transfer, the large-scale 
industrial technology transfer effort of nuclear technology under the 
IAEA/UNDP Regional Industrial Project had promoted industrial development in 
the region. The project had created an awareness of the benefits of nuclear 
technology in production processes and plant operation safety among various 
industries in his country. The private sector had made a major investment on 
a gamma irradiator for sterilization of medical supplies and the plant had 
been operational since 1984. There was also considerable interest in the 
commercialization of food irradiation technology. The Government was 
initiating a project to meet the needs of the private sector by proposing a 
pilot multi-purpose irradiation plant and the economic feasibility of the 
proposal was being considered. The Agency's assistance in that respect had 
been greatly appreciated. In the light of the widespread success of Phase I 
of the IAEA/UNDP Regional Industrial Project (1982-1986), his Government 
strongly supported the extension of the Project in Phase II. 
118. In conclusion he said that his country was looking forward to further 
close co-operation with other countries under RCA as well as with the Agency. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 32 


119. Mr. PALOMO SILVA (Guatemala) said that at a time of international 
crisis it was perhaps the smaller countries which were best able to analyse 
the danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons, since it was from a 
viewpoint of total impotence that the crisis appeared most terrifying. He 
therefore wished to offer a few thoughts on the subject of nuclear war. The 
horrors of nuclear weapons were many, and since their first use an atmosphere 
of fear and death had prevailed. A constant fear of extinction was 
undermining human life itself and the conditions that sustained it, thereby 
blighting hopes for the future. 
120. But it was not only the existential aspects of the nuclear arms race 
that affected the less developed countries, beset as they were by political 
and financial problems. The enormous investments made in nuclear weapons were 
deeply disturbing. The smallest countries would greatly welcome a reduction 
in nuclear arsenals and an increase in genuine North-South co-operation, not 
as a gift but as an expression of the common need to share the world and to 
eliminate the great dangers which all faced in it. 
121. Despite the discouraging world situation, the Agency had been engaged 
in admirable activities in connection with the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, including its extensive safeguards programme. Although Guatemala was 
a small country, it had belonged to the Agency since its inception. It had 
received assistance from the Agency for many years, and had on two occasions 
been a member of the Board. Guatemala was not able to receive all the types 
of assistance the Agency could provide and had to make a careful selection of 
the activities to be supported. At present, through the Directorate of 
Nuclear Energy, the Ministry of Energy and Mines was carrying out projects 
with Agency technical assistance on analysis of uranium ores, establishment of 
a dosimetry laboratory, radioisotopes in agriculture, radiopharmaceuticals, 
food preservation and eradication of the Mediterranean fruit fly using the 
sterile insect technique. Legislation on the application of nuclear energy 
was to be promulgated; in addition, Guatemala was involved in the ARCAL 
programme and participated in projects on radiation protection, nuclear 
instrumentation, a radioimmunoassay network for animal reproduction, nuclear 
analytical techniques, food irradiation, improvement of rice and other cereals 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 33 


and radioimmunoassay of thyroid hormones. Thus, his country had been actively 
involved in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and intended to expand those 
activities with a view to benefiting its population for the future. 


122. In conclusion, he urged States at the most advanced stage of nuclear 
development to do all that they could to eliminate the atmosphere of nuclear 
terror, replacing it by one in which nuclear technology could be peacefully 
applied so that energy, health and food problems could be solved, especially 
in the least-developed countries. The future of humanity was dependent upon a 
transformation of international relations in the direction of genuine and 
widespread co-operation and interchange of technology and know-how with a view 
to enabling all mankind to live together in a truly human world. 
123. Mr. RODRIGUEZ CEDEfiO (Venezuela) noted with satisfaction that, 
despite the present world economic situation, there had been a considerable 
uptrend in the uses of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Mankind's 
progress and stability depended to a large extent on nuclear energy, and the 
Agency was fulfilling a very valuable function in that respect. 
124. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was 
another framework within which the Agency played an important part. His 
delegation welcomed the consensus achieved at the end of the previous week's 
Review Conference of the Parties to NPT, which had made possible the adoption 
of a final text. However, it had once again been shown that a number of 
countries had not fulfilled all of their obligations under the Treaty. That 
situation had persisted since the first Review Conference in 1975, and was 
progressively eroding faith in the Treaty's credibility. 
125. Venezuela fully supported the Agency's technical assistance activities, 
through which a number of national projects promoting progress in the spheres 
of agriculture, health, industry and scientific research had been 
implemented. His country also planned to embark upon a programme for 
radioactive ore prospecting and a programme for increasing at the same time 
public awareness of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
126. Although Venezuela did not intend to introduce nuclear power in the 
medium term (15-20 years) - its existing energy resources were sufficient his 
Government was nevertheless following developments in that field in other 
countries with close interest. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.275 
page 34 


127. Venezuela had made administrative changes in order to facilitate the 
receipt of technical assistance from the Agency and international co-operation 
in nuclear matters. All such activities were now handled at ministerial level 
and came under the Ministry of Energy and Mines. 
128. Regional action was of fundamental importance, and Venezuela had 
supported the Regional Co-operation Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America (ARCAL) from the outset. Caracas had 
hosted the first meeting in 1981 of the Andean Sub-Regional Committee for the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, in which eleven Latin American countries were 
now involved. He commended the Agency's efforts to implement the programme in 
the areas of radiological protection, nuclear instrumentation, 
radioimmunoassay, nuclear analysis techniques, the use of research reactors, 
food irradiation, cereal improvement by mutations, quality control and the use 
of particle accelerators. The programme was noteworthy for its high social 
content, in which the main element was training, particularly at technician 
level. Projects of that kind had been successful in other parts of the world, 
and his Government therefore felt it essential that other States, particularly 
those more advanced in the nuclear field, should participate in them. 
129. With regard to the Agency's safeguards system, there could be no doubt 
as to its value and importance. Venezuela therefore supported it both morally 
and materially. The Soviet Union's acceptance of Agency safeguards on some of 
its peaceful nuclear activities was greatly welcomed. It was of major 
importance to the international community that nuclear-weapon States should 
conclude such agreements with the Agency. 
130. As to the financing of safeguards, Venezuela's position was clearly 
reflected in the draft resolution contained in document GOV/2181 of 
21 September 1984, and had not changed. 
131. The appropriations made by States for financing safeguards should be 
based, inter alia, on the number, nature and relative importance of the 
facilities safeguarded, as well as on the State's own financial status. The 
major financing burden should fall on the most highly developed countries, 
whose economies, despite the present world situation, were more able to 

GC(XX1X)/0R.275 
page 35 


support a programme of that scope. The developing countries were today faced 
with serious economic problems which affected their development as a whole. 
Existing arrangements for the financing of safeguards were therefore the most 
suitable, and any revision of them should be based on just and equitable 
criteria. 


132. The financing of safeguards had been considered by the Board of 
Governors in the course of the previous week's session but, despite the 
determined efforts of the Chairman, agreement had not been reached. His 
delegation was confident, however, that a more suitable criterion for the 
financing of safeguards would be defined in the near future. 
133. As far as the financing of technical assistance was concerned, he was 
disappointed that during the recent session of the Board it had been agreed to 
increase the indicative planning figure by only 12%. Although that meant a 
relative increase, the figure was not entirely satisfactory and did not meet 
technical assistance requirements. It was his delegation's view that 
technical assistance should be funded from predictable sources that ensured 
that the relevant programmes would be implemented. 
134. In conclusion, he wished to state that the Government of Venezuela had 
pledged the sum of US $40 000 as its voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1986. 
The meeting rose at 10.55 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
April 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 26 September 1985, at 10.10 a.m. 


President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 
later: Mr. HIREMATH (India) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda ** 


General debate and annual report 
for 1984 (continued) 1-7 0 


Statements by the delegates of*. 


Spain 1 -6 
Denmark 7 -13 
Nigeria 14 -24 
Romania 25 -30 
Jordan 31 -46 
Austria 47 -60 
Council for Mutual Economic 


Assistance 61 -70 
Election of Members to the Board 
of Governors 71 -74 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 27 November 1985, 
**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-1548 
0398e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.2 76 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (GC(XXIX)/748) (continued) 


1. Mr. MADRID GONZALEZ (Spain) said that under Spain's current 
National Energy Plan provision was being made over the period 1983-1992 for an 
average annual increase in electricity demand of 3.3%, and that by 1992 the 
total installed capacity would have reached 43 GW, 7.7 GW of which would be 
accounted for by nuclear power. On 31 December 1984 the installed nuclear 
capacity had amounted to 4760 MW. During the year, two 900 MW units had 
reached full capacity and the 975-MW Cofrentes nuclear power plant had been 
commissioned in October. 
2. In 1984, Spanish nuclear facilities had operated satisfactorily in 
terms of nuclear safety and radiation protection. Construction of nuclear 
power plants had continued under the guidance of the regulatory body, and the 
draft of a basic national plan for off-site emergencies had been drawn up. 
Nuclear power generation had increased by 126.9% over the previous year and 
had amounted to 21 346 GWh, with nuclear power accounting for 18.8% of the 
total electricity generation. 
3. In 1984, uranium prospecting work had continued with some 30 000 m of 
exploratory drilling; reserves were estimated at 39 000 t of Uo0 . 
Moreover, construction of the Juzbado fuel element fabrication plant in 
Salamanca had been completed and the first fuel elements had been produced. 
Quite recently - September 1985 - the second unit of the Asco power plant, 
with a capacity of 930 MW, had gone critical. Construction work on two other 
nuclear power plants, Vandellos II and Trillo, had continued; they were to be 
commissioned in 1988 and 1989, respectively. 
4. The Spanish Government attached the highest importance to radioactive 
waste management. Spain was one of the countries opposed to dumping 
radioactive wastes in the sea. It had set up a national agency for 
radioactive waste management, which was financed by a system under which the 
costs were transferred to those generating the wastes. In accordance with the 
forecasts of the National Energy Plan, during the next thirty years Spain 
would produce some 5000 t of spent fuel elements, which it classed as 
3 


high-level wastes, and some 200 000 m of low- and medium-level wastes, 



GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 3 


including waste material produced in hospitals and through scientific and 
industrial research. His country believed it was vital to approach the 
problem of wastes in a realistic way, both by means of research, which would 
be intensified in the coming years, and by the establishment of an appropriate 
legal framework. In that spirit the Government would shortly be tabling a 
bill in Parliament on radioactive waste disposal sites. 


5. Spain believed it necessary to improve the composition of the Board of 
Governors. It was for that reason that Spain, without renouncing its right to 
sit as a designated member on the Board as constituted at present, wished to 
place on record its belief that Article VI of the Statute should be modified 
as a whole in such a way that the Board reflected the current state of 
development of nuclear technology in Member States and the increase in their 
number. 
6. Given the present economic situation, Spain considered that there 
should be zero real growth in the budget, and it appreciated the efforts made 
by the Secretariat to that end. Within that context, what needed to be done 
for the budget as a whole also needed to be done for the safeguards budget, so 
that sufficient funds would be available for the Agency's other activities. 
During the past year, Spain had been pleased to support technical assistance 
and training activities as far as it could, by providing training for a large 
number of fellows and expert services for various Agency activities. 
7. Mr. CHRISTENSEN (Denmark) recalled that his country had always 
been a strong supporter of the Agency, which was called upon to play a leading 
role in a number of fields such as safeguards, technical assistance, research, 
nuclear safety, international trade in nuclear materials, waste management and 
environmental protection. Denmark wished to demonstrate the favourable stand 
it took towards technical assistance by pledging its full share of the target 
for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1986. Apart from that, the Risd National Laboratory had recently hosted 
the IAEA Seminar on Applied Research and Service Activities for Research 
Reactors. 
8. Only credible and effective verification measures would make it 
possible to attain the goal of safeguards, which was to prevent the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. The safeguards system needed to be expanded 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 4 


continually, and all nuclear facilities without exception should be subject to 
Agency safeguards. His delegation hoped that all unsafeguarded nuclear 
facilities in non-nuclear-weapon States would be placed under Agency 


safeguards in the very near future. The Danish Government had noted with 
grave concern that there were still five or six non-nuclear-weapon States in 
which unsafeguarded nuclear facilities were either under construction or in 
operation. On the other hand, it was greatly appreciated that several 
nuclear-weapon States had voluntarily offered to place under Agency safeguards 


all or some of their civil nuclear facilities, and, in particular, that the 
Chinese Government had decided to submit to safeguards all its civil nuclear 
plants. Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was of equal importance to all 


States. For that reason his delegation saw no need for any change in the 


system of financing the Agency's safeguards operations. 


9. With regard to waste management, there were differences from one 
country to another, not only in types of radioactive material and equipment, 
but also in the procedures and techniques applied. The Danish Government was 
strongly opposed to the sea dumping operations carried out by some States. It 
wished to appeal, not only within the Agency but also at other international 
levels, to countries which dumped radioactive waste in the sea to cease that 
practice. 
10. His Government recognized the importance of the joint FAO/IAEA 
programme and, in particular, welcomed the emphasis placed on biotechnology in 
activities devoted to food and agriculture. 
11. Noting that, in recent years, most countries had been obliged to impose 
budgetary restrictions and that international organizations, including the 
Agency, had been facing a difficult budgetary situation, his delegation 
welcomed the fact that the Secretariat had submitted for 1986 a budget 
reflecting the objective of zero real growth. He fully realized that the 
policy of zero growth had its negative side but felt that the Agency's main 
objectives could be achieved even under those conditions. The Secretariat 
should continue to evaluate all activities critically so as to ensure that 
they were cost-effective and that the costs and benefits of individual 
programmes stood in reasonable proportion. There would be need, in that 
respect, to find a budgetary system which allowed the Secretariat more 
flexibility in re-allocating budgetary resources within the framework 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 5 


established and approved by the competent bodies. Such flexibility should not 
cover only a given budgetary year: the Secretariat should also be able to 
transfer appropriations from one year to the next. 


12. In March 1985, the Danish Parliament had asked the Government to draw 
up national energy plans on the understanding that nuclear power would not be 
resorted to in Denmark. It had to be stated, however, that the Riso National 
Laboratory was at the same time expanding its energy research activities. 
That Laboratory would continue to be at the forefront of research and 
development in a number of areas. 
13. In conclusion, he quoted the statement made on 11 August 1945 by the 
Danish physicist Niels Bohr: "Against the new destructive powers no defence 
may be possible, and the issue centres on world-wide co-operation to prevent 
any use of the new sources of energy which does not serve mankind as a whole. 
It is obvious, however, that no control can be effective without free access 
to full scientific information and the granting of the opportunity of 
international supervision of all undertakings which, unless regulated, might 
become a source of disaster". Forty years later, that statement remained 
entirely valid. 
14. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) said that the statistical information contained 
in the introduction to the annual report (GC(XXIX)/748) showed that in 1984 
34 nuclear power plants with a total capacity of 31.8 GW(e) had started 
generating electricity, representing the largest annual increase, in both 
absolute and relative terms, since the beginning of the large-scale 
introduction of nuclear power. Also in 1984, one major power had suspended 
indefinitely the construction of nuclear power plants, in particular, for 
reasons of excess generating capacity and lower growth rates in electricity 
demand. That confirmed the supposition that the acquisition of nuclear power 
plants was based mainly on advanced technology. 
15. In the case of the developing countries, however, it could only be 
hoped that small and medium power reactors would bring about an expansion in 
nuclear technology. Unfortunately, the annual report showed clearly the 
widening gap between those whose technological maturity had enabled them to 

GC(XX1X)/0R.276 
page 6 


benefit fully from the use of atomic energy and whose membership of the Agency 
had a concrete and visible impact on their way of life, and those whose 
presence in the Agency represented merely a symbolic expression of hope for 
the future. 


16. Many delegates from developing countries had stated that it was an 
urgent matter for their countries to acquire nuclear technology for peaceful 
purposes. There was therefore irony in the fact that only twelve, or less 
than one third, of the least developed countries (LDCs) were Agency Members. 
Eight of those countries belonged to the least developed continent, namely 
Africa. That gloomy picture hardly reflected the relevance or importance of 
the Agency's potential for the technological and socio-economic advancement of 
the continent. Paragraph 26 of the technical co-operation activities report 
contained in document GC(XXIX)/INF/226 mentioned measures adopted by the 
Agency, namely exemption from assessed programme costs, pre-project 
assistance, technical co-operation programming and intercountry co-operation. 
Those measures were all geared towards the goals of the "Substantial New 
Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries (SNPA)" 
and they demonstrated that the Agency was making special efforts to respond to 
the needs of the LDCs. However, the small degree of participation by those 
countries in Agency activities raised the question of the way in which the 
Agency could use the resources to improve that situation. His delegation 
urged all Member States to give serious consideration to a mechanism 
appropriate to that purpose. 
17. Participation in the work of the Agency presupposed mutual advantages 
and, for most developing countries, and especially Nigeria, technical 
assistance could speed up the introduction of nuclear technology for peaceful 
purposes. That was why the technical assistance and co-operation programme 
was the most important Agency activity for all developing countries. In that 
connection, the BIGOT project at Vom in Nigeria, remained the most tangible 
proof of the Agency's technical assistance to his country. The project had 
been a great success and had been of direct help in overcoming some of the 
practical problems, for example, in animal husbandry. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 7 


18. Predictable financing of technical assistance had become an annual plea 
on the part of all developing countries both in the Board and at the General 
Conference. The widening gap between the industrialized countries and a group 
of crumbling societies with a shaky technological base was a matter of grave 
concern which deserved serious and urgent attention. His delegation had been 
glad to note the target fixed for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1986 and the pledges made so far. The recent agreement on indicative 
planning figures would help in some measure to allay the fears of developing 
countries. None the less, the true solution of the problem lay in a more 
reliable and predictable mechanism, such as the incorporation of the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund into the Regular Budget. It was therefore 
imperative for industrialized Member States of the Agency to show the 
political will to aid developing countries in acquiring nuclear technology for 
peaceful purposes in medicine, agriculture, power generation and other areas. 
19. Nigeria was a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) and believed that the concept of the nuclear-weapon-free zone 
should be respected. The solemn declaration by the Organization of African 
Unity (OAU) in 1963, which had been supported by the United Nations, that the 
continent of Africa undertook to remain a denuclearized zone, had been 
undermined by the development of South Africa's nuclear-weapons capability. 
The horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons by the selective transfer of 
technology and of fissile material to the illegal, irresponsible and racist 
regime in South Africa seriously jeopardized the credibility of those who 
preached the principles of NPT. There was no lack of proof of the role played 
by certain major powers in assisting South Africa to develop its nuclearweapons 
capability in order to threaten and blackmail African States. 
However, Africa had friends. It knew who had supplied South Africa with a 
range of items, including a Cyber 750/170 computer designed for nuclear 
weapons and also helium-3, camouflaging that flagrant violation of a United 
Nations resolution with ridiculous terms such as "dual use". Africa knew who 
was actively involved in the construction of the Koeberg power plant. The 
fuel for the reactors of that plant would be supplied under contract by a 
major Power until 1992, and an unholy consortium of companies from three 
prominent Agency Member States would be supplying the pressurized-water 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 8 


reactors. In order to evade sanctions more easily, South Africa was building 
strategic plants with the assistance of companies such as Linde, Lugi, 
Deutsche Babcock and Siemens. One of those companies was responsible for 
constructing the SASOL II and SASOL III coal liquefaction plants, which were 
to manufacture explosives and fuel. 


20. Against that background and in view of the grave situation developing 
in the region, the General Assembly had at its thirty-seventh session adopted 
resolution 37/223 A, in which it wholeheartedly condemned the collusion 
between the Governments of certain Western and other countries and the racist 
regime of South Africa in the construction of facilities enabling it to 
produce enriched uranium, plutonium and other nuclear material and military 
equipment. The United Nations General Assembly had also called on those 
Governments to exclude Namibian uranium from the Treaty of Almelo, which 
regulated the activities of Urenco. That company represented another 
conspiracy against the African people, and Africa knew who owned it. 
21. African countries, which were the potential victims of nuclear 
blackmail by the racist regime in South Africa, had long foreseen that 
danger. They had been pointing out that the emerging situation constituted a 
threat to the stability of the region and a contravention of the revered 
principles of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was against that 
background and in order to express their genuine concern and fear that Africa 
and its friends had voted in favour of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/423, which, 
inter alia, called upon South Africa to submit immediately all its nuclear 
installations and facilities to inspection by the Agency and urged Member 
States which had not yet done so to end all nuclear co-operation with the 
South African racist regime and halt the exploitation and purchase of Namibian 
uranium. 
22. On 26 July 1985, the United Nations Security Council had adopted 
resolution 569, which urged Member States to take measures against the racist 
regime of South Africa, including the suspension of all new contracts in the 
nuclear field. The limited sanctions against South Africa, more especially in 
respect of nuclear technology, that had recently been announced by the 
President of the United States, could be regarded as a step in the right 
direction, but they did not come up to the expectations of African countries. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 9 


The latter hoped that the United States Government would compel South Africa 
to submit its nuclear installations and facilities to Agency safeguards 


immediately. They believed that the United States, the United Kingdom, the 
Federal Republic of Germany and other nuclear countries were in a position to 
induce South Africa to halt its nuclear-weapons programme. African countries 
had also noted the statement by the nine EEC Ministers on the suspension of 
new contracts relating to nuclear facilities with South Africa. The African 
countries, however, were very perturbed by the dissenting view of one member 
of the Community. They hoped that the pledges by the EEC Ministers would soon 
be fulfilled faithfully. South Africa must be forced to realize that, 
although it had fooled some of the people some of the time, it could not fool 
all the people all the time. 


23. Turning to the Agency's budget for 1986 (GC(XXIX)/750)), he noted that, 
under "Nuclear Applications", priority had rightly been given to "Food and 
Agriculture" and "Human Health". However, still further increases in funds 
for those activities were desirable. In that connection, he commended the 
Director General for the importance he attached to joint IAEA/FAO programmes. 
With regard to the staffing of the Secretariat, it was gratifying to note the 
efforts made by the Director General to comply with paragraph 3 of resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/437 with a view to redressing the imbalance in the staffing of 
the Secretariat. The Nigerian delegation would continue to co-operate with 
him in order to meet the objectives of that resolution. 
24. Finally, he assured the General Conference that, despite the 
unfavourable economic situation in his country, the Nigerian Government was 
taking steps to settle all its outstanding payments where both the Regular 
Budget and voluntary contributions were concerned. The Agency would soon be 
receiving the total sum, amounting to US $345 454. On behalf of his 
Government, he also pledged $57 000 for the technical assistance programme for 
1986. Moreover, he was pleased to announce that the Nigerian Government was 
talcing the necessary steps to conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
25. Mr. MIHULECEA (Romania) noted that the current session was taking 
place at a moment in time marked by the complexity of the international 
political and economic situation. As a result of inequalities in 
international trade and finance, more especially, extremely high interest 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 10 


rates, the position of developing countries had become much more serious. 
Hence it was essential for agreement to be reached between developed and 
developing countries on a new world economic order, since the current economic 
crisis could only be overcome if the problems of underdevelopment were 
solved. In that connection, Romania was in favour of strengthening the role 
of the United Nations and the organizations associated with it, including the 
Agency, in the interests of co-operation, development and peace. At present, 
the most important issues were those of disarmament, including nuclear 
disarmament, and defence of the supreme right of peoples to life, freedom and 
peace. As had been stressed in a statement by Mr. Nicolae Ceausescu, action 
must be taken before it was too late to halt the dangerous course of events 
towards a nuclear catastrophe, to save humanity from destruction and to 
guarantee the right of all mankind to development and to the benefits arising 
out of the achievements of science and knowledge exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. 


26. The current session of the General Conference had a particularly 
important responsibility in that it followed the Third Review Conference of 
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
which had been called upon to propose viable solutions and to give a new 
impetus to the efforts of States to obtain concrete results in respect of 
disarmament - notably nuclear disarmament - and international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, especially the transfer of technology. 
His delegation was convinced that all Member States party to the Treaty, 
whether nuclear-weapon States or not, would take specific action to meet their 
obligations under the Treaty. In that context, he stressed the importance of 
the statement in the Agency's report that so far it had not detected any 
anomaly which would indicate the diversion of a significant quantity of 
safeguarded nuclear material - a conclusion which showed that Article III of 
the Treaty had been strictly complied with. Romania believed that the current 
session of the General Conference should attach particular importance to such 
matters, so that they would be reflected in the programmes of the Agency. 
27. His delegation had by and large been satisfied with the Agency's 
activities during the previous year, more especially with regard to 
achievements in technical assistance, training, nuclear power, nuclear 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 11 


applications, nuclear safety and quality assurance. The Agency had likewise 
made efforts to promote the transfer of technology to developing countries. 
Its programme for 1986 reflected the main trends in the use of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes, while bearing in mind the relative degree of importance 
which Member States accorded to nuclear power and other applications, and also 
to the safety of nuclear facilities. In addition, more attention had been 
given to the legitimate needs of developing countries which wished to see an 


increase in the Agency's contribution in the form of technical assistance. 
Romania had further noted that safeguards occupied a prominent position in the 
programme as compared with the Agency's basic function, which was to promote 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to support the efforts of developing 
countries in that sphere. 


28. Under Romania's national programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, the country was to acquire independence in energy matters. With 
respect to social and economic development over the period 1986-1990, stress 
was placed on the development of the energy base through the use of all 
primary resources and acceleration of the nuclear power plant construction 
programme. In 1990, out of a total of 95-96 billion kWh, some 21-22 billion 
would be produced by nuclear power plants, so that the share of nuclear power 
in electricity production would be approximately 20%. To that end Romania had 
started an ambitious nuclear power programme and had succeeded in acquiring 
the appropriate technology and in producing nuclear fuel as well as materials 
and equipment for its nuclear power plants under construction. In order to 
support that high-priority programme, Romania had set itself certain research 
objectives. The scientific research programme related, in particular, to new 
generations of reactors, including fast reactors and other advanced types. 
29. Stressing the importance of the resolutions adopted by the General 
Conference on the staffing of the Secretariat, he believed that efforts to 
apply their provisions should be redoubled, with particular stress on the 
requests made by under-represented countries, including Romania. The 
representation of his country within the Secretariat should be improved to 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 12 


reflect its level of advancement in the nuclear sphere, namely the large 
number of experts available and the Romanian contribution to the Agency's 
activities as a whole. His delegation was confident that the Director General 
and those in charge of recruitment would follow up the requests that had been 
made and which would be made in the future. 


30. In conclusion, he welcomed the fruitful co-operation that had taken 
place between his country and the Agency and was satisfied with the productive 
work of the organization; his delegation was sure that the Agency would 
continue in the future to fulfil its noble purpose and to discharge the highly 
responsible duties entrusted to it by Member States. 
Mr. Hiremath (India) took the Chair. 


31. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) noted that the twenty-ninth session of the 
General Conference coincided with the fortieth anniversary of the explosion of 
the first atomic bomb. It also coincided with the Third Review Conference of 
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
which had affirmed the absolute need to free mankind from the threat of 
nuclear war. The proliferation of nuclear weapons was not only horizontal but 
also vertical, thereby making the risk involved even greater. There was also 
indirect proliferation, which was both vertical and horizontal and which took 
the form of a transfer of nuclear weapons from a nuclear-weapon to a 
non-nuclear-weapon State when such was authorized under military and strategic 
agreements, whether declared or undeclared. That fact led to the expansion of 
areas threatened by nuclear destruction, thereby giving rise to fear and 
anxiety in various parts of the world, and, which was even more dangerous, 
possibly leading to armed international confrontation. 
32. The situation in the Middle East was very uncertain. Apart from the 
regional and political problems there, Israel had continued to put nuclear 
programmes into effect without submitting them to Agency safeguards. That 
fact was arousing concern and shaking the foundations of peace throughout the 
region. The Israeli threats to destroy peaceful nuclear facilities in the 
area persisted and, unfortunately, efforts to remove or have them withdrawn 
had been unsuccessful. His delegation requested the Director General to 
continue his intensive efforts to implement resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 of 
the General Conference, which stipulated that Israel should withdraw its 
threats to attack nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 13 


33. In his address to the symposium of the Belerev Group held in Geneva as 
part of the preparations for the Third Review Conference of the Parties to 
NPT, Prince Hassan of Jordan, Co-chairman of the International Committee for 
Human Rights, had pointed out that the Agency, in its capacity as the 
organization entrusted by the international community with the resolution of 
one of the most vitally important issues in the history of humanity, that of 
nuclear technology, and the international community itself, concerned as it 
was to achieve peace and security in the world, were both responsible for 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the Middle East as well as 
nuclear terrorism and nuclear blackmail in that sensitive area of the world. 
34. The Agency's responsibility arose from the principle of the submission 
to its safeguards system of all nuclear facilities in the region and as a 
result of that it had acquired international credibility which all Member 
States in the region should respect. Those States should undertake to meet 
the requirements laid down by the system, more especially as concerned the 
inspection of nuclear facilities. 
35. The responsibility of the international community stemmed from the fact 
that it was called upon to make intensive efforts to help transform that 
region into a denuclearized zone free from all nuclear proliferation, whether 
horizontal or vertical, direct or indirect. The continuing attempts by Israel 
and South Africa to develop their military nuclear capabilities constituted a 
standing threat to the peoples of two regions urgently in need of peace: the 
Middle East and Africa. It was time for the international community to take 
action to remedy that increasingly perilous situation. 
36. Jordan associated itself with those countries which had welcomed the 
results of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT, and it also 
supported the Conference's Final Declaration concerning the importance and the 
vital role of the international safeguards system, both in the cause of peace 
and stability in the world as well as to dispel the fear and mistrust inherent 
in the transfer of nuclear equipment and technology. The international 
community should implement the Treaty and endeavour to extend it and remedy 
its weaknesses instead of denouncing it, denying it or ignoring the noble 
humanitarian aims which could be achieved through it. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 14 


37. His delegation paid tribute to the Agency for its increasing efforts in 
the sphere of technical co-operation and for sponsoring peaceful nuclear 
technology programmes in the areas of power production, agriculture, medicine, 
geology, hydrology, and industry. It approved the decision to increase 
technical co-operation funds by 12% each year. However, a large number of 
developing countries, in particular the smaller ones, had serious energy 
problems to overcome. Those countries were either incapable of procuring the 
energy needed at a cost commensurate with their level of socio-industrial 
development, or their expenditure on energy consumed the bulk of their 
national income. That was reason enough to make a far-reaching review of the 
system of assistance as well as the training programmes offered by the 
Agency. Assistance and training progrmames should be more comprehensive and 
much more detailed if they were to help qualified national staff to absorb 
nuclear technology and to build up teams capable of tackling specific tasks. 
38. The apprehensions of developing countries, especially the smaller ones, 
with regard to the risk of military action - whether of the nuclear or 
conventional kind - against their peaceful nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards was one of the main reasons for the slow - or even total absence 
of - progress in peaceful nuclear technology. Half of the world's population 
was thereby being deprived of access to that important source of energy. 
39. At a moment in time when the Agency was playing a notable role in 
efforts to develop commercial small and medium power reactors (SMPRs), it was 
legitimate to wonder how the smaller countries could have confidence in the 
future of their nuclear facilities and take the technological and financial 
decision to acquire the low-power reactors recently developed if those 
reactors continued to be subject to enemy attack. Jordan was convinced that 
it was the duty of the Agency and the international community to find a 
solution to that problem, which in effect took the form of an undeclared, 
unofficial and unfair embargo on the development of peaceful nuclear 
technology and a denial of the Agency's objectives. 
40. Jordan believed that the time was ripe to conclude an international 
treaty on the protection of peaceful nuclear facilities, to which all Agency 
Member States should be parties and which would be complementary to NPT. The 

GC(XX1X)/0R.276 
page 15 


signatories of such a treaty would bind themselves not to attack any nuclear 
facility designed for peaceful purposes that was under Agency safeguards. It 
was in the interests of neither the Member States of the Agency nor the 
international community to wait for years before SMPRs were developed and then 
to have to wait even longer for the conclusion of an international treaty on 
the protection of peaceful nuclear facilities which would allay the fears of 
smaller countries and encourage them to take the right decisions. The absence 
of such a treaty was in fact a way of inviting direct or indirect 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, since it obliged countries deciding on the 
nuclear option to protect their own facilities, possibly by appealing to a 
nuclear-weapon State. Jordan thus associated itself with countries which were 
studying that important question and called on the Agency to undertake 
preparations immediately, in collaboration with the competent United Nations 
bodies, for an international conference with a view to concluding an 
international treaty on the protection of peaceful nuclear facilities. 


41. In any case, the utilization of nuclear power by developing countries 
required substantial and rapid progress in the field of SMPRs, and Jordan 
welcomed the Agency's efforts in that direction. At the same time, the Agency 
and Member States should study the problem closely, since the commercial 
opportunities for the development of that type of reactor, which were 
favourable at the present juncture (in fact a buyers' market) would probably 
be only temporary. If the demand for high-power reactors recovered, the 
market would most probably become favourable to sellers, and the question of 
low-power reactors would have to take second place. Moreover, reactors of 
approximately 600 MW were still much too powerful for the needs of most 
developing countries, especially smaller countries, which needed reactors in 
the 150-250 MW range. The Director General's report on that subject was 
valuable. The Jordanian delegation believed that the Agency had an important 
role to play in assisting countries which were particularly interested in 
gaining some idea of the economics and availability of low-power reactors. It 
might therefore be useful to expand the SMPR programme and to set up a special 
task force to help countries interested in technical and economic feasibility 
studies to take the right decisions at the right time. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 16 


42. The financing of nuclear power plants was of paramount importance. The 
symposium held on that subject had made for a better understanding of the 
problem. The idea of establishing a joint venture between the suppliers of 
power plants and local utilities was a novel approach and deserved 
encouragement. Developing countries, however, needed the aid of the Agency in 
resolving the legal, technical and financial problems posed by that type of 
partnership. Jordan was convinced therefore that the idea could be put into 
practice more quickly if the Agency, through the intermediary of a special 
section, played the more active role of a third party who would guarantee 
compliance with the commitments entered into by the two others. 
43. With regard to nuclear waste management, the international community 
and the Agency should strive to find an acceptable solution without long- or 
short-term harmful effects with a view to allaying the unjustified fear of 
nuclear waste, which represented a considerable obstacle to the development 
and application of nuclear technology; they should also seek to ensure that 
nuclear waste management was as economical as possible. 
44. The question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had been 
under consideration for seven years. Certain delegations now wished to amend 
that Article as a whole. The Agency would thereby be drawn into prolonged 
discussion, for it would then be necessary to alter the representation of all 
geographical areas on the Board. The result might be an increase in the 
number of Members but with the same type of imbalance; such would be contrary 
to the spirit and the letter of the resolutions adopted by the General 
Conference, the aim of which had been merely to improve the representation of 
the areas "Middle East and South Asia" and "Africa". His delegation called on 
the General Conference to confine the amendment to Article VI.A.2, without 
revising the Article as a whole. 
45. The Secretariat's endeavours to enable nationals of developing 
countries to occupy posts of responsibility in the Agency deserved every 
encouragement. His delegation noted, however, that that process was taking 
place less quickly and less extensively than had been expected. He hoped the 
Director General would give due attention to the question so as to afford 
developing countries, within a reasonable time, the appropriate opportunities, 
bearing in mind the principles of equity and competence. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 17 


46. Jordan approved the Agency's Annual Report for 1984 and pledged a 
voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
47. Mr. FISCHER (Austria) recalled that the year since the twentyeighth 
session of the General Conference had been a fruitful one as far as the 
development of the Agency was concerned. During that period, many of the 
problems between countries and groups of countries had been jointly resolved, 
and objective discussions had taken place as part of the Agency's work. 
Austria therefore hoped that it was seeing the beginning of a phase of 
consolidation, during which the variety of interests of the different 
countries, areas and groups would be recognized. Those observations were in 
keeping with the optimism which had prevailed in the Agency since its 
inception and which had been instrumental in giving it a special place in the 
United Nations family. As a guardian of peace, it had prevented the diversion 
of nuclear material and had assumed the responsibility for promoting manifold 
opportunities for the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes; in that 
context, it had created throughout the world the technical prerequisites for 
minimizing the risks that the application of nuclear technology involved for 
mankind. 
48. In its role as a guardian of peace, the Agency had become aware that 
international tension could be reduced only if, among other things, problems 
lying at the root of economic inequality could be alleviated. In that sphere, 
the Agency had a very important role to play by encouraging international 
co-operation and enabling the least developed countries to benefit equally 
from the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
49. His delegation welcomed, for example, the active participation of the 
Agency in the preparations for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion 
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE), in which Austria was co-operating with considerable interest. 
It was to be hoped that that Conference would also identify specific 
mechanisms by which such international co-operation could be improved for the 
benefit of smaller countries and, in particular, developing countries. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 18 


50. In his opening address, the Director General had said that Agency 
safeguards had played a particularly important role in the organization's work 
over the previous year, which he had ascribed to the fact that the Third 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) had taken place during that year. However, it should 
not be forgotten that the task of that Conference had been not only to take 
stock of the present status of Agency safeguards, but also to explore new 
ideas for making headway towards the objectives set forth in the Treaty. In 
that connection he (Mr. Fischer) was referring, in particular, to proposals 
which went even further than the demand for full-scope safeguards in 
non-nuclear-weapon States and were aimed at the application of safeguards to 
all civil nuclear activities in nuclear-weapon States; within the overall 
context of nuclear disarmament, the necessary conditions would thereby be 
created for safeguarding nuclear facilities made over at a later stage to 
peaceful uses. Austria was aware that the process would take time and 
therefore proposed that it should begin immediately so that that aim, which 
was by no means Utopian, could be achieved. His country was seeking the 
co-operation of all countries like-minded in that respect. It supported the 
Agency's safeguards work and was aware of the important contribution which the 
organization made to the cause of world peace. The Agency was responsible for 
maintaining and further improving the credibility of its safeguards system. 
His delegation realized that the Secretariat was doing all it could to utilize 
budgetary resources effectively and economically, and in that connection he 
wished to pay tribute to the Director General and his staff. 
51. With regard to technical assistance, Austria had signed a large number 
of bilateral agreements relating chiefly to training and scientific aid. For 
many years Austria had welcomed the efforts of multilateral organizatons 
active in that sphere and had made its own contribution to them. In addition, 
it had stepped up its co-operation with the Agency by providing cost-free 
expert services for Agency programmes and by making large numbers of places 
for training courses available to Agency fellows. The fact that the Agency's 
Headquarters was situated in Austria was certainly significant in that respect. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 19 


52. His country had recently signed another agreement with the Agency which 
established a new legal framework for all the work performed at the 
Seibersdorf Laboratory and which should facilitate its operation. In the next 
year a new laboratory devoted exclusively to the application of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture would be completed. Unfortunately, no decision had 
yet been taken in respect of the possible construction of a training centre at 
Seibersdorf, but it was hoped that the relevant authorities would soon come to 
a decision on that matter. 
53. The Agency's important contribution to the preservation of world peace 
through the efforts it deployed in the field of technical co-operation was 
well known. He welcomed the flexibility demonstrated by the Agency in its 
programme, which enabled it to adapt its priorities rapidly in accordance with 
changing needs throughout the world. In addition, the Agency was placing 
emphasis on the problem of hunger in Africa under its food and agriculture 
programme, and was thereby contributing to the current efforts of the United 
Nations to assist that part of the world, which had been beset by so many 
disasters. 
54. He recalled that the Austrian Research Centre at Seibersdorf, which was 
the country's largest interdisciplinary laboratory, was to celebrate its 
twenty-fifth anniversary in the coming week. The establishment of that 
Centre, which from the beginning had been devoted to nuclear research and 
applications, had been in the spirit of the times. It had successfully 
brought together all the branches of science associated with nuclear energy 
and had enabled Austria to take part in international co-operation projects, 
such as the Dragon, Halden and Eurochemic projects of OECD. It had helped 
Austrian industry to take its first steps in that sphere and thereby to 
develop high standards. 
55. The ASTRA research reactor, which had begun operation twenty-five years 
before, had played a decisive part in that connection. During its 63 000 
hours of operation the performance had been outstanding and it had fully 
served its purpose as a safe and reliable tool in the service of science and 
research. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 20 


56. Austria had long been actively concerned with the transboundary 
problems involved in operating nuclear facilities. It had, as a result, 
concluded an agreement on matters of mutual interest relating to nuclear 
facilities with Czechoslovakia . That agreement provided for a regular 
exchange of views on general aspects of the co-operation involved and for 
special missions before the commissioning of nuclear power plants in border 
zones. A mission of that kind had taken place in connection with the first 
unit of the Dukovany nuclear power plant. The discussions between experts had 
been held in a very good atmosphere of co-operation and had afforded an 
opportunity to acquire a detailed knowledge of the way in which the operator 
and the competent Czechoslovak authorities met their safety, safeguards and 
security goals. That example showed how easy it was to co-operate with a 
neighbouring country, even in a region in which interests were so divergent, 
provided the parties concerned recognized that each State had the right to 
protect its own population against any nuclear hazard from, a source beyond 
the frontier. 
57. The physical protection of nuclear material was an aspect of safety to 
which Austria attached considerable importance, and since 1972 it had been 
attending the meetings at which the relevant directives and recommendations of 
the Agency had been drawn up. It had also taken an active part in the 
drafting of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, 
which had been opened for signature on 3 March 1980. The Austrian Government 
was awaiting the necessary parliamentary approval and hoped to ratify the 
Convention in the near future. 
58. In his opening address, the Director General had pointed out the 
economic viability and ecological advantages of nuclear power plants. As was 
well known, a nuclear power plant had been completed in Austria but could not 
be commissioned because of the 1978 referendum on nuclear power, in which only 
49.6% of the votes had been cast in favour of it. Since then, the situation 
had changed radically. He therefore believed that the Austrian public should 
be given a further opportunity to decide on that question in a democratic 
fashion. In recent months, the Federal Government had on a number of 
occasions explored the problems of peaceful uses of nuclear energy in Austria 
and had unanimously reached a number of conclusions. First, the Federal 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 21 


Government's recent Report on Energy to Parliament had indicated that it would 
be economically viable for Zwentendorf to be commissioned. Second, according 
to reports by the Austrian Reactor Safety Commission, the safety of a plant 
such as Zwentendorf could be considered to have been dealt with 
satisfactorily. Finally, the controversial question of waste disposal could 
be solved for Austria in the same way as for other States which had met their 
electricity needs by means of nuclear power. It was therefore in the 
interests of Austria to convince a sufficiently large majority of the Austrian 
Parliament that it was essential to ascertain what the Austrian public now 
thought about that matter and that it would be reasonable to propose a new 
referendum. In his delegation's opinion, it would be possible to make headway 
within the next two years since that idea was increasingly gaining ground. 


59. None the less, there was need to continue working on the so-called 
alternative energy sources, although the initial and unduly optimistic hopes 
for the speedy application of such sources had not in fact been realized, and 
might never be. It was true that Austria had major hydroelectric resources; 
it also had a certain amount of coal. But there, too, the Government was 
constantly confronted with the problem of public acceptance. The public was 
more and more critical and had become sensitive to power plant projects, even 
in the case of conventional plants. From a sociological point of view that 
might be desirable, but it did not make life easier for politicians. 
60. In conclusion, he hoped that the Agency would continue to discharge its 
functions as effectively as possible and that it would remain, above all, a 
forum for the exchange of expertise. 
61. Mr. VYLKOV (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance) said that 1985 
marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of the CMEA's Permanent Commission on 
Co-operation on the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. During that time CMEA 
member States had acquired a wealth of experience in the establishment of 
multilateral co-operation, and solutions had been found to major scientific, 
technical and economic problems involved in the industrial introduction of 
nuclear power, nuclear instruments and techniques, underground disposal of 
radioactive wastes and the safe and reliable operation of nuclear facilities. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 22 


62. In accordance with decisions by the CMEA's Economic Conference held in 
June 1984, the organization was attempting to speed up scientific and 
technical progress by placing emphasis on scientific, technical and economic 
co-operation. In that connection, CMEA member States were drawing up a joint 
programme on the scientific and technical progress to be achieved over the 
next 15-20 years. That programme would reflect the anticipated scientific and 
technical policies of the various countries, their objectives and the material 
and organizational resources with which those objectives could be met. The 
programme provided for the following developments as a matter of priority: 
introduction of electronics into the national economy, extension of 
automation, development and utilization of different types of equipment and 
technology, biotechnology and acceleration of the expansion of nuclear power, 
which was playing a dominant role in overcoming the energy problems of CMEA 
member countries. 
63. The aims of the nuclear power programme were as follows: to acquire a 
more effective and more reliable energy supply; to obviate the need for 
continued use of scarce fossil fuels for electricity and heat production; to 
obtain new structural materials; to automate monitoring and control processes; 
to improve the qualifications of experts; and to explore problems of 
standardization and those associated with test facilities. 
64. In CMEA member countries, nuclear power was being introduced mainly in 
the form of WWER (water-cooled and-moderated) reactors with capacities of 440 
and 1000 MW. The Soviet Union had also begun to develop graphite-moderated 
boiling-water reactors with capacities of 1000 and 1500 MW. At present, 
24 WWER-440 units were operating in CMEA member countries, and by 1990 some 20 
further units would be commissioned. The first standardized WWER-1000 
reactors were already operating in the Soviet Union, and Bulgaria was 
completing the construction of a reactor of that type. Others were under 
construction in the German Democratic Republic, Romania and Czechoslovakia. 
Currently, CMEA member countries were drawing up, for the period up to the 
year 2000, construction programmes for nuclear power plants producing 
electricity and heat. The total capacity of the nuclear power plants of CMEA 
member States would attain 100 000 MW over the next ten years, amounting to 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 23 


some 20-30% of total electricity generation in those countries and over 40% in 
Bulgaria. Scientific and technical co-operation in the construction of 
reactors was geared to improving the physical and thermohydraulic parameters 
of reactors, as well as to developing new types of plant components and to 
formulating standards and regulations ensuring safe and reliable plant 
operation. To that end, joint efforts were being made to devise diagnostic 
systems for reactor cores, to develop rigs for studying critical heating and 
thermal safety, and to improve command and control systems for nuclear power 
plants. 


65. Taking as the point of departure Soviet dual-purpose and district 
heating plants (500 MW), CMEA member States were drawing up an agreement, 
together with research and development programmes, for the period up to 1990, 
with a view to the widespread use of nuclear power for the district heating of 
large towns. With regard to fast reactors, co-operation covered the 
development of 800 and 1600 MW industrial reactors. The co-operation 
programme provided for joint research on physics and thermohydraulics, for the 
development of different types of plant components and devices, and for ways 
of overcoming safety and reliability problems. 
66. With regard to the most promising form of nuclear power, namely 
thermonuclear fusion, the co-operation programme of the CMEA member countries 
covered the design and manufacture of components and systems for the 
Tokamak 15, and also for joint scientific and technological research on that 
device. The programme was part of the international INTOR programme for the 
development of an experimental thermonuclear reactor. 
67. The speed-up in the expansion of nuclear power in CMEA member countries 
called for joint efforts to resolve problems associated with the fuel cycle, 
underground disposal of radioactive wastes and, in particular, the nuclear and 
radiological safety of nuclear power plants. Regulations had been devised, a 
huge amount of research had been done on radioactive waste disposal in 
geological formations, and problems entailed in the transport of spent fuel 
over long distances had been effectively solved. Copious use had been made of 
the technical documents published by the Agency in tackling those problems. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 24 


68. Under the aegis of its Permanent Commission, CMEA had engaged in 
widespread co-operation, in addition to nuclear power, on the development and 
application to different branches of the economy of radioisotope instruments 
for monitoring industrial processes and power plant control and for medical 
diagnosis; such co-operation also related to the establishment of industrial 
complexes and medical treatment centres using particle accelerators. Co-
operation of that kind had made it possible to agree on special arrangements 
for the production of radiopharmaceuticals and of RIA instrumentation. 
69. CMEA member countries were working together on the production of 
equipment for the nuclear industry as part of an international economic 
association called "Interatominstrument". There were already 187 different 
items of equipment belonging to 17 different categories and amounting to over 
50% of the trade turnover between member countries in that sphere. "Interatominstrument" 
also provided many services through its branches in the 
various member countries. 
70. CMEA was also working with the Agency in many areas under the agreement 
concluded between the two organizations. It was prepared to expand and 
consolidate that co-operation with a view to placing nuclear energy at the 
disposal of peace and progress throughout the world. 
Mr. Manouan (Cote d'Ivoire) resumed the Chair. 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXIX)/766) 


71. The CHAIRMAN reminded the General Conference that to ensure that 
the Board would be constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute, 
11 Members had to be elected from the geographical areas specified in 
paragraph 2 of document GC(XXIX)/766. 
72. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members to the Board 
of Governors. 
73. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Argentine 
delegation and a member of the Indian delegation acted as tellers. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.276 
page 25 


74. The CHAIRMAN said that the counting of votes would take some time 
and therefore suggested that consideration of item 12 of the agenda be 
deferred until the tellers had reported to him. 
The meetinn rose at 12.25 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
April 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 


on Thursday, 26 September 1985, at 3 p.m. 
President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 
later: Mr. TSUKADA (Japan) 
CONTENTS 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Item of the 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
12 Election of Members to the Board of 
Governors (resumed) 1 17 
7 General debate and annual report for 
1984 (resumed) 18 - 130 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Paraguay 18 - 30 
Israel 31 - 39 
Turkey 40 - 50 
Zambia 51 - 66 
Democratic People' s Republic of Korea 67 - 70 
Uruguay 71 - 79 
Mongolia 80 - 89 
Morocco 90 - 99 
Greece 100 -111 
Ecuador 112 - 122 
Cyprus 123 - 127 
Reply by the delegate of Iraq to 
the statement by the delegate 
of Israel 128 - 130 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 10 October 1985. 
*_*/ GC(XXIX)/763. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 


GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev. 3. 
86-1530 
0361e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 2 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXIX)/753) (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of 
the voting: 
2. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Latin 
America was as follows: 
Abstentions: 23 
Valid votes: 159 
Required majority: 40 
Votes obtained: 


Guatemala 52 
Mexico 80 
Paraguay 27 


3. Having obtained the required majority. Guatemala and Mexico were 
elected to the Board. 
4. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Western 
Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 2 
Valid votes: 180 
Required majority: 46 
Votes obtained: 


Finland 90 
Sweden 90 


5. Having obtained the required majority. Finland and Sweden were elected 
to the Board. 
6. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Eastern 
Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes: 173 
Required majority: 44 
Votes obtained: 


Czechoslovakia 86 
Poland 87 



GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 3 


7. Having obtained the required majority, Czechoslovakia and Poland were 
elected to the Board. 
8. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was 
as follows: 
Abstentions: 17 
Valid votes: 165 
Required majority: 42 
Votes obtained: 


Algeria 86 
Sudan 79 


9. Having obtained the required majority. Algeria and Sudan were elected 
to the Board. 
10. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 87 
Required majority: 44 
Votes obtained: 


Iraq 39 
Pakistan 48 


11. Having obtained the required majority. Pakistan was elected to the 
Board. 
12. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Far East 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 84 
Invalid votes: 1 
Required majority: 43 
Votes obtained: 


Mongolia 84 



GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 4 


13. Having obtained the required majority, Mongolia was elected to the 
Board. 
14. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific or of the Far East 
was as follows: 
Abstensions: 16 
Valid votes: 75 
Required majority: 38 
Votes obtained: 


The Democratic People's 


Republic of Korea 1 
Iraq 1 
The Republic of Korea 73 


15. Having obtained the required majority, the Republic of Korea was 
elected to the Board. 
16. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, 
recalled that under Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold office from 
the end of the current session until the end of the thirty-first regular 
session of the General Conference, i.e. for a period of two years. 
17. He thanked the delegations of India and Argentina, which had provided 
tellers, the two tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistants. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr.1) (resumed) 


18. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said that his country was a strong supporter 
of the principle of universality in international organizations, especially 
the Agency. It believed that all peoples should have access without 
discrimination to the Agency's various activities and to the benefits of 
applying nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Paraguay attached 
considerable importance to the Agency remaining a purely technical body and 
was concerned about the fact that considerations extraneous to it were again 
being introduced; such matters would be more appropriately discussed within 
the United Nations. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 5 


19. Turning to the activities of Paraguay's Atomic Energy Commission in 
1984, he noted that the Commission had continued with its programme on the 
establishment of the infrastructure needed for expanding the use of nuclear 
techniques, in particular, in health, industry, agriculture, livestock, 
breeding and mining. 
20. The year 1984 had been a very active one as regards international 
co-operation, both multilateral through the ARCAL programme and bilateral. 
Valuable assistance had continued to be received from the Agency in the form 
of equipment, fellowships, expert services and scientific visits. Various 
Paraguayan organizations had, moreover, benefited from training provided by 
the Agency. 
21. Paraguay had been actively involved in regional activities through the 
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC), ARCAL and the Argentine 
Atomic Energy Commission; co-operation with the latter organization had 
mainly taken the form of fellowships and intensive training courses for 
scientific staff. 
22. Participation in scientific courses and conferences held in various 
countries had also been fruitful; such meetings had included a round table 
meeting on public acceptance of nuclear energy in Santiago de Chile, a seminar 
on nuclear law in Caracas and a meeting of the countries of the Rio de la 
Plata Basin with countries of the Andean area with a view to implementing the 
ARCAL agreement. 
23. On a national level, assistance had been provided by the Commission to 
organizations such as the Health Sciences Research Institute, the National 
Cancer Institute, the Faculties of Chemical Sciences, Agricultural 
Engineering, Veterinary Sciences and Physical and Mathematical Sciences. 
24. Moreover, on 23 August 1984, the Government received via the Ministry 
of Foreign Relations the pre-project for the Chaco Nuclear Centre, alternative 
suggestions for its location and a general report; a policy decision in 
respect of the project was also requested. That project represented an 
example of united efforts contributing to the solution of national problems 
such as the development of the Paraguayan Chaco. 

GC(XX1X)/0R.277 
page 6 


25. An agreement had been reached with the National Cancer Institute on the 
training of scientific staff for a hospital which was under construction. 
Also, requests had been submitted for Agency technical assistance with 
equipment for the radiation protection and dosimetry laboratories for the 
Directorate of Nuclear Biomedicine of the Commission. 
26. Describing the activities of each Directorate General of the 
Commission, he said that the Agency was providing assistance with a project of 
the Directorate General for Nuclear Science and Technology on nuclear 
sciences, under various new sub-programmes of which activities had proceeded 
in 1984. The following additional activities of the Directorate General were 
also carried out: X-ray fluorescence spectrometry, nuclear instrumentation 
and a theoretical and practical course on low-level background measurements. 
The Radiological Protection Service was engaged in the provision of dosimetric 
services, shielding tests, research on fission products in food and 
thermoluminescence dosimetry. In addition to various other research 
projects, the Directorate General had been involved in the process enabling 
Paraguay to join the Regional Non-Destructive Testing Programme and also in 
the ARCAL programme. 
27. The Directorate General for Education and Exchange in Nuclear Science 
had selected the candidates for various training courses and seminars attended 
in 1984 by Paraguayan scientists. Paraguay had participated in a 
co-ordination meeting of the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) 
and had taken that opportunity of discussing the difficulties faced by its 
scientists wishing to attend events organized by the Agency. The main problem 
was that for most events the Agency paid only a one-way flight, leaving the 
return flight to be paid by the Government. Paraguay did not have funds for 
all the return flights of its scientists, who were therefore unable to attend 
certain meetings. 
28. The Directorate General of Radioactive Mineral Resources had been 
involved in the elaboration of a geological map of Paraguay, had helped to 
organize a First National Symposium on Geology, had participated in the 
Brazilian Geology Congress, had received a visit from an IAEA expert, had been 
engaged in the processing and evaluation of information on geology and 
radioactive ore exploration techniques and had provided training activities 
for staff. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 7 


29. The Directorate General of Nuclear Biomedicine had been involved in 
various training activities and had submitted technical assistance project 
requests to the Agency. A working meeting had been held with IAEA experts, 
and Paraguayan scientists had taken part in various regional and interregional 
training courses. 
30. Finally, the Directorate General for Nuclear Energy had been engaged in 
a study of the pre-project for the Chaco Nuclear Centre, including evaluation 
of the cost of construction and maintenance of the Centre. 
31. Mr. KILAM (Israel) said he first wished to join other delegations 
in congratulating the Director General on his reappointment for a new term of 
office. 
32. The international community's growing reliance on the atom for energy 
production purposes as well as its application in agriculture, industry and 
the life sciences afforded the Agency a unique opportunity to play an even 
more active part in promoting nuclear energy for peaceful purposes while 
remaining faithful to its mission and its Statute. The discharge of those 
duties was a serious challenge. To attain the important goals with the 
co-operation of Member States the Agency had to remain fully relevant to their 
needs. 
33. More effort should be made by the Agency to remove all unproductive 
issues from its deliberations, such as item 10 of the agenda for the present 
Conference. The Director General had stated, inter alia, in his opening 
address on 23 September that he was aware from the many discussions he had 
held that there was a widespread wish for the Agency to put that specific 
matter behind it and to build up renewed confidence that peaceful nuclear 
facilities could be constructed and operated without fear of any armed 
attack. The Director General had received Israel's fullest co-operation from 
the very outset in his endeavours. In 1984, it was made clear in a letter 
from Israel's Resident Representative, dated 21 August 1984, and in the 
statement made by the Israeli delegation during the general debate of the 
previous year that the policy of the Israeli Government was that nuclear 
facilities dedicated to peaceful ends should be inviolable from military 
attack and that Israel had great respect for the manner in which the Agency 
had fulfilled its mission in the area of safeguards. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 8 


34. His delegation was directed to say on behalf of the Israeli Government 
that, firstly, Israel held that all States must refrain from attacking or 
threatening to attack nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes and that 
the Agency's safeguards system produced the necessary evidence of the peaceful 
operation of a facility; secondly, within that context Israel reconfirmed its 
policy that it would not attack or threaten to attack any peaceful nuclear 
facilities in the Middle East or anywhere else. He wished to emphasize that 
no State in the Middle Bast was excluded. Thirdly, Israel was willing to 
support any subsequent action in competent fora convened to work out binding 
agreements that would protect nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes 
from attack or threat of attack. 
35. He believed that the record demonstrated the fact that Israel had 
sought to facilitate the Director General's mission in a forthcoming manner. 
The clear position as he had just expressed it was a response to 
resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 and afforded a sound basis for terminating the 
consideration of that agenda item. 
36. Unfortunately, the Iraqi delegation had once again initiated a draft 
resolution - GC(XXIX)/764 - which ran counter to the endeavours of the 
Director General and many Member States during the past year. In contrast to 
Israel's willingness to co-operate with and respond to the Director General's 
initiative, the Iraqi Government had only seen fit to reiterate the 
stereotyped accusations and falsehoods that the General Conference had 
regrettably heard so often in the past. 
37. Examination of the Iraqi draft resolution showed that it was either 
redundant or in contradiction to the Agency's Statute. It was clearly 
intended in operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution to seek to erode 
Israel's rights and privileges as a Member of the Agency. 
38. Instead of levelling false accusations against Israel and adopting a 
course of action which could jeopardize the Agency's future, the Government of 
Iraq would do better to end the useless war which it had started and which had 
already caused a death toll of almost a million people; Iraq had also 
attacked, among other civilian targets, a peaceful nuclear facility and by 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 9 


engaging in gas warfare had violated an international treaty to which Iraq was 
a party. But there had been no statements or declarations by any Iraqi 
spokesman to the effect that Iraq would desist from attacking or threatening 
to attack nuclear facilities in other Middle Eastern countries. 


39. In conclusion, he wished to renew his Government's assurances of 
confidence in the Agency's ability to attain its goals with the co-operation 
of Member States, among them the State of Israel, and hoped the present 
General Conference would be a milestone on the road to better understanding 
between them. 
40. Mr. ERNER (Turkey) noted the Agency's impressive record of success 
in its activities during 1984 and approved the annual report. 
41. It was gratifying to note that the total resources available for 
technical assistance and co-operation had increased greatly from 
US $29.58 million for 1970-74 to US $66.68 million for 1975-79 and to 
US $143.40 million for 1980-84. The targets for the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund which were being set each year on the basis of indicative 
planning figures had doubled from US $13 million in 1981 to US $26 million for 
1985, and in 1986 the figure would reach US $30 million and be distributed 
among 80 developing countries and among a number of regional and interregional 
projects. Some years the contributions paid by a developing country were more 
than the amount received in technical assistance and it was to be hoped that 
such situations would be avoided in future project implementations. The total 
amount of technical assistance was obviously not sufficient to meet the 
increasing needs of the developing countries, and ways should be explored for 
substantially increasing the Agency's technical assistance resources. His 
country had pledged its assessed voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for the year 1986. 
42. The Agency should do much more to assist developing countries during 
the early stages of nuclear power introduction and provide advice during 
siting, construction and operation. There was a marked difference in the per 
capita per day consumption of energy of some of the least developed countries 
which was as low as 2300 kcal and that in the most developed countries which 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 10 


was 243 000 kcal. It should also be noted that the average energy consumption 


in developing countries in the mid-70s was 0.86 kW per capita while in 
developed countries it was 5.3 kW. Those figures demonstrated the acute 
energy needs of developing countries and the vast disparities involved. 


43. It was estimated that the world population would double by the 
year 2030. If per capita energy consumption around the world were to reach 
the current level of Western Europe, which was 5 kW, the total consumption 
would be 40 TW, compared to the present total consumption around the world of 
8 TW. Those figures showed the degree of the energy shortage in the 
developing countries. To remedy that situation they would need to use all 
their conventional energy resources as well as nuclear power production. 
44. Nuclear energy was now regarded by many developing countries as one of 
the best alternatives to fossil fuels because of the latter*s relative 
expensiveness and ensuing environmental problems. In order to develop their 
inadequate manpower, organizational and institutional infrastructure, 
developing countries had to benefit more and more from the predictable and 
assured technical assistance of the Agency. 
45. The installed power capacity in his country in 1984 had reached 8460 MW 
and would be approximately 9300 MW at the end of 1985. It was expected that 
the total installed power capacity of electricity would be doubled by the end 
of 1989. In order to cover the energy demand in the year 2000 the installed 
power capacity would need to be 39 000 MW. By that time it was estimated that 
the 20 000 MW would be derived from hydroelectric power, 13 000 MW derived 
from fossil sources and the remaining 6000 MW would be accounted for by 
nuclear power. 
46. Following detailed studies and negotiations made on the proposals of 
different companies to build the first nuclear power plant in Turkey, his 
Government had submitted, in November 1983, its letters of intent to three 
firms from the United States of America, the Federal Republic of Germany and 
Canada. In the course of the negotiations with those companies, his 
Government had stated that the project was to be realized not on a turn-key 
basis but according to a new concept, the so-called "build-operate and 

GC(XXIX)/OK.277 
page 11 


transfer" model, a Joint Venture Utility to be incorporated with the 
participation of the suppliers and the Turkish Electricity Authority would 
undertake the design, construction, financing, operation, maintenance and the 
ownership of the nuclear power plant and make available the electricity 
produced to the Turkish Electricity Authority. Upon completion of its 
obligations, the Joint Venture Utility would transfer its shares to the 
Turkish Electricity Authority. A pre-agreement had been signed on 
14 August 1985 between the Turkish Electricity Authority and the Atomic Energy 
of Canada Limited as the main supplier. 


47. With regard to safeguards, it was gratifying to note that 98% of all 
the nuclear activities in non-nuclear-weapon States were currently under 
Agency safeguards, covering 900 nuclear installations in the world. It was 
all the more gratifying to note that the Agency had not detected any important 
anomaly which would indicate the diversion of a significant amount of 
safeguarded nuclear material, or the misuse of facilities or equipment subject 
to safeguards for the manufacture of any nuclear weapon, or for any other 
military purposes. 
48. His delegation welcomed the fact that some nuclear-weapon States had 
decided to submit certain civilian nuclear facilities to international 
control. It was to be hoped that all civilian nuclear activities of all 
nuclear-weapon States would be placed under Agency safeguards. Schemes for 
separating the civilian and military installations in nuclear-weapon States 
and the international plutonium storage scheme were also to be encouraged. In 
that connection he recalled that the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material had been signed by his Government in 1983 and had been 
ratified in 1985 bringing the number of the parties to the Convention to 14. 
It was to be hoped that the Convention would enter into force at an early date. 
49. The work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was to be 
commended. The CAS discussions had produced agreements on "Emergency and 
Back-up Mechanisms" and "Revision Mechanisms". His delegation hoped that in 
its next sessions CAS would be able to reach a consensus on the "principles of 
international co-operation". 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 12 


50. Another important initiative was undoubtedly the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). It was to be hoped that the Conference 
would attain its goals and, in particular, would find practical and effective 
ways of promoting international co-operation to facilitate free and unhampered 
access to nuclear technology and supply of nuclear materials, equipment and 
services, needed for the development of national programmes designed to 
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the economic and social 
development of developing countries. 
51. Mr. SIAMWIZA (Zambia) said he first wished to congratulate the 
Director General on his well-deserved reappointment for a further term of 
office. 
52. Zambia firmly believed in and was committed to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy because of its great potential for improving the living 
conditions of human beings. The Agency represented a collective form of the 
determination to exploit nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and in that 
respect it had a major role to play. One way of attaining those objectives 
was to induce Member States to exercise more political will and flexibility 
than had been the case so far. Although the Agency's Statute was basically a 
positive document, some of the provisions contained in it remained patently 
unfair in the face of new world developments, an example of which was the 
increased membership of the Agency. Hence, just as in the past, Zambia would 
continue to support all efforts aimed at remedying that situation and making 
the Statute truly representative of the interests of all Member States. In 
that connection an amendment of Article VI.A.1 of the Statute was greatly to 
be desired. 
53. The year 1984 had been marked by a downward trend in Zambia's economy. 
Its main foreign trade commodity - copper - continued to fetch low prices on 
the international markets. In addition, the effects of the severe drought had 
caused havoc in the country's agricultural industry. Nevertheless, the 
country's efforts in the application of nuclear science and technology for 
national development had continued. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 13 


54. Prospecting for uranium had been carried out during the past year by 
both the Geological Survey Department and private international companies. 
The Survey Department, in conjunction with the Prescribed Minerals and 
Materials Commission, had continued to receive Agency support in its 
prospecting operations. The geological and radiometric data amassed had 
enabled specific areas to be singled out for further investigation. 
55. Preliminary results for over 800 samples had been promising. Two 
experts had been provided by the Agency to work with the Survey Department and 
private companies had also pursued their prospecting activites with a view to 
starting uranium mining in the future. Since Zambia was assured of adequate 
hydroelectric energy supplies, current plans were directed more towards the 
uranium export market. 
56. Agriculture had continued to receive top priority in national development 
programmes during the year. Despite the drought and the high cost of 
importing or producing fertilizers, agricultural projects had been receiving 
the focus of attention. Good progress was also being made in Agency-assisted 
projects, which included isotope hydrology and study of fertilizers, nitrogen 
fixation, evaluation of Zambian rock phosphate for direct use as fertilizer, 
and the sterile insect technique for tsetse fly control. 
57. The project for a nuclear analytical laboratory was making headway. 
Most of the equipment earmarked for delivery had been received, installed and 
put into operation, thereby providing analytical services for the 
agricultural, medical, industrial and mining sectors of the economy. The 
construction of laboratory space was now advanced and occupancy was expected 
in the early part of 1986. The laboratory complex under construction would 
also provide space for the multi-purpose gamma irradiation facility. 
58. At the beginning of 1985, a one-man expert mission had visited the 
country to look into the feasibility of the project and assess requirements 
for Agency assistance. As a result, the original room design for the 
irradiation had been modified to conform with radiation safety standards. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 14 


59. In 1984 there had been progress with the project for upgrading the 
radiation protection services. An expert mission had identified the 
additional equipment required and discussed areas for manpower resource 
development. Another one-man expert mission lasting six months had been 
arranged to help with implementation of the existing legislation governing the 
use of ionizing radiation. 
60. It was heartening to note that there had been more financial resources 
available for the technical assistance and co-operation programme in 1984, as 
against 1983. The increased resources, however, did not yet match the number 
of technically sound projects, a good percentage of which had not been made 
operational. The problem of unfunded footnote a/ projects was clear evidence 
of the unsatisfactory nature of the current scheme of voluntary financing for 
the programme's activities. His delegation believed that the most effective 
way to finance the technical assistance and co-operation programme would be 
from the Regular Budget. Member States which had so far been reluctant to 
agree to that system were urged to take a more flexible stand. 
61. His delegation was happy to see that it had been concluded on the basis 
of safeguards inspections that no nuclear material or facility under Agency 
safeguards had been used in 1984 for a non-peaceful purpose. It was hoped 
that the trend would continue, for it would help considerably to allay current 
concern regarding threats to peace and security. Hence the conclusion of a 
safeguards agreement between the USSR and the Agency was very much to be 
welcomed. It was also hoped that the agreement would introduce a new 
dimension into the nuclear disarmament talks between the Super Powers, and 
that the Agency's safeguards system would subsequently be able to form a basis 
for an independent verification mechanism, which the Super Powers had always 
had need of for successful nuclear disarmament negotiations. Zambia supported 
the concept of an effective international safeguards system and would 
contribute, as in the past, to the cost of the Agency's safeguards programme. 
62. As far back as 1976, Zambia had urged the Agency to discontinue 
contacts that would give the racist apartheid regime in South Africa any 
semblance of respectability. It was therefore gratifying to note from the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 15 


Director General's address that some progress had been made in minimizing 
technical contacts between the Agency and South Africa. It was reported, 
however, that the discussions on comprehensive safeguards for nuclear 
facilities in South Africa had been negative, and at best concerned only the 
semi-commercial enrichment plant. 


63. At the previous year's session of the General Conference the Zambian 
delegation had pointed to the origin of South Africa's intransigence as 
racially rooted. South Africa had embarked upon its present nuclear programme 
not so much for economic reasons as on racial grounds, for the programme was 
ultimately intended to defend the policy of apartheid with nuclear weapons and 
that fact had to be understood by all. The behaviour of those States which 
had, either naively or knowingly, been instrumental in helping South Africa's 
nuclear development was to be deplored. They could not escape the charge of 
complicity in financing and backing the system of apartheid in South Africa. 
64. The situation in South Africa was a matter of deep concern to all 
humanity. As was known to all, in its resolution 39/2 of September 1984, the 
United Nations General Assembly had called upon all Governments and 
organizations to take appropriate action to assist the oppressed people of 
South Africa in their struggle for national liberation. His delegation now 
urged the General Conference to further support the just efforts of the United 
Nations against the inhuman apartheid system. 
65. It was disappointing to see that the Board of Governors had once again 
presented a negative report on the question of amending Article VI.A.2 of the 
Agency's Statute. The fact that some Member States were still reluctant to 
assign three more and two more seats on the Board, respectively, to the areas 
of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia showed them to be devoid of moral 
sense and fair play. That injustice had gone on for more than seven years. 
Efforts would have to be renewed to find a solution to that problem and there 
could be no support for measures that would only serve to perpetuate the 
under-representation of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia on the Board. 
66. Despite Zambia's economic difficulties, he was pleased to announce that 
the Zambian Government had fully met its financial obligations with regard to 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 16 


the Regular Budget and the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 
1984. It also pledged its full share of the target for voluntary 
contributions to the Fund for 1985. 


67. Mr. SO (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that in 1984 
the Agency had made considerable efforts to carry out the tasks entrusted to 
it. During the year the total installed nuclear generating capacity in the 
world had increased by 17%, with 34 new nuclear power units, representing a 
total capacity of 31.8 GW(e), being connected to the grids in thirteen 
countries. That figure once again demonstrated that nuclear power technology 
was mature and that operating nuclear power plants compared favourably with 
fossil-fuelled plants in terms of both reliability and generation costs. 
However, in spite of the rapid increase in nuclear generating capacity 
world-wide, in most developing countries nuclear power was still at an early 
stage of development. In that connection, the small and medium power reactor 
project initiated by the Agency, which was being implemented and was 
attracting the interest of many Member States, would contribute to the 
expansion of nuclear power in developing countries. 
68. Technical assistance to the developing countries was one of the most 
important activities of the Agency, since it helped them to gain access to the 
technology and information needed for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
The Agency had made some progress by extending the scope of technical 
assistance and enhancing its efficiency. His country had benefited from such 
in 1984, and his delegation wished to express its appreciation for its 
assistance. 
69. Safeguards, which were another of the principal activities of the 
Agency, were vital for creating trust between Member States with a view to 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and his delegation was gratified by the 
overall conclusion drawn from the Agency's safeguards activities in 1984 in 
paragraph 36 of the annual report. 
70. Twenty years had elapsed since a research reactor started to operate at 
his country's nuclear research centre. During that period there had been no 
abnormal events and its operation had greatly contributed, not only to the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 17 


production of radioactive isotopes and to nuclear research, but also to the 
training of human resources. His Government was preparing to construct a 
nuclear power plant in the near future using the technical and human resources 
already available to it. In that connection, it looked forward to closer 
co-operation with the Agency. 


71. Mr. LEURERO (Uruguay) recalled that following general elections 
democracy had been restored in his country in March 1985. 
72. The International Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material was being examined by the new legislative authorities in his country 
and was expected to be ratified by a national law. 
73. With regard to Article VI of the Statute, any revision or amendment 
should ensure a balanced geographical distribution between regional groups in 
the Board and maintain the current proportion of representatives from the 
region of Latin America. 
74. His delegation supported the efforts made by the Director General to 
achieve a fair representation of all countries in the Secretariat but it was 
regrettable that the proportion of staff from developing countries and in 
particular from Latin American countries was still insufficient. 
75. Safeguards were one of the Agency's main activities and a suitable 
means of financing them should be found which would at the same time make it 
possible to increase the resources available for technical assistance and 
co-operation. The amount contributed by developing countries for safeguards 
should be related, on the one hand, to the country's available financial 
resources and on the other hand to the scale of nuclear activities under 
safeguards in the country concerned. Nuclear-weapon States should pay a 
greater contribution to the costs of safeguards. 
76. Technical assistance activities were of primary importance. His 
country was very satisfied with the way in which the Agency carried out those 
activities and was grateful for the assistance received. 
77. His country strongly supported the regional co-operative agreements for 
Latin America and was preparing certain specific projects under the system. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.27 7 
page 18 


It was also participating in the activities of various energy organizations in 
the region of Latin America such as the Inter-American Nuclear Energy 
Commission, the Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America, the Latin American Energy Organization, the Commission of Regional 
Electrical Integration and the Mutual Assistance of the Latin American 
Government Oil Companies. Co-ordinated action and co-operation enabled 
maximum benefit to be derived for the countries concerned. 


78. Uruguay had continued its efforts to develop the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy particularly in the fields of medicine and agriculture and 
Uruguayan authorities were about to consider a feasibility study for a nuclear 
technology centre. 
79. In conclusion, the Agency could count on his country's full support in 
carrying out its activities. 
80. Mr. TSEREN (Mongolia) said that mankind was passing through a 
difficult period because reactionary forces were accumulating arsenals of 
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, thereby hoping to upset the 
military strategic balance. Plans to extend the arms race to outer space were 
particularly dangerous. 
81. The best way of preventing nuclear war, of putting a halt to the 
nuclear arms race and of achieving disarmament was to follow the constructive 
proposals put forward by the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. 
Mongolia fully supported the Soviet proposal for international co-operation on 
the non-militarization of outer space and welcomed the recent decision by the 
Soviet Union to declare a unilateral moratorium from 6 August 1985 on any 
nuclear explosions. If the other nuclear-weapon States followed the Soviet 
example and declared a moratorium on their nuclear tests, the nuclear arms 
race would be effectively controlled. 
82. Progress in the talks between the Soviet Union and the United States 
currently being held in Geneva would greatly assist the reduction of nuclear 
arsenals and the prevention of the militarization of space. The arrangement 
of a forthcoming meeting between the General Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, Mr. Gorbachev, and the United States 
President, Mr. Reagan, was also encouraging. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 19 


83. As a socialist State in Asia, Mongolia attached considerable importance 
to security on that continent. The idea of a common approach to the problem 
of Asian security and of a joint search for constructive solutions to the 
difficulties faced and the call for an All-Asia Forum should be followed up as 
being consistent with the Mongolian proposal aimed at excluding acts of 
aggression and the use of force from relations between the countries of Asia 
and the Pacific. The treaty on the establishment of a non-nuclear zone in the 
southern Pacific was also to be welcomed. 
84. The General Conference was being held soon after the successful 
conclusion of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and Mongolia noted with 
satisfaction that that Conference had unanimously approved its Final 
Declaration to the effect that the Treaty was held to be of considerable 
importance for international peace and security and that it had confirmed the 
strong commitment to the Treaty, of the. parties to it including their 
commitment to strengthen even further its effectiveness and viability. 
85. The Treaty had in fact proved itself to be viable and was at present 
the agreement on arms limitation with the most universal membership. Since 
NPT had entered into force, no State had acquired nuclear weapons. A further 
important result of the Treaty had been that it had created favourable 
conditions for broad international co-operation on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. Mongolia had been one of the first countries to sign NPT and had 
constantly spoken in favour of all measures which would strengthen the 
non-proliferation regime. Supporting, as it did, the Agency's safeguards 
activities, Mongolia was in favour of universal adherence to the Treaty and of 
increasing the effectiveness of Agency safeguards inspections. It was for 
that reason that the Mongolian delegate to the Third NPT Review Conference had 
proposed that all countries which had not yet done so and in particular 
nuclear-weapon and "threshold" nuclear-weapon States, should accede to the 
Treaty as soon as possible. 
86. The annual report for 1984 showed that the Agency had made a 
considerable contribution to the development of internationl co-operation on 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and Mongolia approved that report. His 

GC(XXrX)/OR.2?7 
page 20 


country also supported the Agency's activities as a whole, in which all 
countries were interested, especially nuclear power and its fuel cycle, 
nuclear safety and environmental protection, the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) and nuclear fusion. 


87. The Agency had also achieved a considerable amount by the provision of 
technical assistance. Mongolia was in favour of assistance being granted 
preferentially to States party to NPT and to those which had concluded 
safeguards agreements with the Agency. He welcomed the decision by the Board 
of Governors to recommend indicative planning figures for 1986 of $30 million 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. Mongolia was receiving 
assistance from the Agency with a number of important projects which would 
improve its nuclear physics research activities and further the introduction 
of nuclear techniques in industry, agriculture, geology, biology and other 
spheres. 
88. His delegation welcomed the fact that in 1984 the Agency had sent 
highly qualified experts to Mongolia to train national professionals with a 
view to introducing nuclear techniques. With their help a national seminar on 
application of X-ray fluorescence and atomic absorption analysis techniques in 
various spheres had been held. Such visits by Agency experts made a 
considerable contribution to the development of research and to improving the 
qualifications of local staff. The success of scientific research depended to 
a large extent on the systematic renewal of apparatus and on such improvements 
in qualifications, and in that connection Mongolia placed high hopes in 
assistance from the Agency and in co-operation with other Member States. It 
was grateful for the assistance received from the Agency so far. 
89. As regards the proposed amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, his 
country believed that any change in the Statute would be a serious matter 
which should be carefully considered, whereby account would need to be taken 
of the interests of all Agency Member States. 
90. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) noted with interest that the number of new 
power plants was continuing to increase despite the various difficulties which 
had affected most countries' national programmes. Nuclear power had 
established itself as a technically sound and economically viable alternative 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 21 


source of energy. Progress achieved in certain countries, particularly in 
France, in the field of fast breeder reactors suggested that a new era of 
nuclear power was not far off and that it would provide immense possibilities. 


91. The increased assistance provided by the Agency to developing countries 
was very welcome, particularly with regard to regulatory activities, the 
training of specialized staff, the design and implementation of nuclear power 
programmes and the application of nuclear techniques in areas such as 
agriculture, food, health and water. 
92. With regard to nuclear safety it was pleasing to note that there had 
been no significant accidents during 1984 which had caused any consequences to 
public health and safety. The Agency's assistance to Member States in setting 
up their radiation protection services and the establishment of the 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group were both very useful. 
93. His country had continued its efforts to reduce its dependence on 
energy from foreign supplies. As well as accelerating the mobilization of 
traditional resources such as water, coal and natural gas, it was also 
continuing with its nuclear power programme. Site feasibility studies for the 
first power plant had resulted in the selection of a number of sites which 
were currently being studied in depth. In addition, significant work, had been 
carried out in establishing a scientific, administrative and technical 
framework, and in preparing the necessary regulations for a nuclear power 
programme. A national nuclear energy centre had been set up and an initial 
research reactor had been purchased for it. The centre would help provide 
specialized training in reactor physics as well as in the promotion of nuclear 
techniques in vital sectors of the national economy. The centre would also 
assist the public authorites in the choice of technical options and would be 
their main instrument for implementing nuclear safety and control 
regulations. In addition, the centre would play a major role in the 
management of the physical accounting of nuclear materials and waste. 
94. In 1984 his country had signed the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability 
for Nuclear Damage and the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material. He noted that his country had thus adhered to all the international 
conventions and treaties aimed at preventing the non-peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, and commended other countries which had also adhered to such treaties. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 22 


95. His country was concerned that the current economic crisis was 
affecting the opportunities of countries wishing to develop nuclear power. 
The economic problems in many countries were such that they could not be 
solved by the individual countries alone and collective efforts were 
necessary. An in-depth analysis was needed at all levels of international 
trade and relations in order to identify and solve the problems. A new system 
of international co-operation based on genuine solidarity was essential in 
order to cope with the world-wide crisis. 
96. Such a new system of co-operation was particularly necessary in the 
field of nuclear energy and could be best carried out through the Agency. It 
was extremely important to continue to develop all activities associated with 
the development and transfer of technology and with the promotion of vital 
sectors of the world economy using nuclear techniques. 
97. With regard to technical assistance, the Secretariat was to be 
commended on its performance in programme implementation. His country was 
particularly grateful to all countries which had provided assistance over and 
above their numerous commitments. 
98. Safeguards were a vital part of the Agency's work and as such should be 
developed and strengthened by increasing the resources available for that 
purpose. The recent decisions taken by certain countries to submit their 
nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards were very welcome and demonstrated the 
commitment of those countries to the safeguards system. 
99. However, certain other countries, namely Israel and South Africa, 
continued to damage the Agency's credibility through their arrogant and 
irresponsible attitude. Resolutions adopted by the United Nations General 
Assembly, by the Security Council, by the Agency's Board of Governors and 
successive General Conferences continued to be ignored. Despite the continued 
refusal of those countries to co-operate with the international community in 
putting an end to the aggressive attacks and to the detestable apartheid 
regime, Israel and South Africa continued to benefit from certain rights and 
privileges to which their behaviour did not entitle them. Since its attack on 
the Iraqi research reactor, Israel had received several research contracts and 
considerable assistance such as the recent illegal export to Israel of 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 23 


depleted uranium from a member of EURATOM in defiance of the safeguards 
agreement. For its part, South Africa continued to participate in technical 
and scientific meetings organised by the Agency or by other specialized 


institutions in the nuclear field on the same level as Member States of the 
Agency. His country reaffirmed its determination to abide by the resolutions 
adopted in various international fora with regard to Israel and South Africa 
and to ensure that they were fully implemented. 


100. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece) said he would first like to take the 
opportunity of congratulating the Director General on his re-election for a 
second term of office. 
101. Greece was a firm believer in the value of nuclear energy for peace and 
prosperity as well as a fervent supporter of nuclear disarmament and the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. His country's efforts to reduce the 
international tension that threatened peace and security were well known and 
it strongly supported the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Balkan 
peninsula in order to build confidence and dispel suspicion in that region. 
Greece had been one of the first countries to accede to and ratify the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (KPT) and stood in favour of 
full-scope safeguards with maximum transparency for all States; the role to be 
played by the Agency in that respect was indispensable. 
102. It was heartening to see the successful outcome of the Third Review 
Conference of Parties to NPT, which had just ended, since that Treaty was the 
cornerstone of the international system of safeguards ensuring the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Had the Review Conference not been so 
successful, it would have struck a serious blow to that system. Nonproliferation 
was a political issue rather than a technical one and the 
signficance of the Agency's safeguards system lay in the experience and 
results gained in its twenty-eight years of existence. 
103. His delegation noted with satisfaction that in the year under review 
there had bean no detection by the Agency of any anomaly which would have 
indicated the diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded material. It 
was also happy to see the clarification of the 1984 anomaly, as reported in 
the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1985. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 24 


104. He welcomed the accession of Dominica, Equatorial Guinea, St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines to NPT in 1984, and commended the Soviet Union on its 
negotiation of a safeguards agreement with the Agency by which some of its 
civilian nuclear facilities were placed under Agency safeguards on a voluntary 
basis. 
105. Non-nuclear-weapon States that had not yet submitted their nuclear 
activities to Agency safeguards were strongly urged to do so in order to build 
up international confidence and dispel distrust. He proposed in that 
connection that the Agency should report regularly on the nuclear activities 
of non-nuclear-weapon States that might be considered as preparatory steps to 
non-peaceful activities. 
106. In addition to the Agency's safeguards activities, Greece also 
supported the activities relating to nuclear power and the fuel cycle, 
radiation protection, food and agriculture, life sciences and physical 
sciences. 
107. Although Greece accorded priority to domestic energy sources, mainly 
lignite, it closely followed the trends in energy production, especially 
alternative energy sources, since it believed that nuclear power was the most 
advantageous in the final analysis. Within that context he welcomed the 
Nuclear Safety Review for 1984, which showed a good safety record for nuclear 
power plants in the course of that year. 
108. The establishment in 1984 of the International Safety Advisory Group 
(INSAG) and initiation of the Radiation Protection Advisory Team (RAPAT) 
programme were Agency activities that would certainly help to promote the safe 
and reliable development of nuclear power. 
109. Conversely, in 1984, there had been again a number of serious events 
involving radiation that had not been related to nuclear power facilities. 
The most serious event had ultimately claimed the life of eight persons. The 
Agency would do well to pay particular attention to safety standards and 
procedures within a broader context of nuclear applications in order to 
improve their safety. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 25 


110. Although for the time being Greece had not taken up the nuclear option, 
it had an active programme in many other areas of nuclear energy, such as 
uranium exploration, nuclear techniques in agriculture and medicine, and had 
taken full advantage of the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme. It was hoped that the budget for that programme could be 
substantially increased. 
111. In conclusion, he wished to reaffirm his country's support for Agency 
activities and pledged its full share of the target for voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1986. 
112. Mr. PEflAHERRERA (Ecuador) said that for Ecuador the Agency's 
safeguards system and its Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Programme (TACP) were the two main objectives of the Agency's work; they 
accorded with its Statute and enjoyed his country's full support. 
113. His delegation hoped that all States would ultimately make use of that 
safeguards system. The financing of it, however, must make due allowance for 
the economic capacities of the countries concerned and their level of progress 
in the applications of nuclear energy. The grave economic situation 
prevailing in the developing countries made it very hard for them to 
contribute more to the budget for that important Agency function. In that 
respect the proposal for financing safeguards put forward by Venezuela merited 
support. 
114. The Agency's TACP was a vehicle for international co-operation in the 
effective development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in the 
developing countries, and had the added effect of stimulating their economies 
as a whole. The TACP should therefore be based on a reliable and predictable 
system of financing in order to guarantee full funding for technically sound 
projects. While his delegation would wish for a greater increase in available 
funds, it nevertheless agreed to 12% for the indicative planning figures for 
each of the following three years. He hoped that all Member States would 
support that increase. 
115. With regard to the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), his 
delegation considered it an effective consultative mechanism and fully 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 26 


supported its work. It was to be hoped that a consensus would soon be reached 
on principles of international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. 
Furthermore, the Secretariat's efforts to comply with resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/437 in the matter of staffing were to be praised. More should 
be done, however, to employ administrative staff from developing countries. 


116. Ecuador regretted to see the continued zero-growth policy in the 
Agency's budget for 1986, since it was detrimental to activities in favour of 
developing countries. As to the task of preparing the budget for subsequent 
years, Ecuador would continue to participate in the task force of the Group 
of 77, which performed an important and relevant function in that respect. 
117. The Director General's report had brought out the importance of 
activities aimed at promoting the uses and awareness of nuclear power. 
Experience gained in the study on small and medium power reactors would 
doubtless be of interest to those developing countries which were considering 
the use of nuclear power to meet their energy requirements. 
118. He commended the Agency for its work in the area of nuclear safety. It 
should continue to provide information on safety matters to all countries of 
the world with a view to increasing confidence in nuclear energy. 
119. Having among its own facilities a modern secondary standard dosimetry 
laboratory, Ecuador was aware that the Agency's work in sponsoring the 
establishment of the secondary standard dosimetry laboratory network around 
the world had led to a great increase in the precision of dosimetric 
measurements, which was of direct benefit to public well-being. In addition, 
the Radiological Protection Advisory Team (RAPAT) service provided countries 
with one of the best sources of technical expertise in that field and 
therefore deserved full recognition. 
120. Ecuador, together with the other ten States subscribing to the Regional 
Co-operative Arrangements for Latin America (ARCAL), was highly satisfied that 
that programme was now firmly established and in a position to ensure regional 
co-operation in the nuclear field. It fully favoured the implementation of 
ARCAL's objectives, and the facilities of the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy 
Commission would always be available for use in its technical projects. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 27 


121. He appealed to potential donor countries to contribute funds for 
programmes of genuine interest to the region. Such action would ensure the 
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
122. In conclusion, he noted that Quito had a few days previously hosted the 
most recent ARCAL meeting, at which Ecuador had pledged its full and effective 
participation within the framework of regional activities. 
123. Mr. PAPADEMAS (Cyprus) observed that in a world where mankind 
lived in constant fear of extinction in a nuclear holocaust, the existence and 
activities of the Agency made a positive contribution to the efforts to curb 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy. The General Conference itself was an important forum where 
the nuclear Powers could state their policies in respect of the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, and be, in their turn, subjected to public 
scrutiny and criticism. The system of safeguards and inspection offered the 
guarantee and security for the peaceful application of nuclear power in the 
service of mankind. Congratulating the nuclear Powers which had voluntarily 
accepted safeguards on their peaceful nuclear facilities, he pointed out that 
such a step not only ensured nuclear safety, which was essential for the use 
of nuclear power, but also enhanced confidence in the assurance that nuclear 
energy would not be misused for the production of nuclear weapons. He wished 
to state categorically that his country was resolutely opposed to the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, whether vertically by the nuclear Powers or 
horizontally by new Powers joining the "nuclear-weapons club". 
124. He commended the Agency's extremely valuable contribution in the area 
of safe disposal of nuclear waste, which was as important as safeguards if the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy was not to be abandoned out of fear of the 
destruction of the environment. 
125. Agreeing with the Director General that the production of clean energy 
for electricity was the challenge of our time and for the foreseeable future, 
he emphasized that technological progress in that important field should not 
be the privilege of a few. If the world was to advance in peace and develop 
in a balanced manner the countries of the Third World should also share in the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 


page 28 


resources of nuclear power. Indeed, the developing countries badly needed 
electric power for their advancement. Advanced nuclear technology in 
medicine, agriculture and water preservation was also of paramount importance 
to them. The Agency's technical assistance programme had a significant role 


in that respect and must be expanded to meet the multiple needs of those 
countries. 


126. He was grateful for the three projects in the fields of radiation 
dosimetry, nuclear techniques in animal production and isotopes in hydrology 
which were being implemented in Cyprus. 
127. In conclusion, he wished to congratulate the Director General on his 
reappointment and to reiterate his country's full support for the ideals and 
aspirations of the Agency. 
REPLY BY THE DELEGATE OF IRAQ TO THE STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF ISRAEL 


128. Mr. AL-QARAGULI (Iraq), replying to certain comments made by the 
Israeli delegate, pointed out that the statement of Israel's Minister of 
Foreign Affairs referred to by the Israeli delegate, was the same as that 
contained in the letter circulated by the Resident Representative of Israel, 
which had been rejected by Iraq during discussion of the relevant issue and 
which had been described by the Director General as insufficient. In Iraq's 
opinion, that statement did not explain what Israel considered to be a 
peaceful nuclear facility. In fact, the latter continued to be ambiguous in 
defining a peaceful facility so that it could carry out fresh attacks at any 
time it wished and in accordance with its own interpretation of the peaceful 
nature of such a facility. Furthermore, that letter did not fully respond to 
resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 because there should have been an undertaking in 
the form of a statement by the Prime Minister or the Foreign Minister of 
Israel to withdraw its threat to attack Iraqi nuclear facilities and not to 
carry out any further attacks on such facilities in Iraq, i.e. facilities 
under Agency safeguards. 
129. The purpose of draft resolution GC(XXIX)/764 was primarily to implement 
and supplement the contents of resolutions GC(XXVII)/RES/409 and 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/425. The Iraqi delegation had co-operated with the Director 

GC(XXIX)/OR.277 
page 29 


General and had yielded on a number of points in order to facilitate the 


latter*s and the Conference's task. If no result had been achieved, the 
responsibility lay with the Israeli authorities, which were intransigent and 
persisted in their policy of aggression. The draft resolution certainly did 
not aim at depriving a Member State of its rights and privileges since the 
activities mentioned in operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution could be 
carried out by the Agency in any State, whether or not it was a Member of the 
Agency. What was asked for in that paragraph was the least the Conference 
could do in the case of a State violating international law and international 
safeguards. 


130. As for the war between Iraq and Iran, the Israeli delegate's comments 
could only be seen as another attempt to divert attention from Israel's 
aggression against peaceful nuclear facilities. Iraq's position in the matter 
and its sincere desire to end that war were too well known to be repeated. 
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
April 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 26 September 1985, at 8.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 
later: Mr. TAKAHASHI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


7 General debate and annual report for 
1984 (continued) 1-59 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Kenya 1-11 
Sudan 12 - 17 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 18 - 25 
United Nations Council for Namibia 26 - 34 
Portugal 35 - 41 
Senegal 42 - 51 
New Zealand 52 - 59 


Reply of the delegate of France 60 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 4 December 1985. 


** GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev. 3. 


86-1536 


0405e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1984 (GC(XXIX)/748 and Corr.1) (continued) 


1. Mr. OMWONY (Kenya) said that the annual report gave a balanced 
view of the Agency's activities during 1984. 
2. It indicated a steady growth in the allocation of funds to safeguards 
activities, which were intended to ensure that nuclear knowledge was developed 
and used for peaceful purposes only. That was essential for the survival of 
the human race. In that regard, his delegation had noted with interest that 
South African nuclear facilities would be inspected. 
3. In the area of technical co-operation his delegation supported the 
Agency's activities relating to the transfer of nuclear technology. Kenya had 
received valuable Agency assistance, especially in radiation protection and 
nuclear medicine. 
4. The report of the Joint Inspection Unit had noted the problems 
associated with equipment utilization. In that connection, he pointed out 
that the Agency had provided assistance to Kenya in the maintenance of nuclear 
equipment and for a nuclear science laboratory. 
5. He wished to thank the Member States which had heretofore agreed to 
finance footnote a/ projects at Kenya's request. The latter now had new 
projects in the areas of animal reproduction, parasitic infection and 
non-destructive testing. 
6. His country had a particular interest in the possibilities of regional 
co-operation. He hoped that a Kenyan project on the tsetse fly would be 
developed as a regional project by the Agency. Under a regional co-operation 
programme Kenya was offering training facilities at the Food Preservation 
Laboratory. 
7. On the sensitive issue of denuclearization of the African region his 
delegation wished to draw the attention of Member States to the African 
group's resolution on sanctions against the racist regime in South Africa. 
Kenya had endorsed resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/423 adopted at the preceding 
session of the General Conference. South Africa had refused to accept 
safeguards on all its nuclear facilities. South Africa could be developing 

GC(XXIX>/OR.278 
page 3 


nuclear weapons only with the aim of attacking neighbouring nations opposed to 


the system of apartheid. He urged the General Conference to adopt the 


resolution submitted by the African group at the present session. 


8. His delegation held the view that Article VI.A.2 of the Statute should 
be amended in order to increase the representations of the areas of Africa and 
the Middle East and South Asia on the Board of Governors. 
9. As for the recently concluded Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), his delegation 
wished to underline its support for total non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. The nuclear-weapon States were continuing to produce ever larger 
nuclear warheads. There should be an agreement on banning all production of 
nuclear weapons. 
10. The Agency could not function without funds. His Government had always 
paid its assessed contributions and would continue to do so since it had great 
faith in the Agency 
11. His delegation strongly believed that nothing should stop the efforts 
of the General Conference to maintain peace in the world and to ensure that 


nuclear energy was used only for the good of mankind. 


12. Mr. ABBADI (Sudan) recalled the Director General's recent visit to 
his country in order to discuss with the Sudanese authorities the 
possibilities of applying peaceful nuclear techniques there. The visit had 
enabled the Sudan to strengthen its links with the Agency and to open new 
channels of co-operation with it. Furthermore, the visit had created among 
the Sudanese scientific community an enthusiasm for intensifying its efforts 
to make the best use of the technical opportunities offered by the Agency to 
utilize nuclear techniques for the country's economic and social development. 
Since that visit, the Sudanese Atomic Energy Commission had been working 
earnestly to put into practice the ideas which had emerged during the visit 
and had prepared specific projects on the applications of radioisotopes and 
radiation in the medicine, agriculture and animal husbandry and in groundwater 
studies. Funds for those projects still had to be obtained, within the 
framework either of the Agency or of bilateral co-operation with brother 
countries which had always helped the Sudan. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 4 


13. In recent years the Sudan, like many other countries in Africa, had 
been the victim of drought and desertification, catastrophes which had 
aggravated the already heavy burden due to poverty, hunger and ignorance. The 
Sudan was grateful to the international community for its speedy and efficient 
help, and hoped that the spirit of co-operation and solidarity shown on that 
occasion would be maintained. Nevertheless, the major part of the problem 
persisted. It was necessary to readapt and reorganize the people affected in 
order to create for them new means of livelihood. His country was relying 
greatly on the United Nations specialized agencies to provide technical 
assistance and advice to help overcome the consequences of those natural 
calamities. The Agency, in particular, could assist in the investigation of 
the quantity and quality of Sudan's groundwater resources by means of isotope 
techniques. The tapping of those resources was one of the basic solutions in 
combating the effects of drought and desertification in certain areas of 
Africa. His delegation appealed to the specialized agencies and to the 
international community to join hands and prepare a full and comprehensive 
programme of water resources survey in the African continent. In the Sudan 
the National Council for Research had prepared a pilot programme for 
controlling drought and desertification based on modern techniques, in which 
radioisotopes could play a crucial role. 
14. With respect to the Agency's budget for 1986, the Sudan, as one of the 
least developed countries in the Third World, considered that the principle of 
zero real growth was not consistent with the principle of expansion of the 
Agency's activities. Nuclear energy was destined to become an important 
source of electricity, and zero real growth would in the near future have a 
negative effect on the technical assistance and co-operation programme, which 
was vital for the training of manpower needed by the Third World countries for 
developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that connection, the 
General Conference should take into account the very modest request on the 
part of the developing countries to increase the technical co-operation and 
assistance budget by 1-2%, especially for help in sectors of interest to the 
least developed countries. Although it had been decided to increase the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund by 12% annually, a look at future 
budgets showed that the growth in resources would not exceed 2%. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 5 


15. The Director General had referred in his opening statement to the 
conclusions of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In that context, he had mentioned 
Articles III and IV of NPT and had said that, in the opinion of the Review 
Conference, the Agency's safeguards system played a central role in promoting 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He urged countries which had not yet done 
so to sign or accede to that Treaty as soon as possible. The Review 
Conference had reaffirmed the right of all parties to the Treaty to use 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It had also called upon all parties to 
assist the countries in the Third World and in particular the least developed 
ones. He hoped that the General Conference would take those recommendations 
into account, in accordance with the Agency's objectives. 
16. In the same connection, he expressed Sudan's growing concern over the 
development of the nuclear capacity of Israel and South Africa. The policy of 
the racist regime in South Africa posed a continuous threat to the peace and 
security of the African continent. The Israeli attack against the Iraqi 
nuclear facility had not only created a threat to Iraq but had also adversely 
affected the Agency's safeguards system, since the Iraqi reactor had been 
under Agency safeguards and that should have been sufficient for the 
protection of the reactor. The safeguards system shoud be supplemented by 
measures designed to protect nuclear facilities intended for peaceful purposes 
by discouraging any aggression against such facilities. 
17. In conclusion, he reaffirmed that, as a peace-loving developing 
country, the Sudan would spare no effort in implementing the Agency's 
decisions designed to attain the noble objectives for which it had been 
established. On that basis, his country would collaborate with the Member 
States at the regional and sub-regional levels and do its utmost at the 
national level to make the best use of nuclear energy. 
18. Mr. WADI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that his country attached 
particular importance to co-operation with the Agency, since that policy was 
important for development in general and, in particular, for the acquisition 
of the technological know-how necessary for the development of the nuclear 
sector, an area that was vital for all future progress. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 6 


19. A praiseworthy example in that respect had been the Seminar on the Use 
of Research Reactors in Basic and Applied Sciences, organized jointly by his 
country's Nuclear Energy Secretariat and the Agency, at Tajura from 16 to 
20 September 1984. The objective of that Seminar had been to review the 
present status of the research reactors and the potential for their future in 
peaceful applications in all branches of science and knowledge. It had also 
aimed at creating fruitful international co-operation in the use of the 
Nuclear Research Centre. It had been attended by scientists and research 
workers from many countries, and its success had been attested by the Agency. 
20. Generally speaking, the Libyan delegation was satisfied with the 
activities of the Agency and its positive initiatives with regard to the 
provision of technical assistance and co-operation and expert services. In 
particular, it wished to commend the outstanding role played by the Agency in 
organizing training courses, in granting and sponsoring fellowships and in 
providing opportunities for scientific training in the Agency's laboratories 
and at renowned scientific centres, in addition to the provision of 
information and equipment. It thus contributed to the strengthening of 
capabilities and to the mobilization of the resources necessary for peaceful 
and beneficial applications of nuclear energy. 
21. While some obligations and promises with regard to the provision of 
certain equipment and instruments for the peaceful application of nuclear 
energy had not been fulfilled, the responsiblity did not necessarily lie with 
the Agency but rather with a certain State which had an interest in 
obstructing any constructive efforts and any technical co-operation project 
between the Agency and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The State in question used 
its far-reaching tentacles and its transnational monopolistic corporations to 
achieve that end. The delegate of that Great Power, in an attempt to mislead 
and generalize, had described technical assistance as generous by quoting 
meaningless figures. That same country had prohibited the sale of a small and 
simple piece of equipment for measuring radioactivity to the Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, a country which had signed and was committed to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and whose nuclear establishments 
and research facilities were of course under Agency safeguards. Certain 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 7 


States were acting contrary to the letter and spirit of Articles II and III of 
the Agency's Statute. Those States, particularly those which were more 
advanced in the non-peaceful uses of nuclear energy than in its peaceful 
applications, tenaciously and arrogantly persisted in monopolizing nuclear 
energy and in using it for inhuman purposes and for blackmail. A certain 
State had gone so far as to apply pressure on and use threats against other 
States and even against the Agency itself in order to prevent them from 
providing technical assistance and materials needed for the operation of 
peaceful nuclear facilities. Furthermore, that State had not hesitated to 


close the doors of its scientific institutes and research centres to students 
from developing countries in search of knowledge, in flagrant violation of 
both the Statute of the Agency and the principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations. 


22. In reviewing co-operation in the peaceful applications of nucler energy 
his delegation wished to commend and express its gratitude to the Soviet Union 
for its generous assistance and for the supply of facilities, which had 
enabled Libya to progress and to strengthen its capabilities in the nuclear 
field. The construction of the Nuclear Research Centre at Tajura had been the 
most noteworthy result of that co-operation, and he hoped that the first 
WWER-440 nuclear power plant would be completed by the end of the year. 
23. The same imperialist Great Power, which was plotting to withhold the 
benefits of technology from peace-loving countries, was providing another 
intrusive entity with every kind of material and technical assistance and 
facility, thereby enabling it to practice the same form of blackmail and to 
pursue terrorism and aggression in the Arab area. It was well known that the 
Zionist entity had been working with the assistance of a large Western Power 
towards the acquisition and stockpiling of nuclear weapons in disregard of 
every international instrument and resolution. That entity persisted in 
preventing the Agency from inspecting its advanced nuclear facility which was 
devoted to aggression. That situation had already been exposed and condemned 
in a number of United Nations resolutions, to such an extent that it was no 
longer either logical or necessary that that entity should continue to have 
the honour of membership of an agency against the principles of which it 
continued to act, while ignoring its resolutions. The destruction of the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 8 


Iraqi nuclear research reactor in June 1981 was the clearest evidence for 
anyone who still needed proof of the intentions of the aggressive Zionist 
entity. The condemnation by the entire international community of that 
flagrant and premeditated act of aggression, which had been made possible only 
by the collusion and open support of a Great Power, revealed yet again the 
nature of that entity which had been able to perpetrate all those acts with 


impunity and without sufficient international prosecution. All those things 
had led his delegation to wonder about the results of the resolution adopted 
by the Agency on that subject. The report by the Director General on the 
mandate given to him in that connection did not indicate any genuine response 
to the resolution but only provided further evidence of disdain for and 
evasion of all efforts exerted within the United Nations to put a stop to the 
aggressive acts of that entity. 


24. Another entity which maintained material and political relations with 
the Zionist entity, namely racist South Africa, was also persistently and 
arrogantly refusing to allow inspection of its nuclear facilities by the 
Agency. It was actively engaged, with support and assistance from States 
which were Members of the Agency, in developing its nuclear capability and in 
acquiring nuclear weapons, which could only be used for aggression and which 
constituted the gravest threat to the peoples of Africa. That entity, too, 
had begun the production and stockpiling of nuclear weapons at the rate of, at 
least, two atomic bombs per year, as Mr. Fischer, the former Assistant 
Director General of the Agency had stated. The resolutions on the subject, 
including that adopted by the General Conference at its twenty-eighth session, 
were still being ignored. His delegation therefore wondered about the results 
and the outcome of the efforts made by the Agency and by the Director General, 
and of those exerted outside the Agency, in an attempt to halt the acquisition 
of nuclear weapons by the racist regime, in pursuance of the resolution 
adopted by the General Conference at its 1984 session. The brief report given 
by the Director General did not indicate any change in the attitude of South 
Africa, which sought means of further evasion with the covert support of a 
well-known Great Power. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 9 


25. His delegation maintained its stand with regard to the need to amend 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute so as to ensure an increase in the number of 
seats on the Board allocated to the developing countries and a more equitable 
representation of those countries commensurate with their importance and their 
aspirations. He hoped the other Member States would respond favourably to 
that just request. 
Mr. Takahashi (Japan) took, the Chair. 


26. Mr. GORITA (United Nations Council for Namibia) said that the 
United Nations General Assembly had declared time and again that South 
Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia constituted an act of aggression 
against the Namibian people in terms of the definition of "aggression** 
contained in General Assembly Resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 and 
that it supported the armed struggle of the Namibian people under the 
leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) to repel 
South Africa's aggression and to achieve self-determination, freedom and 
national independence in a United Namibia. The General Assembly had also 
declared that South Africa's defiance of the United Nations, its illegal 
occupation of the territory of Namibia, its war of repression against the 
Namibian people, its persistent acts of aggression against independent African 
States, its policies of apartheid and its development of nuclear weapons 
constituted a serious threat to international peace and security. The main 
obstacle to Namibia's independence was the racist and colonialist policy of 
South Africa. Another obstacle was that even countries which upheld the rule 
of law did not abide by their principles and were collaborating with South 
Africa. 
27. The lack of a solution continued to aggravate tension and conflict in 
the region as well as endanger international peace and security. For 19 years 
South Africa had been disregarding the decisions of the United Nations with 
respect to Namibia, for which territory the General Assembly had assumed 
direct responsibility in 1966; for 33 years, the United Nations had seen South 
Africa's obdurate refusal to heed the will of the world community to eliminate 
apartheid. During all those years, South Africa's allies had told the United 
Nations General Assembly and the Security Council that their relations with 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 10 


that country would provide then leverage over South Africa to bring it under 
the rule of law, thereby proving that the international community was wrong in 
demanding the total isolation of the racist and illegal regime. Yet all South 
Africa had done was to use all sorts of manoeuvres to perpetuate its illegal 
occupation of Namibia and further entrench apartheid in South Africa. 


28. In June 1985, the United Nations Council for Namibia had held in Vienna 
its sixth Extraordinary Plenary Meeting on the question of Namibia and had 
issued another fervent appeal for maximum international support for the early 
attainment of independence by Namibia. The Council had considered that 
special responsibility lay with the Security Council to act without further 
delay to secure the implementation of its relevant resolutions, in particular 
resolution 435 (1978). The Security Council had held 12 meetings on the 
question of Namibia from 10 to 19 June 1985, at a time when international 
public opinion had been expressing its increasing support for the oppressed 
peoples of South Africa and Namibia through campaigns for disinvestment and 
legislative sanctions against South Africa. The Security Council had met 
again on 26 July and 20 September to consider the escalation of racial 
conflict in South Africa and the intensification of unprovoked acts of 
aggression of the racist regime of South Africa against the People's Republic 
of Angola. That aggression represented not only a flagrant infringement of 
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an independent African State, but 
also a new attempt of the Pretoria regime to perpetuate its illegal occupation 
of Namibia. 
29. Concrete measures were essential, along with the imposition of 
mandatory sanctions and complete cessation of relations with South Africa in 
all spheres, especially in military and nuclear matters. All Member States 
should also give assistance to the United Nations Council for Namibia and to 
the Namibian people fighting for their freedom under the leadership of SWAPO. 
Governmental and public pressure in the countries of Western Europe and North 
America in favour of economic sanctions against South Africa was necessary. 
30. The General Assembly had repeatedly drawn the attention of the world 
community to the increasing threat to international peace and-security posed 


by racist South Africa's development of a nuclear capability based on the use 



GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 11 


of Namibian uranium. In the preceding year, several delegations from African 
countries, including his own, had referred in their statements to South 
Africa's plans to dump nuclear waste in the Namibian desert. That news was 
alarming to the Council for Namibia and his delegation would like to receive 
emphatic assurance from the Director General that Namibian soil would not be 
used in any way by South Africa as a dumping ground for radioactive waste of 


any nature whatever. 


31. On behalf of the United Nations Council for Namibia, he wished to 
express his concern at the rapid depletion of Namibia's natural resources by 
State-owned and other corporations and enterprises, in violation of the 
pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and Security Council, of the 
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971 and of 
Decree No. I enacted by the Council for the protection of the national 
resources of Namibia. He urged those countries whose multinational 
corporations were engaged in the illegal exploitation of Namibia's natural 
resources, especially its uranium deposits, to put an end to that plunder 
without delay. Such activities of foreign economic interests in Namibia were 
illegal under international law and those foreign interests operating in 
Namibia were liable to pay damages to the future lawful government of an 
independent Namibia. He wished to draw attention to paragraph 4 of 
Decree No. I under which "any animal, mineral or natural resource produced in 
or emanating from the Territory of Namibia which shall be taken from the said 
Territory without the consent and written authority of the United Nations 
Council for Namibia or of a person authorized to act on behalf of the said 
Council may be seized and shall be forfeited to the benefit of the said 
Council and held in trust by them for the benefit of the people of Namibia". 
In that regard, the Council intended to initiate legal action in national 
courts against those corporations which were exploiting the natural resources 
of Namibia. 


32. The United Nations Council for Namibia wished to thank the Agency and 
its Members which had supported the efforts of the Council in the discharge of 
its responsibilities. It also wished to reiterate its call to the Agency and 
its Member States to take all necessary measures to strengthen the 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 12 


co-operation between the Agency and the people of Namibia. In that 
connection, it was appropriate to emphasize the important role which the 
Agency had to play in promoting and developing technical assistance projects 
before independence, during the transition period and after the independence 
of Namibia. One of the main areas where the Agency ought to make an increased 
contribution was training activities, which should be conceived in the form of 
a consolidated and comprehensive assistance programme, specifically designed 
to meet the needs of the Namibian people. 


33. The Council commended the efforts made by the Agency to assist the 
Namibian people through the Council's Nationhood Programme. He hoped that the 
latter programme would be substantially enlarged in order to meet the growing 
demands of the Namibian people. In so doing the Agency would act in full 
conformity with the objectives of Article II of its Statute. 
34. Commending the efforts which the Director General had made in recent 
years to increase the representation of developing countries in the 
Secretariat, he recalled that the United Nations Council for Namibia was 
interested in one or more Namibians being recruited as staff members in 
appropriate Departments of the Agency. Reiterating the General Assembly's 
request to all specialized agencies, he called upon the Agency to continue 
granting a waiver of assessment to Namibia for the period during which it was 
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia. 
35. Mr. de MEDEIROS PATRICIO (Portugal) observed that the Agency had 
proved to be one of the most vital and able international organizations in 
spite of the problems which were affecting its work to a greater degree at 
present than in the past. He hoped that the Agency's key role would continue 
to develop under the able guidance of its Director General, whom his 
delegation wished to congratulate on his re-election. 
36. In 1984 the Agency had continued its efforts to remove obstacles in the 
way of the installation of nuclear power plants in Member States. He was 
especially happy to note that it was taking close interest in the work on 
extending the nuclear market to the small and medium power reactors and that 
it was trying to intensify its contacts with national and international 
financing institutions with a view to providing Member States with information 
on possible financing schemes for installing nuclear power plants. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 13 


37. The obstacles were not, however, confined to economic and financial 
difficulties. There was also the initial attitude of a considerable fraction 
of the public who were concerned about the problems of disposal of nuclear 
waste and were particularly worried by the danger - so far not disproved 
scientifically - of dumping such waste into the sea, on which millions 
depended for their daily living. Efforts must not only be continued but also 
be increased in order to solve those issues to the satisfaction of the public 
and enable nuclear power to gain much wider acceptance. 
38. In the matter of safeguards, his delegation noted with satisfaction 
that some nuclear-weapon States had decided to place some of their civilian 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. Those measures were important 
because they contributed to the objectives of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to which his country attached 
great importance. The Agency had a vital role to play in implementing the 
objectives of NPT, but its work alone was not enough. It was essential that 
all States should accede to the Treaty and - what was no less important - that 
the depositary States should bring themselves to comply with Article VI of 
NPT. The word of States must not be taken lightly by those who gave it, nor 
should it casually be accorded a lesser rank in the hierarchy of matters of 
honour, especially where the rule "pacta sunt servanda" was much more than a 
principle of ethics and became a condition for the survival of mankind. 
39. He wished to underline the importance of the work done by the Committee 
on Assurances of Supply (CAS), namely the progress made at the recent meetings 
towards establishing the principles of international co-operation in matters 
relating to nuclear energy. 
40. Portugal was grateful to the Federal Republic of Germany and the United 
States of America for their large contributions to the financing of some 
footnote a/ projects. Within the general framework of Agency technical 
assistance it had been possible to implement projects on uranium exploration, 
site survey, nuclear safety, secondary standard dosimetry, research and 
development, physical sciences, medicine and agriculture. 
41. The Portuguese energy plan, which envisaged the possibility of 
installing nuclear power plants, had been completed in 1984. However, because 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 14 


of economic difficulties and other factors the activities were confined for 
the time being to site selection for nuclear power plants, to which activities 
the Agency had been providing valuable support. 


42. Mr. LEYE (Senegal) congratulated the Director General on his 
appointment as the head of the Agency for another four years. Of the matters 
dealt with in the annual report for 1984, he wished intentionally to leave 
aside the problems relating to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT), nuclear safety and safeguards. That was not because those 
problems were unimportant or because his delegation was not concerned or 
interested. But since many other delegations had already spoken on those 
subjects, he preferred to concentrate on matters of immediate interest to 
Senegal, such as technical co-operation, applications of nuclear technology to 
the areas of food and health, protection of peaceful nuclear facilities and 
the problem of South Africa. 
43. With regard to technical co-operation, his delegation was happy to see 
that, as far as the resources for technical co-operation were concerned, the 
high level attained in 1983 had been exceeded in 1984, in which year resources 
amounting to US $35.9 million had been available. He also noted with 
satisfaction that disbursements from the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund had been 20.2% higher than in 1983. It was to be regretted that, 
although the resources of that Fund had steadily increased from US $10 632 000 
in 1980 to more than $22 232 000, there had been a steady decrease in funds 
provided by UNDP, which had declined by more than 50% in five years, and that 
assistance in kind had stagnated. He appealed to UNDP, whose situation had 
improved, to make more resources available to the Agency. His delegation 
considered that technical assistance, which was one of the principal 
activities of the Agency, should grow at the same rate as its other essential 
activities such as safeguards and nuclear safety; for that purpose, it needed 
predictable and assured resources from the Regular Budget so as to comply with 
the letter and the spirit of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388 of 1981. There was no 
doubt that the present system of financing based on indicative planning 
figures had on the whole worked satisfactorily thus far and the credit for 
that went to the donor countries. However, an increase in technical 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 15 


assistance requests could reasonably be expected in the not too distant 
future. His delegation therefore regarded the 12% increase in 1987-1989 as a 
reasonable and realistic compromise and wholeheartedly supported that increase. 


44. He praised the multifarious help and assistance which the Agency 
provided to the area of Africa in general and to the least developed countries 
(LDCs) in particular. Twenty-six out of the 36 countries in that category 
were situated in Africa. According to the annual report, assistance to LDCs 
had increased at an annual rate of 31% during the period 1981-1984. 
Pre-project assistance, country programming assistance and intercountry 
co-operation, which aimed at assisting the least developed countries in a 
sub-region, region or regions in applying nuclear techniques in order to solve 
common problems, were some of the measures designed and developed with much 
imagination and realism by the Agency to respond to the least developed 
countries' needs for assistance. In the case of the African area, the Agency 
should nevertheless envisage greater co-operation and co-ordination with 
regional organizations such as the Organization for African Unity and the 
Economic Commission for Africa. 
45. The Agency's activities in connection with food and agriculture and 
with life sciences were of the greatest interest to developing countries. The 
use of portable radioactive equipment to study the dynamics of water movement 
in field soils under cropping conditions could effectively help in the 
attainment of self-sufficiency in food by providing a simple and efficient 
means of water management in the rural environment and by ensuring high yield 
and efficient fertilizer use. The seven co-ordinated research programmes on 
grain legumes, cereals, root crops and tubers could be welcomed as heralding a 
revolution in agriculture, and it was not accidental that African countries 
like Ghana, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mali, Sudan and Zaire were already 
devoting particular attention to those programmes. The application of nuclear 
techniques in the control of insects and other pests under the BICOT project 
had provided experience which could be extended profitably and rapidly to 
other regions in Africa, especially those affected by the tsetse fly. 
46. His delegation also commended the Agency's efforts to extend to Africa 
its activities in the radiation sterilization of medical supplies. The 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 16 


co-ordinated research programmes on the development of a vaccine against 
schistosomiasis and on nuclear techniques for monitoring malaria vectors and 
the work on the establishment of cancer radiotherapy services in some 
developing countries deserved encouragement and support. 


47. In the matter of nuclear power, the small and medium power reactor 
project initiation study was a laudable undertaking, as a result of which 
information on 24 designs of nuclear power plants with power levels below 
600 MW(e) had been obtained from manufacturers. His delegation considered 
that those miniplants were still prohibitively expensive for small countries 
with modest means, and that further research should be carried on so that the 
LDCs, island and land-locked countries and those poorly endowed with fossil 
fuel reserves, could benefit from the peaceful use of the atom. 
48. The Senegalese delegation was aware of the very high cost of financing 
safeguards. While he recognized the extreme usefulness of safeguards and was 
in favour of their widest and universal acceptance, he felt that the system 
should be financed primarily by those States which derived the greatest 
benefit from it. Small States, for their part, should only make a purely 
token contribution to the costs. 
49. The Israeli attack against the Iraqi research reactor had, apart from 
its numerous other consequences, dealt a severe blow to the credibility of the 
safeguards system and, at the same time, compromised nuclear safety. The 
Director General had reported to the Board of Governors that he had had 
contacts with Israel in pursuance of resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 and that in 
his opinion those efforts had been inconclusive. However, the NPT Review 
Conference had itself recognized that an armed threat against a safeguarded 
nuclear facility or the threat of such an attack had created a situation 
regarding which the Security Council should take immediate action. Moreover, 
since such an armed attack, or the threat thereof, against a nuclear facility 
intended for peaceful uses could have very serious consequences for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, for international nuclear co-operation and for 
Agency safeguards, it could be concluded that such irresponsible acts were 
directed against the interests of the world community as a whole and therefore 
deserved very severe condemnation. 

GC<XXIX)/OR.278 
page 17 


50. The racist regime in South Africa, which relied on armed force alone to 
repress demands at home and to intimidate the African nations hostile to 
apartheid abroad, had in recent years acquired a nuclear capacity which 
seriously compromised the security of its neighbours, increased the risk of 
nuclear-weapons proliferation and imperilled world peace and security. 
Moreover, that had been possible only because South Africa was illegally 
mining Namibian uranium. His delegation requested all countries concerned 
about the protection of human rights to lend their strong support to the draft 
resolution, submitted to the General Conference by the entire African group, 
calling upon Member States, among other things, to halt all nuclear 
co-operation with South Africa, to refrain from purchasing Namibian uranium 
sold illegally by the racist regime and to end any transfer of fissionable 
materials and technology to South Africa. 
51. In conclusion, he said that forty years ago when atomic energy had made 
its first appearance, many pessimists had seen in that event the confirmation 
of their worst fears. Others who had been more optimistic had welcomed the 
fission of the atom as the dawn of a new era for mankind. The extremely slow 
progress towards disarmament and, at the same time, the breathtaking rate of 
scientific and technological advancement would tend to make the first point of 
view more credible, whereas the peaceful utilization of various nuclear-based 
technologies adequately responding to the numerous and very serious problems 
which affected the majority of the planet's inhabitants would seem to justify 
the supporters of the second view. Mankind was indeed at the crossroads and, 
in order to continue further, it had to decide which of the paths to take: 
the one leading to destruction and death or the other leading to life. 
Between life and death, the great majority had chosen that of life. It was 
for men of goodwill to see to it that the choice became a reality. 
52. Mr. WALKER (New Zealand) wished, first of all, to reaffirm his 
country's support for the Agency. 
53. The safeguards of the Agency played a vital role in helping to curb 
horizontal proliferation. His delegation was pleased to see references to 
safeguards in the final document of the Third Review Conference of the Parties 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 18 


to the Treaty on the Non-Proliteration of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). He regarded 
them as a strong signal to all supplier States that they should take greater 
care than ever before to ensure that their nuclear exports did not contribute 
inadvertently to the development of nuclear weapons. While commending their 
efforts in that direction, New Zealand urged them all to require full-scope 
safeguards under Agency supervision as a fundamental precondition of supply. 


54. At the same time, the application of full-scope safeguards must be 
balanced by assurances that no unnecessary obstacles would be placed in the 
way of the acquisition of nuclear materials, equipment and knowledge by those 
countries which had accepted safeguards and wished sincerely to make use of 
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. 
55. Generally speaking, New Zealand wanted to see early progress made in 
the universal application of safeguards. Steady strengthening of a global 
safeguards regime would play a major part in international confidence 
building. That had particular relevance for the smaller nations like 
New Zealand which had to rely on the monitoring capacities of the Agency in 
order to be reassured that the safeguards system was working properly. 


56. New Zealanders were particularly concerned about the fact that such a 
substantial proportion of the world's now considerable nuclear resources 
continued to be devoted to military purposes. They were totally opposed to 
the present situation in which, although the world already had more than 
enough nuclear weapons for its destruction, the bulk of the world's precious 
resources of nuclear technology continued to be expended on making and 
stockpiling more and more sophisticated nuclear weapons. His country was 
fortunate in being relatively distant from the areas most exposed to nuclear 
confrontation but New Zealanders did not feel that they could remain 
indifferent to the global threat of nuclear destruction. Consequently, with 
the strong support of a clear majority of its people, his Government had 
declared New Zealand to be nuclear-free. No nuclear weapons would be 
tolerated in New Zealand. 
57. At Rarotonga, on 6 August 1985, the 40th anniversary of the destruction 
of Hiroshima, the South Pacific Forum had endorsed, and opened for signature, 


a nuclear-free zone treaty for the South Pacific Region. It had already been 



GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 19 


signed by New Zealand and eight other Pacific countries. It signalled to all 
the world that the member countries of the South Pacific Forum were determined 
to have no nuclear weapons in the region. Under Article 4 of that treaty each 
party undertook to apply Agency safeguards and to support the international 
non-proliferation system based on NPT and the Agency safeguards system. The 
role of the Agency was thus extended to helping provide reciprocal 
verification assurances to all countries within the zone. The treaty also 
extended the benefits and obligations of safeguards procedures to a number of 
very small countries whose technological development was insufficient to 
enable them to participate actively in the meetings and other activities of 
the Agency. In accordance with Annex 2, several of them would be concluding 
safeguards agreements with the Agency within 18 months from the date of entry 
into force of the treaty for that party. 


58. In that regard, he pointed out that, like the other countries belonging 
to the Pacific Forum, New Zealand was dismayed at the French Government's 
continued testing of nuclear weapons at Mururoa Atoll in the South Pacific. 
The international community had been made more keenly aware of that opposition 
by recent events, including the terrorist attack which had led to the sinking 
of the Greenpeace vessel "Rainbow Warrior". He wished to stress New Zealand's 
total opposition to all testing of nuclear weapons in all environments and for 
all time. That was why every year New Zealand, in conjunction with Australia, 
had sponsored in the United Nations General Assembly a resolution calling 
urgently for a complete and comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty. 
59. Those issues were of direct and immediate relevance to the Agency's 
General Conference. The recent NPT Review Conference had shown that it was 
worthwhile for the smaller nations to strive to play a full part in global 
disarmament negotiations. While for technological reasons New Zealand must 
continue to play a relatively small role in the Agency it was pleased to have 
had the opportunity to reaffirm its willingness to participate as fully as it 
could in the deliberations of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.278 
page 20 


REPLY OF THE DELEGATE OF FRANCE 


60. Mr. ERRERA (France), exercising his right of reply, noted that the 
delegate of New Zealand had expressed the opposition of his Government to the 
nuclear tests carried out by France at Muroroa. The problem of putting a stop 
to nuclear weapons tests - namely all tests, because the nuclear powers were 
all carrying out tests, and it was wrong to single out one of them - was, like 
that of setting up denuclearized zones, inseparable from the problem of 
limitng nuclear armaments in the world. It should and could, therefore, be 
dealt with only by the appropriate specialized bodies. The Agency was not the 
appropriate body for solving that question. With regard to the allusions made 
to a recent incident, he would voluntarily refrain from speaking on that 
subject." 
The meeting rose at 10 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
February 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 27 September 1985, at 12.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 


CONTENTS 
Items of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 
The Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material 1-8 
South Africa's nuclear capabilities 9-50 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 9 October 1985, 


**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


85-0379 
0356e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 2 


THE CONVENTION ON THE PHYSICAL PROTECTION OF NUCLEAR MATERIAL (GC(XXIX>/762 
and Add.1-4, GC(XXIX)/INF/229) 


1. The PRESIDENT pointed out that document GC(XXIX)/INF/229 contained 
a report prepared by the Director General pursuant to resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/424 adopted during the previous year's regular session of the 
General Conference. The Annex to that report provided information regarding 
the status of signatures to and ratifications of the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material-. In addition, a draft resolution 
on the subject was now before the Conference in document GC(XXIX)/762; the 
list of co-sponsors could be found in document GC(XXIX)/762/Add.4. 
2. Mr. BOGGS (United States of America), introducing the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/762, welcomed the progress reported 
by the Director General with regard to the signing and ratification of the 
Convention. It was important for all countries to accede to the Convention 
because it was the first multilateral agreement in its field and because its 
entry into force would be a significant step towards intensifying international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Over the past 
few years the need for the protection of nuclear material had become 
increasingly clear and the Convention was an appropriate legal mechanism for 
that purpose. In content, the draft resolution was similar to the previous 
year's, and he hoped it would again be adopted by consensus. 


3. Mr. HIREMATH (India) recalled that his delegation had already 
expressed its reservations with regard to the draft resolutions on the 
Convention which had been submitted and adopted at the twenty-seventh and 
twenth-eighth regular sessions of the General Conference. His country had not 
signed the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material as it 
contained discriminatory elements: for example, the final paragraph of the 
preamble would result in nuclear-weapon States lying outside the scope of the 
Convention while non-nuclear-weapon States would be bound by it. His 
delegation also had difficulties with regard to Article 2, Article 1(c) and 
Article 4. 
1/ INFCIRC/274/Rev.1. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 3 


4. Prior to the establishment of the Convention, his country and others 
had stressed that the Convention should cover all transported material, 
whether for military or for civil use. Nuclear materials intended for civil 
purposes were very insignificant compared with those for military use, and the 
danger of unauthorized diversion of the latter was much greater. 
5. The United States delegate had spoken of progress, but the number of 
signatories to the Convention had hardly increased and many of those countries 
which had signed it continued to have serious reservations about it. He 
therefore failed to understand the point of the new draft resolution. 
6. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his Government 
was unable to support the draft resolution owing to the discriminatory 
elements contained in the Convention - namely, those elements which excluded 
the nuclear-weapon States. 
7. The PRESIDENT took, it that the Conference wished to adopt the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/762. 
8. It was so decided. 
SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXIX)/767/Rev.1 and Add.1 and 2) 


9. The PRESIDENT drew the attention of delegates to the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/767/Rev.1, which had been submitted 
by Nigeria on behalf of the African Group and was co-sponsored by Jordan and 
the Islamic Republic of Iran. 
10. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) recalled that in resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/423, 
adopted the previous year, the General Conference had demanded that South 
Africa submit all its nuclear installations and facilities to Agency 
safeguards. It had further requested the Board of Governors and the Director 
General to contribute to the implementation of United Nations General Assembly 
resolutions 38/181 A/B, 38/39 A,F and G and 38/36 A in what related to the 
Agency and especially the request to the Agency to refrain from extending, 
directly or indirectly, to South Africa any facilities which might assist it 
in its nuclear plans. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 4 


11. In July 1985, the United Nations Security Council had adopted 
Resolution 569, in which it urged Member States to adopt measures against 
South Africa including the prohibition of all new contracts in the nuclear 
field. 
12. South Africa continued to ignore all resolutions adopted by the General 
Conference and the United Nations General Assembly. Two letters addressed by 
the Director General to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of South Africa 
relating to safeguards had remained unanswered. In accordance with operative 
paragraph 7 of resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/423, the General Conference must at 
its present session take appropriate action if South Africa had not yet 
complied with that resolution, and Member States should therefore support the 
draft resolution now before the Conference in document GC(XXIX)/767/Rev.1. 
13. With regard to operative paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, he had 
been informed by the Director General that since Namibia had become a Member 
of the Agency in February 1983 the Agency had stopped using information 
provided by South Africa in preparing the entry in the Red Book, on Uranium 
Resources, Production and Demand and had consulted and would continue to 
consult with the United Nations Council for Namibia on that matter. 
14. Mr. BOGGS (United States of America) proposed that operative 
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/767/Rev.1 
be voted on separately in accordance with Rule 75 of the Rules of Procedure of 
the General Conference. 
15. His Government opposed sanctions directed at undermining the economy of 
South Africa, such as the ban on the purchase of South African uranium which 
was suggested in operative paragraph 3. That paragraph also called for the 
cessation of all nuclear co-operation with South Africa, regardless of who in 
that country might be harmed by such a sanction or of what effects it might 
have on the international non-proliferation regime. Moreover, a complete 
cessation of co-operation would undermine essential non-proliferation 

GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 5 


initiatives with South Africa designed to enhance acceptance of safeguards, to 


reduce the use of highly enriched uranium and to remove incentives to 


reprocess spent fuel. 


16. His delegation therefore opposed operative paragraph 3 and requested 
that it be taken out of the draft resolution and voted on separately. 


17. Mr. HIREMATH (India) expressed his delegation's full support for 
the people of South Africa, for those suffering long years of detention and 
for the victims of police brutality and organized State terrorism. The 
international community should do everything possible to convince the South 
African regime that its policies were not only reprehensible but also counterproductive. 
18. Adoption of the draft resolution submitted by the Nigerian delegation 
on behalf of the African Group would constitute the most appropriate action to 
be taken by the Conference. The resolution should be voted upon in its 
entirety, since operative paragraph 3 was consistent with the rest of the 
resolution. 
19. Mr. ZHOU (China) commended the Director General and the 
Secretariat on their efforts in connection with resolution GC(XXVI11)/423. 


20. The South African authorities were insisting on their policy of 
apartheid and continued to defy resolutions adopted by the United Nations 
General Assembly, the Security Council and the Agency's General Conference. 
His delegation therefore urged all Member States to stop providing the South 
African authorities with any equipment which might be of direct or indirect 
assistance in the production of nuclear materials and to support the draft 
resolution now before the Conference so that the Director General could 
continue to take the necessary steps. 
21. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote on whether operative 
paragraph 3 should be retained in the draft resolution set forth in document 
GC(XXIX)/767/Rev.1. 
22. There were 63 votes in favour and 7 against, with 12 abstentions. 
Paragraph 3 was accordingly retained. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 6 


23. The PRESIDENT then asked the Conference to vote on the draft 
resolution as a whole. 
24. There were 88 votes in favour and 0 against, with 19 abstentions. The 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/767/Rev.1 was adopted. 
25. Mr. HEDEMANN (Norway), speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries 
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway, said that he wished to explain 


his vote. 


26. The Nordic Governments considered apartheid a serious threat to peace 
and stability in southern Africa and believed that effective international 
pressure must be brought to bear on the South African Government in order to 
end apartheid by peaceful means. They had repeatedly advocated that the 
United Nations Security Council adopt mandatory and comprehensive economic 
sanctions against South Africa, and they considered that that country's 
nuclear installations and facilities should be submitted to Agency safeguards 
and that Member States should halt all nuclear collaboration with South 
Africa. Also, the Nordic countries themselves had also taken a number of 
unilateral measures to increase pressure on South Africa, and it was their 
policy neither to co-operate nor to maintain contacts with South Africa in the 
nuclear field. 
27. That being his country's basic attitude towards apartheid, his 
delegation had been able to vote for the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXIX)/767/Rev.1 despite its reservations on certain points of the 
resolution. 
28. Mr. HAUSTRATE (Belgium) said that his delegation had been unable 
to support the resolution even though Belgium had, in the United Nations and 
other forums, constantly expressed its condemnation and rejection of the 
apartheid regime. As far as sanctions were concerned, his country stood by 
the measures recently decided by the European Communities. 
29. However, his country had always insisted on strict respect for the 
principle of universality within the United Nations system, and it considered 
that several paragraphs of the draft resolution, in particular operative 
paragraphs 5 and 9, could be interpreted as an attack on the rights and 
privileges of an Agency Member State. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 7 


30. His delegation was against the requirement in operative paragraph 2 
that South Africa should submit immediately all its nuclear installations and 
facilities to Agency safeguards, since the application of safeguards could not 
be considered as a sanction. 
31. His delegation was also opposed to operative paragraphs 3, 5 and 9, and 
would have voted against all of them had they been voted on separately. 
32. Mr. BOGGS (United States of America) said that his delegation had 
abstained from voting on the resolution because his Government, while 
continuing unequivocally to support the principle of universality, considered 
that the resolution, as presented, did not infringe South Africa's fundamental 
rights of membership. 
33. His Government specifically understood that operative paragraph 5 of 
the resolution, which called upon the Agency and Member States to refrain from 
participating in any seminars or technical and scientific meetings in South 
Africa, did not preclude the Agency from sponsoring seminars or meetings in 
South Africa. Rather, it prevented the Agency from participating in meetings 
in South Africa sponsored by other entities, including South Africa. His 
Government further understood that paragraph 5 would not stand in the way of 
the Agency's efforts to encourage broader South African acceptance of 
safeguards. In particular, it would not prevent activities such as the recent 
visit by Agency technical and safeguards personnel to South African nuclear 
facilities. Any interpretation of the resolution that would tend to prohibit 
such visits or the negotiation of safeguards agreements with South Africa 
would run counter to the essential non-proliferation activities of the Agency. 
34. His country also understood that the resolution's sponsors had 
clarified the intent of operative paragraph 9 so that it should not infringe 
South Africa's fundamental rights of membership. The exclusion in paragraph 9 
would apply only to meetings of a type not available to all Members and was 
intended solely to prevent South Africa from speaking for Namibia in meetings 
specifically relating to Namibian uranium. On that understanding, his 

GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 8 


delegation could regard operative paragraph 9 as not barring South Africa from 


its fundamental rights of membership and therefore as not violating the 
principle of universality. 


35. His Government opposed sanctions directed at undermining the economy of 
South Africa, such as the ban suggested in operative paragraph 3 on the 
purchase of South African uranium. That paragraph also called for the 
cessation of all nuclear co-operation with South Africa, regardless of who in 
that country might be harmed by such a sanction or of its effects on the 
international non-proliferation regime. As such a sanction would also 
jeopardize essential non-proliferation initiatives with South Africa, his 
delegation had opposed operative paragraph 3 while abstaining on the 
resolution as a whole. 
36. Mr. MORDEN (Canada) said that there were elements in the 
resolution which his delegation favoured, such as the call on South Africa to 
place all its facilities under Agency safeguards. However, there were other 
clauses which cast doubt on the principle of universality in the United 
Nations system. Canada had therefore abstained from voting on the resolution. 
37. Hr. ALVES (Brazil) said that his country strongly condemned the 
apartheid regime and was therefore in favour of the resolution; a different 
wording of preambular paragraph (f) and of operative paragraph 2 of the 
resolution would nevertheless have been preferable. 
38. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that the resolution contained' 
important elements to which, in view of his country's opposition to the 
apartheid system in South Africa, his delegation could fully subscribe, in 
particular operative paragraph 2 concerning the application of Agency 
safeguards to all nuclear installations in South Africa. 
39. The Netherlands could not support some of the paragraphs, as their 
wording came too close to affecting the rights and privileges of South Africa 
as a Member of the Agency, and thus to affecting the principle of universality. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 9 


40. Referring to the recent decision by Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the 
member States of the European Communities, he stressed that pressure had to be 
exerted on the South African Government to change the existing system. 
41. Mr. WILMSHURST (United Kingdom) emphasized that his delegation's 
abstention from voting on the resolution should not be interpreted as implying 
any change in his Government's abhorrence of the apartheid system or as 
reflecting any change in its policy of prohibiting the export to South Africa 
of any equipment which could contribute in any way to South Africa's nuclear 
programme. 
42. His delegation had abstained, firstly, because his Government did not 
agree with the statement in operative paragraph 6 and the implication in 
operative paragraph 10 that the mining and exploitation of Namibian uranium by 
South Africa was illegal, even though his Government continued to consider 
South Africa's administration of Namibia as unlawful. Secondly, his 
Government could not accept the contents of operative paragraph 7 and did not 
consider that British trade with Namibia conflicted with any international 
obligation. 
43. Mr. NOE (Italy) said that his Government condemned apartheid and 
the recent events in South Africa and had decided to take appropriate 
measures. However, the Italian delegation had abstained from voting on the 
resolution under discussion because the wording used in certain paragraphs ran 
counter to the principle of universality. 
44. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) said that, although his country utterly 
rejected and condemned apartheid in South Africa and disapproved of that 
country's illegal occupation of Namibia, his delegation had nevertheless 
abstained from voting on the resolution because it contained paragraphs 
demanding that co-operation between the Agency and South Africa should cease 
and that South Africa should be excluded from Agency activities. That went 
against the priciple of universality in international organizations, which 
Chile fully supported. In any case, political matters should be discussed in 
other international forums. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.279 
page 10 


45. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) felt that the Agency was basically a 
scientific and technical body and should therefore not become involved in the 
internal affairs of Member States. Its work should be directed at improving 
the professional and technical capacity of its Members and at maintaining 
safety standards and applying safeguards in all Member States without 
exception. 
46. His country fully supported the principle of universality and the right 
of all peoples to participate in the activities of international organizations 
which were directed towards increasing the well-being of those peoples, in the 
present case by the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
47. On the other hand, his country had stated sufficiently often in the 
United Nations - the correct forum for political matters - that it was firmly 
against apartheid. Therefore his country had chosen to abstain from voting on 
the resolution. 
48. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) said that his country was concerned at 
developments in South Africa and condemned the apartheid regime. His 
Government was working diplomatically for change, but felt that sanctions in 
the form of economic boycotting were inappropriate. 
49. Certain parts of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXIX)/767/Rev.1 proposed restrictions which would infringe the rights and 
privileges of South Africa as a Member of the Agency, thereby endangering the 
principle of universality, which was essential to the Agency and which, 
together with the equal treatment of States, formed the fundamental basis for 
Swiss foreign relations. His delegation had therefore intended to vote 
against operative paragraph 3 of the resolution and had abstained when the 
whole of the resolution had been put to the vote. 
50. Mr. TSUKADA (Japan) said that some of the paragraphs contained in 
the draft resolution were difficult for his Government to support. However, 
in view of recent developments in South Africa and various other elements, 
Japan had abstained from voting on the resolution. His Government's 
opposition to the racist policies of South Africa remained unchanged. 
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
March 1986* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 27 September 1985, at 3.30 p.m. 
President: Mr. MANOUAN (Coted'Ivoire) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
10 Consequences of the Israeli military 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear research 
reactor and the standing threat to 
repeat this attack for: (a) the development 
of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes; and (b) the role 
and activities of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency 1-79 
11 Protection of nuclear installations 
devoted to peaceful purposes against 
armed attacks 80 - 90 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 10 December 1985, 


**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-981 
0407e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
page 2 


CONSEQUENCES OF THE ISRAELI MILITARY ATTACK ON THE IRAQI NUCLEAR RESEARCH 
REACTOR AND THE STANDING THREAT TO REPEAT THIS ATTACK FOR (a) THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF NUCLEAR ENERGY FOR PEACEFUL PURPOSES; AND (b) THE ROLE AND ACTIVITIES OF 
THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY (GC(XXIX)/764 and Add.1 to 3, 
GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2) 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that in resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 of 
the previous year the General Conference had, among other things, requested 
the Director General to seek personally from the Government of Israel certain 
undertakings and to report to the present session of the General Conference. 
Since the adoption of that resolution, the Director General had held numerous 
consultations on which he had reported to the Board the week before and in his 
statement at the opening of the present session of the General Conference. 
2. 
The President also recalled that two draft resolutions had been 
*/ 
submitted under agenda item 10: one by Iraq- (document GC(XXIX)/764) and 
the other by Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden (document 
GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2). 


3. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), introducing the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXIX)/764, said that since the Israeli attack, in 1981, on the 
Iraqi nuclear reactor, which had been under Agency safeguards, Iraq had been 
living under the standing threat of further aggression against its nuclear 
facilities. Furthermore, a similar threat had been made by the Prime Minister 
of Israel and confirmed by many other officials of the Israeli regime. Iraq, 
just as the General Conference itself, had been waiting several years for 
Israel to comply clearly and explicitly with the provisions of the relevant 
resolutions of the Security Council and of the Agency's General Conference. 
The following countries were co-sponsors of the draft resolution: 
Algeria, Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, 
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia (document 
GC(XXIX)/764/Add.1 to 3). 



GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 3 


and for it to withdraw the stated threat to repeat its armed attack on Iraqi 
nuclear facilities. The persistence of that threat was highly detrimental to 
the Agency and its safeguards system and violated the right of peoples to use 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes for their development; it was also in 
contradiction to the United Nations Charter and the Agency's Statute. 


4. Draft resolution GC(XXIX)/764, submitted jointly by 15 countries, was 
clear; it was the logical result of Israel's equivocal behaviour and its 
refusal to comply with General Conference resolutions. The letter which the 
Resident Representative of Israel had circulated on 23 September to the 
General Conference treated the matter with deliberate ambiguity since it did 
not mention Iraq's nuclear facilities and did not clearly define what 
constituted peaceful nuclear facilities. The proposed draft resolution 
referred in the preamble to resolution 487 (1981) of the Security Council and 
to previous resolutions of the General Conference. In the operative 
paragraphs it requested the Security Council to implement its 
resolution 487 (1981) and called on the General Conference to implement its 
resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409, since Israel had not given the undertakings 
called for in that resolution and in resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425. 
Resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 had been the result of many concessions and 
represented the minimum amount of pressure which could be exerted on Israel. 


5. Israel's devious position put forward by the delegate of that country 
in his statement to the General Conference had been reflected in a press 
statement released on 26 September 1985 by the Austrian Press Agency. The 
Israeli Ambassador had stated that Israel would consider that the Agency's 
opinion that a reactor was non-military was "a very strong indication that the 
facility is used for peaceful purposes only". In reply to a question whether 
it could be concluded that Israel would not attack any facility judged to be 
non-military by the safeguards inspectors, the Ambassador had said that if the 
questioner understood it like that, he was not going to contradict him. Such 
was the situation. Israel had made its position clear and it was up to each 
of the delegates to the General Conference to interpret that statement as they 
thought fit. 

GC<XXIX)/OR.280 
page 4 


6. Iraq had been loyal to the Agency in making a serious effort to help it 
to discharge its duties in the best possible way. Iraq was not the one 
endangering the Agency, blackmailing it or seeking to prevent the General 
Conference from carrying out its work. The General Conference should adopt 
draft resolution GC(XXIX)/764 and refuse to countenance threats and 
blackmail. In doing so it would come out in support of the sovereignty and 
legitimate right of peoples to express themselves freely without constraint. 
The General Conference and the majority of Member States had supported Iraq in 
previous years and his delegation was convinced that such support would still 
be forthcoming. 
7. Mr TOERNUDD (Finland), introducing the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2 on behalf of the five Nordic countries, said 
that the main point to be emphasized was that armed attacks on safeguarded 
nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes represented a grave danger to 
international peace and security and were therefore absolutely unacceptable. 
The premeditated attack in 1981 had also constituted a serious threat to the 
Agency's entire safeguards system, which was the corner-stone of the 
international non-proliferation regime and so vital for all countries, whether 
or not party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
8. It should not be forgotten that Iraq had been a party to NPT since its 
entry into force in 1970; that under that treaty Iraq had agreed to place all 
its nuclear activities under Agency safeguards; and that the Agency had 
certified that those safeguards had been applied to its satisfaction. 
Conversely, Israel was not a party to NPT and had not submitted all its 
nuclear activities to Agency safeguards. 
9. The international community and the international bodies where 
different aspects of the matter were being discussed would still have to 
devote a great deal of attention to the specific consequences of the Israeli 
attack in 1981 and also to the overall problem of protecting nuclear 
facilities against armed aggression. To mention but one example, Iraq had 
still not received compensation for the destruction it had suffered. Under 
those circumstances, the Nordic countries understood Iraq's position very well. 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 5 


10. The sponsors of the draft resolution felt, however, that as far as the 
Agency was concerned it was now possible to conclude the discussion of that 
item, while re-affirming at the same time a number of important principles, 
which were laid down in the operative paragraphs of the draft resolution. 
Affirmation of those principles would, in his view, create a very strong 
political barrier to any further attempts to perpetrate such armed attacks. 
11. It was important to note in that connection the statements made by the 
representative of Israel, which constituted a commitment going such a long way 
towards allaying the concern expressed by the Agency that the matter could now 
be dropped. Draft resolution GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2 was not intended for the 
benefit of any particular delegation or party to the debate. Its only 
objective was to preserve the Agency's effectiveness and capabilities in the 
pursuit of its principal objectives. 
12. Mr. CONSTENLA UMANA (Costa Rica) noted that in operative 
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution submitted by Iraq the General Conference 
"reaffirms the inalienable right of all States to acquire and develop nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes." Yet in operative paragraph 2 of the same draft 
resolution, Iraq openly denied a Member State that right by calling for 
measures against Israel which would restrict, even rescind, the rights of that 
State. Furthermore, with regard to the commitment not to attack or threaten 
to attack nuclear facilities in Iraq that had been demanded from Israel, his 
country felt that Israel had already given such an undertaking in the letter 
of 23 September 1985 from the Resident Representative of Israel to the 
Director General of the Agency. 
13. His delegation would therefore oppose the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXIX)/764 and urged other delegations to do likewise, since it was not 
possible to support a resolution which, apart from containing such obvious 
contradictions, infringed the equality of rights of all Member States of the 
United Nations. In addition, he wished to point out that the undertaking 
given by Israel in the letter to the Director General to respect and refrain 
from attacking nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes in Iraq or 
elsewhere was an unprecedented move. One could only hope that other Member 
States would follow Israel's example by taking action evincing a sincere 
commitment to the cause of world peace. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
page 6 


14. Mr. BOGGS (United States of America) recalled that the previous 
year his Government had expressed its conviction that the statements made at 
that time by Israeli representatives fully met the requirements of the 
resolution which was then under consideration. In fact, those statements went 
much further than those made by any other Government on the subject. That was 
why his delegation had been opposed to resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425. 
15. Nevertheless, during the past year, his Government had wholeheartedly 
supported the Director General's efforts to carry out the mandate entrusted to 
him by that resolution. It had welcomed the widespread consultations which 
the Director General had skilfully conducted. From time to time his country 
had, like other countries, been informed of the progress achieved. That was 
why he was in a position to state that what the Director General had been able 
to accomplish went far beyond the Israeli statements of the previous year, 
which the United States had already found to be satisfactory. 
16. Moreover, the General Conference had before it the text of the letter 
of 23 September from the Resident Representative of Israel to the Director 
General, which further clarified the Israeli position in the matter. Finally, 
only the day before, during the General Debate, the Director General of the 
Israeli Atomic Energy Commission had specifically dealt with other matters of 
concern to some delegations. The deliberations should therefore be ended; if 
anything, there was more reason to praise the Director General than to dwell 
on the draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764. 
17. For a long time his country had been deeply perturbed by the growing 
tendency, well illustrated by the draft resolution at present before the 
General Conference, to discuss extraneous political issues in the Board of 
Governors and the General Conference. Deliberations of that nature could only 
diminish the Agency's ability to implement the activities laid down in its 
Statute and did not serve the interests of either the Agency or its Member 
States. 
18. Under those conditions, his delegation wished to reiterate the firm and 
unyielding position of the United States Government in the matter: any 
restriction on the rights and privileges of any Member State for reasons alien 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 7 


to the Statute was a direct and totally unacceptable violation of the cardinal 
international principle of universality and was likely to have implications 
for the participation of the United States in the Agency's affairs, as had 
already been explained on many occasions. 


19. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said that his country would oppose draft 
resolution GC(XXIX)/764 because it believed that political issues were better 
discussed in the appropriate fora. He wished to stress once again the purely 
technical role of the Agency which, as an international organization, should 
always foster the principle of universality. Finally, his country requested 
that matters of a purely political nature, such as the draft resolution 
submitted by Iraq, should no longer appear on the agenda for future sessions 
of the Agency's General Conference. 
20. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) noted that the Director General, 
when reporting on the numerous efforts he had made with the aid of States 
playing an important international role to obtain a written statement from the 
Israeli Government withdrawing the Israeli Prime Minister's threat to attack 
other nuclear facilities in Iraq or in any other country in the region, had 
stated that he had unfortunately not been able to achieve any conclusive 
results. Following the Director General's statement, the Resident 
Represetative of Israel had had distributed a letter without document number, 
dated 23 September 1985, which his (Mr. Haddad's) delegation proposed to 
analyse in form and content." 
21. As far as its form was concerned, the letter was unacceptable because 
of the fact that it stemmed from the Resident Representative of Israel - the 
same representative who had informed the Member States of the Agency in 
document INFCIRC/324 on 6 May 1985 that "no one but the Prime Minister and the 
Foreign Minister and their appointed representatives express the authorized 
policies of the Government" with regard to attacks on nuclear facilities. The 
General Conference was not in possession of any document proving that the 
Resident Representative had been authorized by the Prime Minister or Foreign 
Minister of Israel to speak on that policy. Sharon, as an Israeli minister, 
was more entitled to talk about Israel's policy than the Israeli Resident 
Representative to the Agency. When he, Sharon, had attempted to speak on the 
policy of attacking nuclear facilities, it had been said that he had no 
authority to do so. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
page 8 


22. As far as the content of the letter was concerned, it included no new 
information from the competent Israeli authorities just mentioned. It 
contained only a few conclusions drawn by the Israeli Resident Representative 
on the basis of information which had already been submitted to the previous 
session of the General Conference (which had rejected it), and that 
information related to Israel's general policy as outlined by the Prime 
Minister. 
23. In the second main paragraph on page 2 of the Resident Representative's 
letter, which in substance repeated what had already been said in 
sub-paragraph (c) of the third paragraph on page 1, one could read that 
"Israel holds that all States must refrain from attacking or threatening to 
attack nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes, and that the 
safeguards system operated by IAEA brings evidence of the peaceful operation 
of a facility." That statement did not involve any commitment on Israel's 
part. It was merely a hope, a dream. The letter stated that the Agency's 
safeguards system brought evidence of the peaceful operation of a facility. 
Those two paragraphs expressed a vague hope entertained by Israel but did not 
make it clear that the safeguards system brought the evidence that a 
safeguarded facility was in fact used for peaceful purposes. But there was a 
great difference between providing evidence and providing the evidence. A 
similar case had occurred in the wording of Security Council resolution 242 of 
1967, which called upon Israel to withdraw from occupied Arab territories 
instead of calling upon it to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories. 
Member States should not allow themselves to be taken in again. 
24. The third paragraph on page 2 of the letter contained an undertaking by 
Israel that under its stated policy it would not attack any nuclear facilities 
devoted to peaceful purposes. But everyone knew that Israel's stated policy 
had already led it to attack the Iraqi nuclear reactor on one occasion. 
Moreover, the paragraph in question made no mention of safeguards and left it 
to Israel to decide for itself whether or not a facility was devoted to 
peaceful purposes. The letter simply repeated what had been said in previous 
letters addressed by Israel to the General Conference, which the latter had 
not accepted." 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 9 


25. For those reasons, his delegation rejected both the form and the 
content of the letter addressed to the Director General by the Resident 
Representative of Israel and expressed the hope that delegates would support 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764 with a view to implementing 
operative paragraph 3 of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409. 
26. The delegate of the United States had said that the issue was one 
involving political considerations. If there were political considerations 
involved, it was only because the United States had said that there were. As 
he had done in the General Committee, the delegate of the United States was 
also threatening the General Conference in one way or another, saying that the 
rights of any Member State of the Agency should not be infringed. The United 
States had taken a leading part in the drafting of the Statute, in which it 
was laid down that any State violating it should be punished and that its 
rights of membership should be suspended. The stand taken by the United 
States was a purely political one. 
27. His delegation invited the General Conference to reject all forms of 
threat and to refuse to allow anyone to be blackmailed at the present session 
of the General Conference. If any Member States wished to walk out, they were 
free to do so. The many other countries could certainly do without their 
participation. 
28. Mr. MORALES PEDRAZA (Cuba) said that during 1985 his delegation 
had followed with great interest the question of the consequences of the 
Israeli military attack and had made its position known each time the matter 
had been debated. He wished to thank the Director General for his painstaking 
efforts to implement the provisions of paragraph 4 of 
resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425. 
29. As might have been expected, the Israeli Government had not taken the 
fundamental points of that resolution into consideration and had done nothing 
indicating that it was really disposed to comply with it, especially with 
operative paragraphs 3 and 6. 
30. To afford Governments which behaved as Israel did in a given region the 
slightest opportunity of adding nuclear weapons to their military arsenals was 
extremely risky, and his delegation had therefore supported the call to Israel 
by the majority of Agency Member States for submission of all its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
page 10 


31. It was impossible, moreover, to remain indifferent to the fact that a 
Government should destroy the peaceful nuclear facilities of another State, 
and endanger the lives of innocent people, when it believed that such action 
served its own interests. Not to take effective measures to force a 
Government such as Israel's to think before committing such acts was 
tantamount to recognizing, involuntarily, the right of the country attacked to 
perpetrate similar acts in defense of its own population against the 
aggressor. Cuba did not acknowledge the right of any country, however large 
or powerful, to destroy the peaceful achievements of another country, using 
the interests of national security as a pretext. 
32. That was why his delegation believed that the Israeli Government had not 
complied with the fundamentals of resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 and that, until 
it did so, every effort should continue to be made to bring about a sincere 
change of policy; above all, there should be vigorous action to prevent Israel 
developing its nuclear capability. He hoped that the General Conference would 
be instrumental in compelling Israel to comply with resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/425. No pressure or threat of retaliation against the Agency 
should stop the General Conference discharging that duty. His delegation would 
accordingly vote in favour of the draft resolution in document GC(XXlX)/764. 
33. Mr. MQLITOR (Luxembourg), speaking on behalf of the member States 
of the European Community, said that those countries would vote against draft 
resolution GC(XXIX)/764 for two reasons. First, the draft resolution did not 
take into consideration the latest political statement made on behalf of the 
Israeli Government on that matter, and second, operative paragraph 2 infringed 
the rights and privileges of a Member State of the Agency. 
34. The member States of the European Community considered, therefore, that 
the draft resolution submitted by the Nordic countries in document 
GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2 was more appropriate. That draft resolution took account 
of the statement made the day before by the Israeli delegate and reflected a 
better evaluation of the clarifications offered by the Israeli Government in 
response to resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425. 
35. The member States of the European Community had noted, moreover, that 
in his speech the Israeli representative had given an assurance on behalf of 
his Government that Israel would not attack nuclear facilities devoted to 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 11 


peaceful purposes in Iraq or in the Middle East, or in any other part of the 
world. They had also taken note of the fact that Israel had declared that the 
application of the Agency's safeguards system determined whether or not a 
nuclear facility was used for peaceful purposes. 


36. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) pointed out that what Iraq wanted was a 
commitment from the Israeli Government to withdraw its threats to attack 
nuclear facilities in Iraq or anywhere else. In his address at the current 
session of the General Conference, the Director General, recalling the 
Conference's request for him "to seek personally from the Government of Israel 
an undertaking not to carry out any further attacks on nuclear facilities in 
Iraq or on similar facilities in other countries, devoted to peaceful 
purposes ...", had said that those efforts had been inconclusive. It was 
clear that the efforts undertaken by the Director General in pursuance of the 
mandate given to him by the General Conference had not enabled him to obtain 
an undertaking from the Israeli Government not to make any further attacks. 
Hence there was reason to wonder how it was possible to interpret the 
statement of 23 September as an undertaking by Israel to refrain from further 
attacks or why the Israeli Government should thwart the Director General's 
efforts to implement that mandate and seek to surprise delegations with the 
letter of 23 September from the Resident Representative of Israel. 
37. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said he regretted to see that, instead of 
devoting itself to the consideration of positive measures to promote the use 
of nuclear energy, the General Conference was being compelled to spend its 
time examining the tendentious draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXIX)/764, which was both redundant and in contradiction to the Agency's 
Statute, as he had already stated during the General Debate. 
38. The draft resolution was redundant in that operative paragraph 1 
demanded that Israel "withdraw forthwith its stated threat to repeat its 
military attack against Iraqi nuclear installations and to undertake, without 
further delay, to commit itself not to attack or threaten to attack nuclear 
facilities in Iraq." His delegation had made many statements clarifying the 
Israeli Government's policy, which was that nuclear facilities devoted to 

GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
page 12 


peaceful purposes were inviolable from military attacks. His delegation 


referred the General Conference to the statement he had made during the 
2/ 


General Debate.- To the many delegates who had asked him whether Iraq was 
included in the Middle East his reply was that it certainly was. 


39. Moreover, paragraph 2 of the draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764 
called for the suspension of his country's rights and privileges, for which 
purpose, under the terms of the Statute, a two-thirds majority was necessary. 
The draft resolution was based entirely on political issues which bore no 
relation to the General Conference's statutory mandate and introduced a new 
and dangerous element of politicization and discrimination. States could only 
exist within the Agency on an equal basis. 
40. The Agency had now reached a critical point. Not only were the 
equality of Member States and the universality of the Agency at stake, but 
also the future of the Agency as an international body and a technical 
organization entrusted with a specific mission in the nuclear field. To 
involve the Agency and its policy-making organs in extraneous political 
debates would not help to solve the problems facing the Agency. In any event, 
Israel could not contemplate a state of affairs in which its rights and 
privileges were suspended while its obligations as a Member State were 
maintained. His Government urged all responsible delegations to reject the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764. 
41. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) pointed out that the 
problem facing the Agency was one of great significance and that it had to be 
considered from various angles. If the General Conference's resolutions were 
not respected and put into effect, the Agency's credibility would be 
compromised. The point was to ascertain whether or not resolution 
GC(XXVII)/RES/409 had been implemented: his delegation felt that there was a 
consensus to the effect that the resolution had so far not been complied with 
or taken into consideration. The General Conference was therefore confronted 
with a serious problem which threatened the Agency's credibility. With regard 
to the declaration contained in the letter from the Resident Representative of 
Israel, he wondered why, if the Israeli Government had respect for the 


2/ GC(XXIX)/OR.277, paras 34 and 35 of the provisional record. 



GCUX1X)//OR.280 
page 13 


Agency's General Conference, the declaration had not been made the previous 
year. As far as his delegation could see, a mockery had been made of the good 
faith shown by the majority of Member States attending the Conference session. 


42. Furthermore, in other declarations intended to show that some action 
had been taken to satisfy the General Conference's wishes, use had been made 
of the expression "peaceful purposes". The question arose, what were the 
Israeli Government's criteria for determining whether or not an installation 
was intended for peaceful purposes and whether or not it could be attacked. 
It had been said at the current session of the General Conference that the 
Agency's safeguards system provided evidence of the peaceful nature of a given 
installation. Bearing in mind that declaration, and recalling that there were 
in Israel numerous nuclear facilities which were not under Agency safeguards, 
it could easily be concluded that those were Israeli nuclear facilities 
intended not for peaceful purposes, but, on the contrary, for military 
purposes, and that they might represent a threat to world peace. 
43. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) said that, in the letter of 23 September to 
the Director General, the Resident Representative of Israel had confined 
himself to speaking in favour of nuclear energy and to mentioning its 
contribution to health and prosperity, claiming that nuclear facilities 
intended for peaceful purposes should therefore not be subject to attack or 
the threat of attack. Within that context, Israel had proposed that the 
competent authorities should work out an agreement to protect such facilities 
against attack and threat of attack, and had said that by virtue of its stated 
policy it would not attack any facility intended for peaceful purposes, 
wherever it might be situated. 
44. When analysed it was clear that the clarifications and information 
provided in that letter did not satisfy the provisions of resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 or any other resolutions adopted by the General Assembly of 
the United Nations and the Security Council; nor were they in conformity with 
the decisions of the Agency's Board of Governors or with resolutions adopted 
at previous sessions of the Agency's General Conference. In the operative 
part of resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425 Israel was called upon, for example, to 
withdraw its threats of attack, to submit its nuclear facilities to Agency 

GC(XXIX)/OR.280 


page 14 


safeguards and to recognize the right of neighbouring countries to construct 
nuclear reactors devoted to peaceful purposes. However, the letter to the 
Director General did not go beyond general statements on the importance of 
nuclear energy and the role it could play in building a better world, and on 
the need to protect facilities against any form of attack or aggression. 
Apart from that, the letter only repeated what the Resident Representative of 
Israel had already stated the previous year - namely, that Israel fully 
reserved the right to determine whether a nuclear facility was intended for 
peaceful or military purposes. 


45. His delegation therefore felt that the Israeli attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear reactor remained a threat and that the letter from the Resident 
Representative of Israel was still far from a response to what was called for 
from Israel, bearing in mind the resolutions adopted by the international 
community in various international organizations. Given that Israel had 
totally ignored all those resolutions, it was impossible to grant it any 
further concessions or to abandon the stand previously taken on the basis of 
principles of law and justice. 
46. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) felt it appropriate to recall in connection 
with the Israeli delegate's allusion to his country's "stated policy" that it 
had been that policy which had led to the bombing of the Iraqi nuclear 
reactor. It could not now be regarded, therefore, as a factor in protecting 
Iraq's nuclear facilities. 
47. Furthermore, it was wrong to think that the action called for in 
operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764 would 
infringe the rights and privileges of a Member of the Agency. Those rights 
and privileges had to stem from the fact that a given country was an Agency 
Member; it was not a question of the rights of a country in general. The 
Agency was entitled, in accordance with its practice, to acquire the equipment 
it needed, on the basis of its technical specifications and at the most 
favourable prices, from any country, whether or not it was a Member of the 
Agency. The same was true of research contracts, in that connection, there 
were many examples which showed that the Agency purchased equipment from and 
granted contracts to countries which were not Member States of the Agency. 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 15 


The measures called for in operative paragraph 2 did not therefore infringe in 
any way the rights and privileges stemming from membership of the Agency. His 
delegation had discussed those measures in detail with various legal advisers, 
all of whom had been in agreement with that interpretation. 


48. The PRESIDENT said he would now put the two draft resolutions 
under consideration to the vote, taking first the draft contained in document 
GC(XXIX)/764. Before proceeding to the vote, however, he wished to recall 
that, although the President of the General Conference could not take a stand 
on matters of substance, he was nevertheless responsible for the smooth 
functioning of the Conference's session and, therefore, for compliance with 
the Conference's Rules of Procedure. He was required to apply the Rules 
correctly and impartially, which presupposed his having a clear idea of them. 
Hence, whenever necessary, he had to request the opinion of the Director of 
the Legal Division, and he had done so following the submission of the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764; he now called upon the Director of the 
Legal Division to read out the opinion he had formulated. 
49. Mr. ADEDE (Director of the Legal Division) said that the legal 
opinion he had given to the President on certain points in draft resolution 
GC(XXIX)/764 was as follows: 
"A question has been raised as to whether a decision by the 
General Conference on draft resolution GC(XXIX)/764 containing an 
operative paragraph 2 calling for the implementation of operative 
paragraph 3 of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/409 requires a two-thirds 
majority or not. 


"Operative paragraph 3 of resolution 409 is repeated, in part, in 
the text of operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXIX)/764 which reads as follows: 


'Decides to withhold Agency research contracts to Israel, to 


discontinue the purchase of equipment and materials from Israel 
and to refrain from holding seminars, scientific and technical 


meetings in Israel.' 


"In my view, research contracts are one of the normal components 
of attributes of privileges and rights of a Member of the Agency. 
While it cannot be said that a Member State has an inherent right to 
have its equipment and materials purchased by the Agency, or to host 
any of the Agency's meetings, a decision in advance denying a 



GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
page 16 


particular Member the privilege of competing on an equal basis with 
other Members in these matters amounts to a limitation of such 
privileges. Accordingly, the implementation of paragraph 3 of 
resolution 409, as called for in operative paragraph 2 of the present 


^-^ draft resolution, would amount to suspension of the exercise of 
privileges and rights of membership within the meaning of Article XIX.B 
of the Statute. 


"Thus the decision of the General Conference on draft resolution 
GC(XXIX)/764 would require a two-thirds majority." 


50. During the consideration of item 10 of the agenda at the twenty-eighth 
session of the General Conference, a similiar question had been put to him by 
the then President and he had expressed the same opinion. On that occasion, 
however, the matter had not been formally raised. 
51. The PRESIDENT ruled that, in accordance with the opinion which the 
Director of the Legal Division had just given, the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXIX)/764 would require a two-thirds majority for its adoption. 
52. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), referring to Rule 70 of the Rules of 
Procedure, said he would like the General Conference to decide whether the 
matter under consideration had to be settled by a two-thirds majority. 
53. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, in his opinion, the provisions of 
Rule 70 of the Rules of Procedure did not apply in the given instance. In any 
event, he interpreted the comment by the delegate of Iraq as an appeal against 
the ruling he had just given. Consequently, in accordance with the provisions 
of Rule 56, he would put that appeal to the vote immediately. 
54. By 54 votes to 22, with 13 abstentions, the President's ruling was 
upheld. 
55. Mr. KHLESTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), explaining his 
vote on the President's ruling, said that the Soviet position with regard to 
the substance of the matter dealt with in the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXIX)/764 was well known: it was unacceptable that Israel should attack or 
threaten to attack the peaceful nuclear facilities of Iraq or of any other 
country. 
56. The President had ruled that the effect of the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXIX)/764 was to infringe the rights and privileges of a Member 
State of the Agency, and that it would consequently require a two-thirds 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 17 


majority in order to be adopted. As the matter had not been considered by the 


Board of Governors, and as the Board had not made any recommendations in the 


matter pursuant to Article XIX.B of the Agency's Statute, the Soviet 


delegation had been obliged to abstain from voting on the President's ruling. 


57. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to vote on the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/764. 


58. At the request of Mr. Al-Kital (Iraq), a roll-call vote was taken. 
59. Italy, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


60. The result of the vote was as follows; 
In favour; Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Cuba, Cyprus, 
Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
Eypt. German Democratic Republic, Hungary, India, 
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, 
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, 
Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, 
Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, 
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab 
Emirates, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia 


Against; Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Costa 
Rica, Denmark, Finland, France, Federal Republic of 
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Portugal, 
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America 


Abstaining; Brazil, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Coted'Ivoire, 
Ecuador, Gabon, Ghana, Holy See, Kenya, Mexico, Niger, 
Panama, Senegal, Spain, Sri Lanka, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela 


61. There were 41 votes in favour and 30 against, with 19 abstentions. The 
two-thirds majority required being 48, the draft resolution was rejected. 


62. The PRESIDENT, stating that he would now put to the vote the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2, said that, in accordance 


with Rule 73 of the Rules of Procedure, he would not give the floor to 


delegations wishing to explain their vote until after the General Conference 


had taken a decision on that draft resolution. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
page 18 


63. There were 30 votes in favour and 21 against, with 36 abstentions. The 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2 was adopted. 
64. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile), explaining his vote on the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764, said that he had abstained because he 
felt that the draft ran counter to a fundamental principle of international 
organizations whereby no Member State should be treated in a discriminatory 
manner. Furthermore, the draft ran counter to the principle of universality 
in the composition of international bodies, insofar as it was aimed at 
excluding a Member State from the normal activities of the Agency. 
65. At previous sessions of the General Conference, Chile had already made 
it clear that it did not believe such an item should appear on the agenda of 
the General Conference, since it did not concern the Agency directly. The 
work of the General Conference should be marked by a high degree of 
technicality and by high ideals and not be lost in political considerations 
which, however justified, belonged to other fora - for example, the Conference 
on Disarmament. 
66. Lastly, Chile had abstained from voting because it believed that the 
declaration made on the previous day by the delegate of Israel and confirmed 
at the current meeting was a response to the demands of the sponsors of the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764; by virtue of that declaration 
Israel had undertaken not to attack or threaten to attack peaceful nuclear 
facilities, either in the Middle East or elsewhere, and it had been made clear 
that the statement concerned in particular Iraq. 
67. Mr. BELTRAMINO (Argentina) said that his country had voted against 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/764 because it felt that operative 
paragraph 2 of that draft, which provided for action restricting the rights 
and privileges of a Member State, was unacceptable. Argentina had always 
defended that point of view, since it was convinced that to deprive a Member 
State of its rights was not the best way for the Agency to ensure respect for 
its decisions; dialogue and negotiation seemed a more appropriate means of 
inducing States to meet the commitments they had entered into under the terms 
of the Statute and the Charter of the United Nations. As to the events 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 19 


themselves, Argentina had condemned the act of aggression in question in 1981, 
immediately after it had been perpetrated. The General Conference should by 
now have found a suitable solution, but it had unfortunately been unable to do 
so. For reasons of principle known to all, Argentina had also decided to vote 
against the draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2. 


68. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said that his delegation had been unable to 
vote in favour of the draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2 since it 
had misgivings with regard to the preambular paragraphs, which referred to 
resolutions adopted in other bodies on political matters lying outside the 
Agency's scope. Furthermore, he objected strongly to operative paragraph 5, 
which singled out Israel and ignored the numerous other States which had not 
yet placed all their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards, that not 
being required, moreover, by the Statute of the Agency, one of the fundamental 
rules of which, as in all other organizations, was non-discrimination. 
However, as he had already stated during the present session of the General 
Conference, his delegation accepted the substance of the other operative 
paragraphs, especially paragraphs 3 and 4. 
69. Mr. ERRERA (France) said that his delegation had voted in favour 
of the draft resolution submitted by the Nordic countries out of a wish not to 
weaken or otherwise affect an overall compromise, the urgency and importance 
of which he wished, in common with other delegations, to underscore. That was 
why his delegation had approved the draft as it stood, without making its vote 
in favour conditional upon the acceptance of amendments. 
70. However, in order to avoid any misinterpretation of his delegation's 
vote, he wished to state that, with regard to operative paragraph 5, France 
remained opposed to any requirement that a State should place all its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. Furthermore, his delegation had 
reservations concerning the reference in preambular paragraph (k) to other 
organizations where the question of the protection of nuclear facilities 
against armed attack was under consideration. 
71. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) welcomed the adoption of the draft resolution 
in document GC(XXIX)/765/Rev,2, in favour of which his delegation had voted. 
He realized that certain paragraphs of the other draft resolution, which in 

GC(XXIX)/OR.280 
page 20 


his view was complementary to it and which Nigeria had also supported, had not 
been acceptable to all parties, and he regretted that it had not been possible 
to find a common solution. 


72. Mr. WILMSHURT (United Kingdom) wished to make it clear that his 
delegation's vote in favour of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2 did not imply any change in the attitude of his Government, 
which took the expression "peaceful nuclear facilities" used in preambular 
paragraph (g) and in operative paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 7 and 8 of that draft 
resolution to mean any nuclear facility devoted to peaceful activities; that 
was tantamount to saying that the protection afforded to those facilities 
should be laid down in the same terms as those set forth in Article 56 of 
additional Protocol 1 to the Geneva Convention. 
73. Mr. ERNEMANN (Belgium) associated himself with the statement made 
just before by the delegate of France, who had expressed a point of view 
shared by the Belgian delegation. 
74. Mr. ROBOTHAM (Jamaica), explaining his votes on the two draft 
resolutions, said that on several occasions, both at Agency meetings and in 
other international bodies, his delegation had supported Iraqi draft 
resolutions concerning the consequences for the peaceful use of nuclear energy 
of the Israeli military attack on the Iraqi nuclear research reactor and of 
the standing threat to repeat that attack. After careful study of the letter 
of 23 September 1985 to the Director General from the Resident Representative 
of Israel, his delegation felt that it constituted a binding commitment on the 
part of Israel, since, in response to resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425, Israel 
had in that letter reconfirmed the fact that it would neither attack nor 
threaten to attack any nuclear facility devoted to peaceful purposes, either 
in the Middle East or anywhere else. 
75. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that, while his 
delegation wholeheartedly supported the essence of the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXIX)/765/Rev.2, and in particular operative paragraphs 3 and 4, 
as the draft resolution touched on broader issues concerning the need for 
additional legal principles in a matter under consideration elsewhere, he had 
not been able to support it. In that regard he endorsed the comments made by 
the representative of the United Kingdom. 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 21 


76. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), commenting on the Conference's deliberations, 
said he regretted that a matter of such importance for the future of the 
Agency and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had been considered on a 
procedural basis without a fair evaluation. The President's ruling had been 
given too quickly, so that the Iraqi delegation had not had a chance to give 
adequate consideration to the matter. 
77. From the votes on the two draft resolutions it emerged that the 
majority of the delegations present and voting had not taken seriously 
Israel's "manoeuvring", whereby it had pretended to withdraw its threat to 
repeat its armed aggression against Iraqi facilities. The representative of 
Zionism had mocked the General Conference and all delegations, including those 
which had shown understanding and which had argued in his favour. Israel had 
not voted in favour of the draft resolution submitted by the Nordic countries, 
which showed that it wanted to back down as soon as possible from what the 
Israeli Government called its new policy. In the light of such behaviour on 
the part of the Israeli entity, no one could feel secure from attack. 
Yielding to pressure, threats and blackmail would only encourage Israel to 
persevere in its policy of aggression for as long it enjoyed the support of 
certain countries, and especially the United States of America. 
78. His delegation felt that it was duty-bound to continue to claim its 
legitimate rights and to demand, within the international organizations, and 
particularly the Agency, the withdrawal of threats of attack so that the 
future peaceful uses of nuclear energy would be guaranteed. 
79. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, when he had given his ruling on 
the basis of the opinion of the Agency's most competent authority on such 
matters, namely the Director of the Legal Divison, the Iraqi delegation had 
not asked for time in order to consider the ruling. He had taken it that the 
point of the remarks made by the delegate of Iraq was to contest his ruling 
and had therefore put that ruling to the vote, in accordance with the Rules of 
Procedures. 

GC(XXIX)/0R.280 
page 22 


PROTECTION OF NUCLEAR INSTALLATIONS DEVOTED TO PEACEFUL PURPOSES AGAINST ARMED 
ATTACKS (GC(XXIX)/754, GC(XXIX)/768, and Add.1 and 2) 


80. The PRESIDENT said that the item now before the General Conference 
had been included in the agenda at the request of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran, which had submitted an explanatory memorandum contained in document 
GC(XXIX>/754. The General Conference also had before it, under that item, a 
draft resolution entitled "Protection of nuclear installations devoted to 
peaceful purposes against armed attacks", which was reproduced in document 
GC(XXIX)/768. 
81. Mr. BELTRAMINO (Argentina), introducing the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXIX)/768 on behalf of his own delegation and of the 
delegations of Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of Iran, 
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, the 
Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela and Yugoslavia, pointed out that since the 
adoption of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407 the majority of countries wished to 
take, within the framework of the Agency and other competent bodies, 
international measures founded on uncontested and forward-looking principles 
with a view to preventing armed attacks on nuclear facilities and the very 
grave consequences which could result from such attacks. 
82. Aware of the extremely grave consequences of an armed attack on 
peaceful nuclear facilities, and convinced that peace must be the main 
objective of all States and that the Agency had a role to play within the 
scope of its competence, a group of countries had, at the twenty-seventh 
session of the General Conference, taken an initiative aimed at prohibiting 
armed attacks. The consequences of such attacks could be harmful beyond 
measure, and there were three reasons for that: first, they would be a threat 
to international peace and might easily unleash an armed conflict; second, 
they would have disastrous radiological consequences; third, they would deal a 
direct blow to the Agency and its statutory objectives. It had to be borne in 
mind that the radiological risk arising from the destruction of a nuclear 
facility could be worse than that caused by a nuclear explosion. 
83. The formula proposed in the draft resolution under consideration was 
sufficiently general to apply to all peaceful facilities, and its aim was to 
protect all members of the public who might be affected. Its sole aim was to 

GC(XXIX)//OR.280 
page 23 


ensure that the Agency and its Member States continued to give thought to a 
very delicate matter, considered by the sponsors of the draft to be of vital 


importance for all States and for the Agency. They had drawn it up with the 
greatest care, bearing in mind, inter alia, the competence of the Committee on 
Disarmament and the text of resolution GC(XXVII)/RES/407, adopted by a 
considerable majority in 1983. That was why any concepts which lacked clarity 
or which deviated in one way or another from the initial proposal had been 
avoided. 


84. He thanked the various delegations for the contributions they had made 
to the preparation of the draft. Those contributions had been taken into 
consideration without the prime objective of the document being altered. He 
hoped that the draft resolution, the ideas and aims of which were clear, would 
have the support of all the Member States. 
85. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), recalling that draft 
resolution GC<XXIX)/768 urged all Member States to make further efforts aimed 
at the prompt adoption of binding international rules prohibiting armed 
attacks against all nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes, said 
that, although his country was clearly aware of the concerns raised by that 
issue, it did not nevertheless consider the Agency an appropriate forum for 
dealing with the matter. If it was to be discussed at all, the appropriate 
forum was the Committee on Disarmament. 
86. The United States believed that the question of new measures for 
protection against armed attacks raised a number of serious military, 
technical and legal questions. His country was certainly opposed to all 
threats or use of force against States - that being a violation of the United 
Nations Charter - including attacks against nuclear facilities. 
87. In the Committee on Disarmament, the United States confined itself to 
considering whether further measures for protection against such attacks were 
feasible, necessary or desirable. However, the draft resolution under 
discussion proposed that binding international rules prohibiting armed attacks 
against all nuclear facilities should be adopted. It therefore prejudged the 
outcome of the discussions taking place in the Committee on Disarmament. It 
was mainly for that reason that his delegation was opposed to the draft 
resolution. 

GC(XX1X)/OR.280 
page 24 


88. The PRESIDENT, pointing out that the opinions expressed by 
delegations would be duly reflected in the record of the meeting, said he took 
it that the General Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXIX)/768. 
89. It was so decided 
90. Mr. MORDEN (Canada), explaining his country's position with regard 
to the draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/768, said that, had it been put 
to the vote, Canada would have been in favour of it, simply in order to 
confirm the fact that his delegation endorsed its objectives. He believed, 
however, that it would be more appropriate to consider the matter in the 
Committee on Disarmament, which was in fact already dealing with it. In that 
connection, he drew attention to the fact that the Final Declaration of the 
Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which had just ended, had acknowledged that the 
matter was under consideration in the Committee on Disarmament. The Final 
Declaration also pointed out the unanimous concern about the possibility of an 
attack against facilities under safeguards and the risks inherent in such an 
attack. 
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
International Atomic Energy Agency February 1986* 
GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-NINTH REGULAR SESSION: 23-27 SEPTEMBER 1985 
PROVISIONAL RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 


on Friday, 27 September 1985, at 8.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. MANOUAN (Coted'Ivoire) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
Oral report by the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole on the 
following items: 1-31 
The Agency's accounts for 1984 13 
The Agency's budget for 1986 14 
The financing of safeguards 15 
Report of the Joint Inspection Unit 
on the International Atomic Energy 
Agency's Technical Co-operation 16 
Scale of assessment of Members' 
contributions for 1986 17 
The financing of technical 
assistance 18 - 22 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 23 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute 24 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute 
as a whole 25 - 31 
22 Examination of delegates' credentials 32 - 39 
23 Appointment of the External Auditor 
24 Elections to the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee 40 - 41 
25 Report on voluntary contributions 
pledged to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund for 1986 42 - 43 
Closing of the session 44 - 56 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 October 1985. 


**/ GC(XXIX)/763. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIX)/INF/227/Rev.3. 


86-0373 
0371e 



GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 2 


ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


1. Mr. SCHEEL (German Democratic Republic), Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole, presented the Committee's report on items 13 to 21 of the agenda. 
2. Under item 13 (The Agency's accounts for 1984), the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution on page I of 
document GC(XXIX)/749. 
3. Under item 14 (The Agency's budget for 1986), the Committee recommended 
that the Conference adopt draft resolutions A, B and C set forth in Annex III 
to Part I of document GC(XXIX)/750. 
4. Under item 15 (The financing of safeguards), the Committee recommended 
that the Conference adopt the draft resolution set forth on page 3 of document 
GC(XXIX)/760. 
5. Under item 16 (Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the International 
Atomic Energy Agency's Technical Co-operation), the Committee recommended that 
the Conference adopt the draft resolution set forth on page i i of document 
GC(XXIX)/751. 
6. Under item 17 (Scale of assessment of Members* contributions for 1986), 
the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution set 
forth on page 2 of document GC(XXIX)/7S6. 
7. Under item 18 (The financing of technical assistance), the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution set forth in 
document GC(XXIX)/771. During the discussion of that item in the Committee, 
the representative of Belgium had expressed a reservation about the 12% 
increases foreseen in the indicative planning figures for the years 1987, 1988 
and 1989, as well as a general reservation about certain aspects of the 
indicative planning figure system as such. 
8. Under item 19 (Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat), the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution set forth in 
document GC(XXIX)/773, to the French version of which a corrigendum had been 
issued. 
9. Under item 20 (Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute), the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution set forth 
in document GC(XXIX)/772. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 3 


10. Finally, under item 21 (Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a 
whole), the Committee recommended that the Conference take note of the report 
by the Board of Governors in document GC(XXIX)/752/Add.3, which contained the 
record of the Board's debate on an amendment of Article VI proposed to the 
General Conference in document GC(XXIX)/752. 
11. The PRESIDENT suggested that the draft resolutions relating to the 
items of the agenda that had been referred to the Committee of the Whole might 
now be considered by the Conference with a view to their adoption. 
12. It was so agreed. 
The Agency's accounts for 1984 


13. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/749 was adopted. 
The Agency's budget for 1986 


14. Draft resolutions A. B and C contained in Annex III to Part I of 
document GC(XXIX)/750 were adopted. 
The financing of safeguards 


15. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/760 was adopted. 
Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the International Atomic Energy 
Agency's Technical Co-operation 


16. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/751 was adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members* contributions for 1986 


17. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/7S6 was adopted. 
The financing of technical assistance 


18. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/771 was adopted. 
19. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that his country had always paid 
its full share of contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund. The Netherlands had not opposed the consensus reached in the Board of 
Governors whereby the indicative planning figures for 1987, 1988 and 1989 
would increase by 12% each year, but he was not able to commit his Government 
to paying the full amount to the Fund which would correspond to its base rate 
of assessment; it would, however, do its utmost despite conditions of 
budgetary austerity. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 4 


20. Mr. ERNKHANM (Belgium) said that the Belgian authorities did not 
support the 12% increases in the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
foreseen for 1987-89 as they were in favour of limitations on expenditure and 
endorsed the principle of zero growth. The system of indicative planning 
figures appeared to create a form of obligation, or at least exerted moral 
pressure, and in the light of experience his delegation was unable to support 
it. 
21. Belgium had submitted to the Board and to the Conference a proposalregarding 
the granting of cost-free Agency technical assistance, which it felt 
should be limited to developing countries recognized as such in General 
Assembly resolution 1995 (XXIX). In that way, more resources would be 
available for assisting those countries which really needed the help countries 
which qualified beyond doubt as developing countries. 
22. Belgium was one of the five countries which provided most aid to 
developing countries, if the aid delivered was measured as a proportion of 
gross national product. It considered, however, that its contributions for 
technical assistance should remain essentially voluntary, and therefore 
reserved the right no longer to participate in the system of indicative 
planning figures for the period for which they had been agreed upon and to 
determine its position for each year separately. 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


23. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/773. to the French 
version of which a corrigendum had been issued in document 
GC(XXIX)/773/Corr.1, was adopted. 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


24. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/772 was adopted. 
1/ See Attachment to document GC(XXIX)/7S9. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 5 


Revision of Article VI as a whole 


25. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to follow 
the recommendation of the Committee of the Whole and take note of the report 
by the Board of Governors contained in document GC(XXIX)/752/Add.3. 
26. It was so agreed. 
27. The PRESIDENT said that under the same item of the agenda there 
was now also a draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Guatemala, Italy, Panama 
and Spain in document GC(XXIX)/769, which was being co-sponsored by Norway, 
Paraguay and Sweden. 
28. Mr. AAMODT (Norway), introducing the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXIX)/769 on behalf of the delegations sponsoring it, said that the text of 
the draft was in substance the same as that discussed on the previous day in 
the Committee of the Whole, when a modification proposed by Norway to the 
original text had received broad support within the Committee. Since one of 
the sponsors of the original draft had withdrawn its support, Norway was 
submitting the draft resolution directly to the Conference in a plenary 
meeting. It seemed both reasonable and logical that, when discussing various 
proposals relating to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, the Board 
should follow the same procedure irrespective of the part of that article 
which was being discussed. Thus, and in view of the resolution on the 
amendment of Article VI.A.2 which had just been adopted by the Conference,he 
hoped that the draft resolution set out in document GC(XXIX)/769 would also 
find a consensus in the Conference. 


29. Mr. NANIOV (Bulgaria) said that the Committee of the Whole had 
already discussed and had reached a decision on the question of the amendment 
of Article VI as a whole. The proposal in document GC(XXIX)/769 was a new 
one, and he drew the attention of the Conference to Rule 63 of the Rules of 
Procedure, under which a proposal could not be discussed or put to the vote 
unless its text had been distributed not later than the day preceding the 
meeting. His delegation was therefore unable to consider the proposal 
introduced by the delegate of Norway. 
2/ Reproduced in document GC(XXIX)/772. 



GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 6 


30. The PRESIDENT said that, while the view expressed by the 
representative of Bulgaria was not without merit, he would leave it to the 
Conference itself to decide whether to consider the draft resolution. He 
therefore asked whether the General Conference was prepared to adopt the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXIX)/769. 
31. The draft resolution in document GC(XXIX)/769 was adopted. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXIX)/770/Rev.1) 


32. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Committee had met on the 
previous day as a credentials committee to examine the credentials of 
delegates, as provided for in Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. The Committee's report was set out in document 
GC(XXIX)/770/Rev.1. Paragraphs 1-3 of the report described the manner in 
which the Committee had approached its task and reported the opinions 
expressed during the discussion. The Committee had agreed to recommend the 
adoption of the draft resolution contained in paragraph 18 of its report. 
33. He pointed out that an addendum to be issued to document 
GC(XXIX)/770/Rev.1 would show Namibia as having submitted credentials 
satisfying Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure. 
34. He asked whether any delegate wished to comment on the report or on the 
draft resolution contained in it. 
35. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic), speaking on behalf of the 
delegations of Iraq, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Quatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, 
Tunisia and the United Arab Emirates, said that all those delegations had 
reservations about the credentials of the Israeli delegate, which were not 
valid for five reasons. First, Israel regarded Jerusalem as its capital, 
which was contrary to international law and to various United Nations 
resolutions; the fact was that the annexation of Jerusalem had been illegal. 
Secondly, the boundaries of Israel could not be internationally recognized 
because the territory of Israel included parts of other countries taken by 
force. Thirdly, Israel had occupied southern Lebanon, the Gaza Strip and the 
West Bank and had used force against the native population of Palestinian 

GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 7 


Arabs in those occupied territories. Fourthly, the regime which governed 
Israel was a Zionist one, and Zionism had been internationally condemned as 
being tantamount to apartheid. Fifthly, the original population of 
Palestinian Arabs in Israel had been deprived of their right to 


self-determination. 


36. Mr. SLIMANE (Algeria), Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh), Mr. MORALES 
(Cuba), Mr. GOMAA (Egypt), Ms. SUDIRDJO (Indonesia), Mr. SOUFAN (Lebanon), 
Mr. PASHA (Pakistan), Mr. MONEIM MUSTAFA EL-AMIN (Sudan) and Mr. LE BA CAP 
(Viet Nam) wished the names of their delegations to be added to the list of 
those read out by the delegate of the Syrian Arab Republic as having 
reservations about the credentials of the delegation of Israel. 
37. Mr. BADDOU (Morocco) wished to clarify the reservations expressed 
by the Arab group in respect of the credentials of the Israeli delegate. The 
reservations related to the fact that those credentials had been issued in 
Jerusalem, which had been annexed in an illegal and arbitrary fashion, thereby 
provoking a strong reaction from the international community. 
38. The Arab group did not intend to engage in polemics or to dispute the 
status of any given country as a Member of the United Nations or of the Agency 
but merely to draw attention to a number of United Nations resolutions and 
other resolutions which had declared the annexation of Jerusalem to be illegal. 
39. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIX)/770/Rev.1 was 
adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 


40. The PRESIDENT recalled that the current term of office of the 
External Auditor, who was the Comptroller and Auditor General of Kenya, would 
end after he had finished auditing the Agency's accounts for 1985 and that it 
was therefore necessary for the Conference at its present session to appoint 
an auditor to audit the accounts for 1986 and 1987. He had been informed that 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of Kenya would be prepared to serve for a 
further period of two years and he (the President) accordingly proposed that 
the General Conference appoint him as External Auditor to audit the Agency's 
accounts for 1986 and 1987. 
41. The President's proposal was accepted. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 8 


ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


42. The PRESIDENT reminded the General Conference that it was 
currently represented on the Staff Pension Committee by two members -
Mr. Lozada (Philippines) and Mr. Ugalde Bilbao (Chile) - and by Mr. Dartois 
(Belgium) and Mr. Nitzsche (German Democratic Republic) as alternates. Since 
three of them were no longer available to serve on the Committee, he proposed 
that the General Conference elect Mr. Jorge Morales Pedraza (Cuba) and 
Mr. Lozada (Philippines) as members and Mr. Vukasin Sreckovic (Yugoslavia) and 
Ms. Angelika Vbelkel (Federal Republic of Germany) as alternates. 
43. Mr. Morales Pedraza (Cuba) and Mr. Lozada (Philippines) were elected as 
members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee and Mr. Sreckovic (Yugoslavia) 
and Ms. Voelkel (Federal Republic of Germany) as alternates. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1986 (GC(XXIX)/757/Rev.4) 


44. The PRESIDENT said that, by 9 p.m. on 26 September 1985, Members 
of the Agency had pledged voluntary contributions amounting to 
US $14 461 931. Since then pledges of US $33 000 by Colombia, US $3000 by 
Mongolia and US $4375 by Viet Nam had been received making a total of 
US $14 502 306. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


45. Mr. BELTRAMINO (Argentina), speaking as Chairman of the Group 
of 77 and on behalf of the Latin American countries, expressed deep 
satisfaction at the wise and fair leadership shown by the President in 
bringing the General Conference session to a successful conclusion. 
46. Mr. PATRICIO (Portugal), acting as spokesman for the Western 
Europe group, said that the success of the Conference was to a large extent 
due to the skill demonstrated by the President in conducting discussions on a 
number of difficult questions. 
47. Mr. BOGGS (United States of America), speaking for the North 
American group, noted that the Conference had now completed a long week of 
complex negotiations. The outstanding leadership and wisdom of the President 
had played a vital role in ensuring that the Conference's efforts were crowned 
with success. The Vice-Presidents, the Director General and his staff also 
deserved thanks for their work. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 9 


48. Mr. MATSUDA (Japan), speaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Far Bast, complimented the President on the able manner in which he had guided 
the twenty-ninth session of the Conference. He thanked the host country, 
Austria, and the City of Vienna for their hospitality. 
49. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia), speaking for the East European 
countries, said that the fact that the Conference had managed to resolve the 
tricky problems facing it was largely due to the President's ability, even 
temperament and unflagging efforts. 
50. Mr. OMWOMY (Kenya) said it was an honour for him to express the 
appreciation of the African countries for the President's work. The 
twenty-ninth session of the Conference marked the end of an era of 
disagreement over many issues, especially South Africa. There could be no" 
doubt that the President's able handling of the Conference's discussions had 
made a major contribution to the success achieved in that respect. 
51. Mr. SADLEIR (Australia), acting as spokesman for the countries of 
South East Asia and the Pacific, praised the President for the fair and 
dignified manner in which he guided the Conference's work, much of which had 
been far from easy. It was particularly appropriate that the President should 
come from Africa, a continent on which so much of the world's attention had 
recently centred. 
52. Mr. HIREMATH (India), speaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Middle East and South Asia, warmly congratulated the President on his handling 
of the Conference session. The fact that the Conference had succeeded in 
completing its heavy agenda successfully and on time was due mainly to the 
President's skillful and determined guidance. 
53. Mr. ZHOU (China) complimented the President on the excellent way 
in which he had guided the Conference's deliberations. The Conference had 
enabled delegations from every part of the globe to enhance their mutual 
understanding, and the resolution of a number of difficult questions by 
consensus had provided a firm basis for future co-operation. The Director 
General and the Secretariat were to be commended for their contribution to the 
success of the Conference. 

GC(XXIX)/OR.281 
page 10 


54. The PRESIDENT thanked all the delegates for their kind words and 
for the co-operation they had extended to him during the conduct of the 
Conference's business. It had been an honour to serve as President at the 
twenty-ninth session. Much excellent work had been accomplished which he was 
confident had confirmed the Conference's faith in the Director General, in the 
Agency and in its ability to help alleviate the suffering of millions of 
people in developing countries. 
55. On behalf of the Conference, he wished to thank the Austrian 
authorities and the City of Vienna for their excellent hospitality and to 
express his gratitude to the Director General and his staff for providing 
valuable support for the work of the Conference. Before closing the session, 
he invited all those present to observe a minute of silence for prayer or 
meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


56. The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-ninth session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 9.A0 p.m. 



