GC(XXX)/OR.282 
April 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 29 September 1986, at 10.15 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. MANOUAN (Cote d'Ivoire) 
President: Mr. RAMANNA (India) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 


agenda** 


Opening of the session 1 -4 


Election of the President 5 -10 


1 Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 11 -17 


Procedural remarks by the President 18 -19 


2 Message from the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations 20 -23 


3 Statement by the Director General 24 -60 


5 Voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1987 61 -62 


6 General debate and annual report for 
1985 63 -143 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United States of America 63 -84 
France 85 -106 
India 107 -117 
Federal Republic of Germany 118 -132 
United Kingdom of Great Britain 


and Northern Ireland 133 - 143 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 13 October 1986. 


[**] GC(XXX)/774. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/lNF/238/Rev.4. 


87-1170 


0816e (0128e) 



GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirtieth regular session of 
the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed the delegates, observers, 
representatives of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and those 
of other intergovernmental organizations. He thanked the Austrian 
authorities, who had once again made available the Hofburg Palace for the 
Agency's General Conference. 
4. The first special session of the General Conference, which had ended 
the previous Friday, had been an outstanding success. If the same spirit of 
co-operation prevailed in the coming week, he was confident that the thirtieth 
regular session would be equally productive. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
6. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh), speaking on behalf of the Middle East and 
South Asia regional group, said it was a great honour for him to propose 
Mr. Ramanna, delegate of India, as President of the General Conference at its 
thirtieth regular session. Both as an outstanding nuclear scientist of 
international repute and in his capacity as Chairman of India's Atomic Energy 
Commission, he had made a major contribution to the development of that 
country's nuclear power programme. His personal qualities and his wide 
experience of Agency and United Nations meetings concerned with technical and 
political aspects of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy made him eminently 
suited to the post. 
7. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), speaking on behalf of the 
North America regional group, seconded the nomination of Mr. Ramanna. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 3 


8. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico), on behalf of the Latin America 
regional group, Mr. GAUTIER (France), on behalf of the Western Europe regional 
group, Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland), on behalf of the Eastern Europe regional group, 
Mr. AHIMSA (Indonesia), on behalf of the South East Asia and the Pacific 
regional group, Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia), on behalf of the Africa regional group, 
and Mr. MURATA (Japan), on behalf of the Far East regional group, supported 
the nomination. 
9. Mr. Ramanna (India) was elected President of the General Conference for 
its thirtieth regular session by acclamation. 
10. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT congratulated Mr. Ramanna on his election. 
Mr. Ramanna (India) took the Chair. 
11. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for the honour they had 

bestowed on him by electing him President of the General Conference for its 
thirtieth regular session. He hoped his unanimous election had something to 
do with the fact that he had been connected with the Agency for a long period 
of time, indeed almost since its inception. He wished in that context to 
refer to an outstanding scientist of the past generation, Mr. H.D. Smyth, who 
had served on the Agency's Board of Governors for many years. The well-known 
"Smyth Report" had been the first major document published on atomic energy. 
He wished to pay a tribute to Mr. Smyth, who had died recently at the age 
of 88, for his contribution to the development of atomic energy and the Agency. 


12. He commended Mr. Manouan of Cote d'lvoire on the excellent manner in 
which he had guided the proceedings of the twenty-ninth regular session of the 
General Conference the previous year, as well as the recent special session. 
13. The General Conference was meeting under very special circumstances. 
For the first time a regular session was being held immediately after a 
session devoted entirely to technical and safety matters, subjects of the 
greatest value to the development of nuclear power in the world. At the 
special session, man's desire to use modern technology for constructive 
purposes and to reject its destructive aspects had been emphasized by many 
delegations. Nuclear energy was still new, but even during its short history 
it had proved to be a highly promising source of energy for the future. The 
special session had shown that, while many problems persisted, it was well 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 4 


within man's capacity to ensure that the necessary safety standards were 


achieved so that nuclear energy could continue to serve mankind. Every effort 
must be made to ensure that nuclear energy was made totally safe. 


14. In a sense the special session had also indicated the direction in 
which the General Conference and the Agency should move, namely towards 
matters concerning the production and uses of nuclear power and other 
associated applications and away from issues that had no direct bearing on 
science and technology. The view had often been stated at past sessions of 
the General Conference that the Agency should devote itself more to technical 
matters, particularly those which would enhance the safe use of atomic 
energy. While atomic energy was a part of modern technology, the developing 
countries would probably benefit more from its utilization than anybody else. 
A number of recent Agency meetings on the development, of small and medium 
power reactors had drawn attention to that fact. 
15. Though he wished the Conference to avoid discussions of a purely 
political nature, he felt obliged to make reference to an obnoxious social 
problem, namely the inhuman apartheid laws in South Africa. He himself knew 
from his earlier years what racial discrimination meant. The fact that it 
still existed legally in 1986 made it imperative for effective action to be 
taken by all countries. A hundred years previously, Mahatma Gandhi had 
rallied the oppressed people of South Africa to break some of those degrading 
laws. That he had done virtually alone and through the force of his 
personality. He (the President) was therefore among those who felt that even 
the Agency should play a part in the fight against such injustice. He would, 
however, be guided by the views of delegates as to whether the Conference 
should concentrate on passing resolutions against discrimination, which might 
or might not have an effect on those laws, or on the introduction of nuclear 
power in developing countries and the improvement of nuclear safety generally. 
16. In conclusion, he noted that nuclear safety had been widely discussed 
during the special session, but such discussions held little relevance for 
countries which had no nuclear power reactors. All countries should enjoy the 
benefits of nuclear power and steps should be taken to enable them to do so as 
soon as possible. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 5 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


17. The PRESIDENT suggested that, as it had unfortunately not been 
possible to conclude informal consultations on the election of officers and 
the appointment of the General Committee so as to complete the composition of 
that Committee, further consideration of the matter be suspended until the 
afternoon. 
PROCEDURAL REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT 


18. The PRESIDENT suggested that, as in previous years, pending the 
report of the General Committee on the agenda, the Conference take up items 2, 
3, 5 and 6 of the provisional agenda. Those were formal items or items 
specified in the Statute. 
19. It was so agreed. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


20. Mr. ALLAF (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations) said that in recent months, in the aftermath of the tragic reactor 
incident in the Soviet Union, the interest of the international community had 
focused on the Agency's statutory tasks in the area of nuclear safety. It was 
gratifying that a number of States, including those immediately concerned, 
should have taken the initiatives that were now leading to a concerted 
multinational effort, under the aegis of the Agency, to improve international 
co-operation in nuclear safety, mitigate the risk of accidents and reduce 
their possible effects. A multi-pronged international approach of that kind 
was a welcome development. 
21. The conventions on early notification and emergency mutual assistance 
adopted at the special session of the General Conference the previous week 
constituted a significant move towards the solution of those important 
problems on an international basis. The United Nations Organization was 
keenly interested in those efforts - its concern was recognized in the 
Agency's Statute - and was ready to support the Agency in its endeavours 
wherever possible. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 6 


22. The tragic accident at Chernobyl had demonstrated the compelling need 
for the international community to co-operate closely on all matters 
pertaining to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It should also 
serve to demonstrate the terrible hazards of the possible use of nuclear 
weapons in the event of war. He recalled in that context that in 1985 the 
General Assembly had unanimously called upon all States, particularly the 
nuclear-weapon States, to adopt concrete and practical measures to prevent the 
outbreak of war, especially nuclear war, and to take appropriate steps to halt 
and reverse the nuclear arms race. The two major nuclear Powers had in recent 
months indicated their wish to achieve meaningful reductions in their nuclear 
arsenals. It was in the interests of all that that wish should find 
expression in agreement on measures to reduce the threat of mass annihilation 
which had hung over the world for the past decades. 
23. Finally, he wished the General Conference success in its very important 
tasks which involved the safety and well-being of the world's population, and 
personally congratulated Mr. Ramanna on his election to the post of President 
of the General Conference. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


24. The DIRECTOR GENERAL recalled that the previous week's special 
session of the General Conference had closed with the adoption of two 
international conventions and a resolution reflecting a consensus on the role 
of nuclear power and the importance of nuclear safety. The special session 
had called for an expanded nuclear safety programme within the Agency and had 
requested the Board of Governors to take action to launch that programme. 
25. The consensus reached by governments at the special session should 
provide helpful guidance to public opinion. That consensus stated that 
nuclear power was an indispensable source of energy for many countries; that 
each country was responsible for securing the highest level of safety; that 
there was scope for further international co-operation in nuclear safety and 
that it was for the Agency to play the central role in encouraging and 
facilitating that co-operation. The Conventions on Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident and Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency, already signed by 50 Member States, filled gaps in the 

GC(XXX)/0R.282 
page 7 


international legal framework of response to emergency situations. Their 
elaboration during the summer and adoption the previous week demonstrated how 
rapidly and effectively governments could act when faced with urgent 
international problems and when there was a common will to tackle them 
together. The Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident would 
enter into force on 27 October 1986 since three Governments had signed it 
without any reservation with regard to ratification. 


26. It seemed that the new Board of Governors at its first meeting after 
the General Conference was likely to request the Secretariat to consider the 
impact of both conventions on the work of the Agency and to prepare, for the 
Board's meetings in February 1987, information on the proposed actions and 
their budgetary implications. A meeting with representatives of other 
international organizations of the United Nations system had been convened the 
previous week to discuss ways of co-ordinating activities in relation to 
accidental releases of radioactive substances into the environment. 
27. During the summer, international nuclear co-operation had been 
demonstrated at its best. Governments, acting through the Agency's Board of 
Governors, had given prompt direction to the initial steps to be taken and had 
sent their experts to draft the two conventions; the technical nuclear 
community had carried out the expert post-accident review; other organizations 
in the United Nations family had offered their assistance and expertise; 
bodies such as the Inter-Parliamentary Union had adopted supportive 
resolutions; and the media had continuously informed the world at large of the 
progress achieved and problems encountered. 
28. Although the Agency's nuclear-safety-related activities had played a 
particularly prominent role during the past five months, it would be a great 
mistake to conclude that the Agency had been neglecting other areas of work. 
The whole programme had in fact gone ahead unabated, and the regular session 
of the General Conference provided a welcome opportunity to review the overall 
profile of the programme. 
29. Although the Chernobyl accident had had a considerable impact on public 
opinion and had led some Governments to defer decisions on the further 
expansion of nuclear power, the fact remained that the global contribution of 
nuclear power to total electricity generation in the world had increased 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 8 


by 14% in 1985. Nuclear power plants had generated about 1400 TWh(e) during 
1985, an increase of 19% compared with 1984. To produce that amount of 
electricity by conventional means would have required the entire annual coal 
production of one of the countries with the largest coal production, either 
the United States or the Soviet Union, or the total Saudi Arabian oil 
production in 1982, in other words about seven million barrels of oil a day 


(300 million tons/year). Those figures demonstrated clearly that nuclear 
power was not a marginal technology, but one which played a very substantial 
role in electricity production. 


30. While there had been a decoupling of the gross domestic product from 
primary energy consumption growth, electric energy had continued to grow 
steadily, with nuclear power providing 40-65% of that electricity in a growing 
number of countries or in large industrialized regions within countries. 
Electrical energy was increasingly a motor of industrial and economic growth, 
so nuclear power was not a dispensable luxury; it was an essential source of 
energy that continued to grow substantially in several countries. 
31. The discussions focusing on accidents and safety problems during recent 
months had completely overshadowed other interesting and more positive facts. 
Nuclear power plants in most countries had shown a steadily improving 
performance bearing witness to the maturity of the technology. From the plant 
availability statistics which the Agency presented jointly with UNIPEDE and 
the World Energy Conference every three years, it could be seen that in 
Europe, for example, nuclear plants showed higher availabilities than their 
oil- and coal-fired counterparts in all size categories. At the General 
Conference in 1987, the Agency intended to publish a report drawing on 
operator experience at some of the plants that had had exceptionally good 
performance and high levels of safety, so that all could learn from those 
positive experiences. 
32. The constraints working against the nuclear option in different 
countries varied considerably. In some industrialized countries public 
opposition and complicated regulatory procedures combined to lengthen 
construction times. High interest rates and uncertainties in policies could 
put nuclear power at a disadvantage by comparison with plants that had lower 
initial capital costs. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 9 


33. For developing countries, the high initial investment was just one of 
many obstacles to be overcome. Following requests made both at the NPT Review 
Conference and at the Agency's General Conference in 1985, a Senior Expert 
Group had been established to advise the Agency on mechanisms to assist 
developing countries in the promotion and financing of nuclear power 
programmes. The Group had identified a number of other important constraints 
in addition to investment capital, namely trained manpower, infrastructure, 
electric grid sizes and industrial support programmes. Some of those 
constraints could be alleviated if medium-sized reactors of comparatively 
simple design, with greater inherent safety and high reliability, were 
available at competitive prices. The Senior Expert Group had been struck by 
the very different problems faced by developing countries and had accordingly 
proposed a new approach for defining the constraints affecting the 
introduction of nuclear power - an approach that would take into account 
individual country profiles. Co-operation with the World Bank was being 
pursued, including the use of joint missions to assist a number of countries 
to assess their future energy and electric power needs and determine the role 
which nuclear power could play in a least-cost long-term strategy for 
electricity supply. 
34. In the period of soul-searching following the Chernobyl accident, 
increased attention would undoubtedly be devoted to the next generation of 
nuclear reactors - which ought to be less complex, economically more 
favourable and intrinsically safer than their predecessors. Additional safety 
and reliability could normally be achieved through progress in technological 
developments. In that perspective, co-operation through the Agency should 
encourage new concepts for safer nuclear power plants with high performance 
standards. For that purpose, a major conference on nuclear power performance 
and safety was planned for 1987. 
35. Another part of the fuel cycle which called for international 
co-operation was spent fuel and waste management. It had been recognized that 
the wastes arising from uranium mining and milling operations were of critical 
importance for the fuel cycle's dose commitment to the general public. 
Therefore, the Board's approval, the previous week, of a Code of Practice and 
Guide to the Code on the Safe Management of Wastes from the Mining and Milling 
of Uranium and Thorium Ores was particularly welcome. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 10 


36. The advantages of regional or international co-operation in high-level 
waste disposal were obvious. Policy decisions and the actual construction of 
high-level waste repositories were required. Although the nuclear community 
did not consider such construction to be a technologically urgent issue, it 
was probably essential to the public's acceptance of nuclear power in many 
countries that there should be a visible, satisfactory solution to the problem. 
37. The Agency had planned to include in its technical co-operation 
programme for 1987 an interregional co-operation programme to advise 
developing countries on their long-term plans and strategies for the 
development and implementation of low- and medium-level waste management 
systems. 
38. For the majority of Member States from the developing world, 
applications of radiation and radioisotopes were bringing immediate direct 
benefits. Research reactors produced the isotopes required for a number of 
applications; in addition they were used for training purposes and stimulated 
scientific research in many fields. For the first time, the Agency had 
produced a booklet on the status of research reactors - of which there were 
some 300 in operation throughout the world, many of them in developing 
countries - and on trends in their utilization. 
39. Progress had been made in building up and improving radiotherapy 
services in developing countries for the treatment and control of cancer, 
especially intracavitary applications of radionuclides. Regional and local 
training was being given in leading Egyptian and Malaysian hospitals with the 
help of financial contributions from Italy and Japan, respectively. 
40. The industrial applications of radiation were attracting increased 
interest and the Agency was particularly involved in the exchange of 
information and research promotion related to new applications. Examples of 
such industrial applications were the use of accelerators for removing toxic 
gases from coal- and oil-burning power plants, the improvement of polymer 
properties, and the decontamination of animal food. 
41. Radiation and radioisotope techniques were being used in a number of 
areas to monitor, improve and protect the environment; to study pesticide and 
other chemical residues in soils and crops; to rationalize the use of 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 11 


fertilizers; to reduce the use of pesticides by means of the sterile-male 
technique of pest control; and to monitor trace element pollutants by means of 
nuclear analytical techniques. Food irradiation also enabled food to be 
preserved without resorting to chemicals. Thus, nuclear techniques were 
helping to protect health and the environment, not only through the use of 
nuclear power, but also through many other practical applications. 


42. Isotope techniques were useful for studying the characteristics of the 
groundwater resources so crucial to areas affected by desertification. A 
regional project in the Sahel area was planned for 1987 to help identify areas 
receiving groundwater recharge. Thus an Agency project would contribute to 
the broader efforts of the United Nations system aimed at helping African 
countries affected by drought to clarify the processes at work and to find 
ways of reversing them. 
43. The Agency was the only organization in the United Nations system which 
directly operated laboratories - in Seibersdorf and Monaco. Those 
laboratories provided Member States with training and laboratory services and 
were also very useful for the development of new techniques. The Seibersdorf 
Laboratory carried out tens of thousands of chemical and isotopic analyses 
each year for laboratories co-operating with the Agency and provided important 
back-up services to technical co-operation projects and safeguards. The 
completion of the new agricultural wing at the Agency's Seibersdorf 
Laboratory, which had been made possible by contributions from FAO and the 
Government of Poland and the donation of a new greenhouse by the United States 
Government, would strengthen the role of the Agency's experimental facilities 
in support of the Joint FAO/IAEA programme on nuclear applications in 
agriculture. 
44. The International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste was highly 
valued by scientists from all over the world. Its programme had expanded 
rapidly as a result of dynamic leadership and a large increase in the 
contributions of the host country, Italy. Nearly 3000 physicists visited the 
Centre each year to carry out research or to take part in seminars, symposia 
or workshops, more than 20 of which were held annually. Scientists from 
developing countries accounted for some 75% of the man-months spent at the 
Centre. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 12 


45. The Technical Co-operation Programme, owing to the special importance 
attached to it by Member States, had for several years been an exception to 
the zero-growth rule. There was a consensus that the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund should increase by 12% annually; thus, providing that 
pledges were made and paid promptly, there was sound support for the 
programme, the content of which was of course determined by priorities which 
Member States themselves determined when submitting their projects. The 
Secretariat was continuing to seek ways of ensuring the most effective 
programme delivery, which was clearly in the interest of recipients, donors 
and the Agency alike, and required concerted efforts. 
46. Various ideas and issues related to the future directions of the 
programme would be discussed at a Technical Co-operation Seminar organized 
within the framework of the current session. The views of Member States were 
sought regarding ways of improving the establishment of clear objectives for a 
project, taking into account its relevance and contribution to national 
development plans; ways of monitoring major outputs more successfully; the 
type of management tools, such as computerization, which could be introduced; 
ways of extending the programme cycle; and ways of rationalizing planning 
practices. 
47. Regional or South-South co-operation had been successful in Asia under 
the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA). Its counterpart in Latin America, 
ARCAL, was at present also under way with supporting contributions from the 
Federal Republic of Germany and the United States of America. The current 
session of the General Conference provided an opportunity for the countries 
involved, and any others that might be interested, to review progress and 
exchange views on possibilies for the future. 
48. In the Agency's Secretariat, a good deal of support for the technical 
co-operation programme came from other technical Divisions. Regular staff 
often took up expert assignments and gave advice on subjects within their 
competence. The Agency's assistance and service to any Member State should 
ideally consist of activities which provided mutual support - for example 
technical assistance projects, research contracts and co-ordinated research 
programmes, seminars, training courses and advisory missions such as RAPAT 
safety missions. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 13 


49. The previous session of the General Conference had followed immediately 
upon the Third NPT Review Conference, which had highlighted the importance of 
the Agency's safeguards system. During the past year that system had been 
referred to repeatedly by members of the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva 
as an example that could serve as a model for verification in other arms 
control agreements. Indeed, the whole concept of verification, usually a 
major hurdle in disarmament and arms control negotiations, was now recognized 
by all as being a sine qua non in most new agreements. In that sense the 
experience accumulated with the safeguards had been very positive indeed. It 
was therefore important that the Agency should ensure that the credibility of 
the safeguards system was fully maintained and that new safeguards approaches 
were developed as fully automated and remotely controlled fuel cycle 
facilities of high safeguards significance came into operation; if that were 
done, safeguards would continue to serve as an inspiration and a model. 
50. Safeguards operations had undergone a period of continued consolidation 
and many measures had been taken to improve their effectiveness and efficiency 
still further. The Regional Offices in Toronto and Tokyo had helped to 
rationalize the inspection effort and reduce travel time. Research and 
development work was continuing, with a large contribution from the Member 
States most advanced in that field, in order to keep pace with the latest 
technology, develop safeguards approaches for new types of facilities and 
achieve the optimum degree of automation. 
51. In June 1986, the Board had concluded the first full-scope safeguards 
agreement with a country which was not a party to the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty, namely Albania. Such a voluntary submission of all nuclear activities 
had long been a possible way of building confidence for a State that was 
unwilling to join NPT. Following the announcement by China at the General 
Conference in 1985 that it had decided to submit certain of its peaceful 
nuclear activities to Agency safeguards, a Secretariat team had visited China 
in August 1986 for preliminary discussions. A draft voluntary-offer agreement 
was at present being worked out by the Agency to serve as a basis for further 
discussions during the first half of 1987. Preliminary discussions had also 
begun with Spain and EURATOM to draw up a trilateral safeguards agreement 
between EURATOM, Spain and the Agency. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 14 


52. The Third NPT Review Conference, recognizing the principle of universal 
application of Agency safeguards to all peaceful nuclear activities in all 
States, had recommended that the economic and practical feasibility of 
extending the application of safeguards to additional civil facilities in 
nuclear-weapon States should be evaluated further. While safeguards activity 
in nuclear-weapon States had been enhanced to some extent, it had been limited 
so far owing to financial constraints. 
53. During the past year, pursuant to General Conference resolution 
GC(XXIX)/RES/442, there had been discussions with South Africa on safeguards 
for its semi-commercial enrichment plant. Regrettably, those discussions had 
broken down. There did not seem to be any point in pursuing them so long as 
South Africa maintained certain conditions. As to full-scope safeguards, 
there had not yet been any response to his written and oral request for 
discussions on their application in South Africa. 
54. Expansion in scope and further improvements in the effectiveness of 
safeguards depended on the full and active co-operation of Member States. One 
specific problem was the designation of inspectors. If undue restrictions 
were imposed and undue delays arose in designations, the credibility of the 
system could be undermined and a costly and inefficient utilization of 
inspectors could result. It was also most regrettable that no consensus had 
been reached on a new system for the financing of safeguards. It was 
disappointing that the only solution, despite years of extensive 
consultations, should be again to extend the temporary arrangements by three 
years. The sums involved did not justify such lengthy negotiations. It 
appeared that the consensus method, which had its great merits, had led to 
paralysis. 
55. In 1985, the General Conference had expressed the hope that the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material would attract the 
widest possible adherence. Since 1985, 4 States had adhered to the 
Convention, and there were at present 46 signatories and 18 ratifications. 
Only three more ratifications, acceptances or approvals were required for the 
Convention to enter into force. It was to be hoped that the example of the 
Convention on the Early Notificaton of a Nuclear Accident would stimulate 
governments which had not yet done so to ratify the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material (1979) without further delay. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 15 


56. The twenty-ninth session of the General Conference had also examined 
the question of a prohibition of attacks against nuclear facilities, 
requesting the Director General to keep it informed of developments. 
During 1986, the Conference on Disarmament had considered that problem. 
Difficulties remained concerning the scope of the agreement and the 
definitions involved. The Disarmament Conference would revert to the matter 
at the beginning of 1987. 
57. Efforts had been made, with some success, to improve the efficiency of 
the Agency's activities. It was not easy to determine quantitatively just how 
successful those efforts had been. Intergovernmental organizations could not, 
like firms, measure their effectiveness by pointing to profits. Nevertheless, 
if objectives were clearly defined, results could be measured in terms of 
objectives achieved, rather than expenditure itself being made an indication 
of effectiveness. Mechanisms of systematic evaluation were needed for the 
Agency's future work. The positive experience with technical co-operation and 
safeguards evaluation had led to the conclusion that impact evaluation should 
be gradually introduced into the technical programmes as well. A system of 
quality assurance, so to speak, should be set up for the Agency's activities. 
58. The Agency's programme and budget were formulated with a view to 
consensus acceptance by Member States and involved lengthy but worthwhile 
consultations. A two-year budgetary cycle would alleviate the burden both on 
staff and on delegations. 
59. For several years the Agency's staff had been asked to increase their 
productivity in order to accommodate programme expansions within zero-growth 
budgets. They had succeeded in no small measure and particularly in the last 
few hectic months, had given proof of their efficiency. It was somewhat 
paradoxical that at a time when the Professional staff were expected to give 
their utmost they should see their pension benefits deteriorate and their 
take-home pay decline. That decline, which in the past two years had amounted 
on average to over 10%, was mainly due to the inability of the United Nations 
common system to find an adequate solution to the long-standing problem of 
post adjustments for currency fluctuations. The present situation was 
unacceptable. Already a number of outstanding Professional staff who had 
served the Agency for many years had resigned, while others had indicated 
their intention of doing so if no prospects of improvement emerged. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 16 


60. It would not be right to end on a negative note, since the overall 
balance of the Agency's work was very positive. The current session of the 
General Conference would demonstrate the manifold nature of the Agency's 
functions. The Agency had to remain responsive to the wide variety of 
interests of all Member States and therefore the programme had to be a 
balanced one. Mutual understanding among Member States was essential, and 
restraint and prudence were required in the handling of delicate or 
controversial matters. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1987 


61. The PRESIDENT said that in 1985 the Board of Governors had agreed 
to continue - for the years 1987, 1988 and 1989 - the practice of recommending 
indicative planning figures as an aid to fixing targets for voluntary 
contributions to the Fund, with an annual increase of 12% over the previous 
year in each case. The figure for 1987 had been set at US $34 million, and in 
the draft resolution relating to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund in Annex III to document GC(XXX)/777 the Board of Governors recommended 
that figure as the target for voluntary contributions to the Fund for the 
year 1987. 
62. Since early pledging would considerably facilitate the work of the 
Secretariat in planning technical assistance programmes, he urged all 
delegations which were in a position to do so to notify the Secretariat during 
the current session of the voluntary contributions to be made by their 
Governments to the Fund in 1987. He hoped that by the end of the session he 
would be able to report that a large percentage of the target figure for 1987 
had been pledged. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1985 (GC(XXX)/775 and Corr.l) 


63. Mr. HERRINGTON (United States of America) said that the importance 
of the Agency, not only in fostering the peaceful uses of atomic energy but 
also in contributing to peace and security through the application of 
international safeguards, was considerable. Furthermore, that importance was 
exemplified by the role it had played in the international community's 
response to the disaster at Chernobyl. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 17 


64. One of the most encouraging things about the activities of the Agency 
was that it served to illustrate what States, even of different philosophies, 
could do if they judged that their self-interest could be served by joint 
action. The health and welfare of citizens of all countries was dependent in 
a substantial measure on economic growth and the availability of adequate 
energy sources. Moreover, it was a fact that international society was highly 
interdependent. The welfare of American citizens was closely related to the 
welfare of those in other countries. There would be no true security in the 
energy sector if others faced shortages or high fuel costs that could serve to 
limit their growth and destabilize their societies. Nor could one be secure 
in efforts to use nuclear power if serious accidents occurred elsewhere since 
that created doubts about the safety of nuclear technology. 
65. It was important to note that, in the absence of the Agency, countries 
of the developing world would most likely have received far less information 
and training in the nuclear sciences than they had to date. For example, 
there was no bilateral or multilateral organization that was doing as much as 
the Agency around the world in disseminating information on the application of 
nuclear technology in the development of medicine, food and agriculture. Also 
there was no other organization as well placed to deal with nuclear safety 
issues that were global in significance. Had the Agency not been involved, 
the proposed new conventions on emergency assistance and prompt notification 
would probably not have been negotiated as smoothly and as rapidly as they had 
been the week before. 
66. Finally, there was no other body that had had the unprecedented 
experience of performing inspections of civilian nuclear facilities around the 
world, and there was no other body with a global responsibility to provide 
assurance that nuclear material in civil facilities remained in peaceful 
nuclear activities. 
67. Those achievements had not happened by accident. They reflected the 
determination of the majority of Member States to make the Agency a serious, 
business-like organization. To guarantee that that continued, Member States 
would have to redouble their efforts to resist the introduction of extraneous 
political issues which tended to undermine the deliberations. During the 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 18 


present session that problem would arise again. How it was handled would 
determine the future of the organization. 


68. The Government of the United States and the Agency shared the same 
energy goals, that was clear from their common wish: (1) to achieve greater 
security in an uncertain world; (2) to maintain strength in the energy sector 
through a balanced and diversified use of resources; and (3) to secure greater 
long-term energy stability. 
69. His country remained firmly committed to the development of nuclear 
power, and was determined to be a stable and reliable partner in the worldwide 
effort to enjoy the benefits of nuclear power under prudent 
non-proliferation conditions. In so doing, the United States would promote 
the safety and well being of all its citizens. 
70. With regard to the domestic situation of the United States, even 
relatively modest projections of electricity requirements made it imperative 
that nuclear power remained an attractive and available option in the energy 
mix for the world. If growth in the United States was any example - and the 
growth in electricity demand ran to only two or three per cent annually there 
would still be an annual requirement of some 100-300 GW of new 
electricity generating capacity by the year 2000 - less than 15 years away. 
That was equivalent to 100-300 new nuclear power plants. While much of that 
capacity would be coal fired and some would burn natural gas, a significant 
fraction should also be nuclear in order to preserve a reasonable level of 
diversity in United States sources of electric power. However, to achieve 
that goal, there would be need to overcome some unique impediments to the 
introduction of nuclear power that had evolved in his country in recent years. 
71. More specifically, there would be need to provide better assurance to 
utilities and the investment community that commercial plants could be built 
on schedule and that they would not be vulnerable to interminable delays in 
construction either due to poor management or to the licensing process. 
72. The United States was attacking that issue on a multi-pronged front 
that involved prospective licensing reform. The adoption of voluntary but 
rigorous self-policing efforts within the utility industry, and the gaining of 
continued improvements in technology. Both technical and institutional issues 
were being addressed. 

GC(XXX)/0R.282 
page 19 


73. Nuclear technology had already shown that energy could be delivered 
safely, economically and reliably. The performance of existing commercial 
power reactors had been good, but it could be improved even further. The 
current orientation in the field of advanced reactor technologies emphasized 
three things: design simplification to reduce plant cost; greater use of 
passive safety features; and the incorporation of plant features designed to 
standardize and improve licensability. In time that approach would be pursued 
in the further development of improved plant features to reduce costs and 
improve already substantial safety margins. 
74. In his Government's view, the events of the previous week represented 
an important episode in the history of the Agency. As a result of Chernobyl, 
countries had been working together to identify ways in which they could 
better cope with significant accidents. They could be proud that they had 
been able to develop, negotiate and sign two important new international 
conventions that pertained to that issue. Both conventions had been signed by 
the United States. 
75. The international efforts aimed at improving reactor safety, discussed 
the week before, would help all States to chart a firmer course towards energy 
security. The Agency's safety-related programmes served desirable 
developmental interests, and he strongly supported the expanded safety 
programme. 
76. The safety programme had various desirable features, and was very well 
conceived. For example, his country supported the training and advisory 
services provided by the Agency under the NUSS programme. Worthy of note were 
the contributions which the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) 
had made to that effort over many years. The NRC had also provided the Agency 
with extensive information on the results of its various research activities 
pertaining to reactor safety, as had the Department of Energy. The week 
before the Chairman of the NRC had delivered important source term data to the 
Director General that was not available anywhere else in the world. The 
United States maintained close interest in the progress of a number of the 
Agency's traditional international working groups, especially those dealing 
with water reactor fuel performance and technology, fast reactors, and 
gas-cooled reactors. It also followed with great interest the programme begun 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 20 


the previous year on new water reactor concepts aimed at simpler operation and 
improved safety. 


77. Like other countries, the United States was also exploring other energy 
alternatives. As a case in point, it proposed to maintain a strong and 
healthy fusion programme. In August 1986 the Department of Energy's tokamak 
fusion test reactor had achieved a temperature of 200 million C. That was 
ten times hotter than the centre of the sun and the highest plasma temperature 
ever recorded in a laboratory. Most important, a temperature had now been 
achieved in a large-scale plasma where other principal characteristics were 
approaching those needed for a fusion reactor. 
78. American scientists were co-operating in the Agency's international 
tokamak reactor study - INTOR - which involved the United States, Japan, the 
Soviet Union and the European Economic Community. In the costly area of 
fusion research that approach facilitated access to valuable information while 
avoiding a significant demand on the Agency's already strained resources. 
79. The activities described were among those currently in the forefront of 
his country's programmes, given its own energy situation and energy security 
interests. The United States also had a strong interest in the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities that were often of direct concern to the 
developing countries. For example, his country supported programmes that 
provided assistance to Member States in using nuclear techniques such as 
radioisotopes and radiation in agriculture, industry and medicine. 
Furthermore, the Agency's work in radioisotope techniques associated with 
medical diagnostics and treatment was in the long run of benefit to all. 
80. The United States had also supported project-and-supply agreements for 
the utilization of various research reactors around the world and their 
associated training programmes. Not only did such projects enhance research 
and education, they also served to promote broad acceptance of the Agency's 
safety standards as well as Agency safeguards. Since that area of Agency 
activity was particularly worthwhile, there was an express provision in United 
States law permitting an annual gift of special nuclear material to the Agency 
for such purposes. Annual gifts had been made by his country to the Agency 
for over 25 years and the latest gift would be applied to a project in 
Thailand for its TRIGA Mark III reactor built by the United States. 

GC(XXX)/0R.282 
page 21 


81. The critical importance of the Agency safeguards system in enabling 
States to engage in international nuclear co-operation and derive the full 
benefits of nuclear power had already been stressed; it was a programme to 
which the United States had dedicated very strong support - at policy levels, 
in its national legislation, in its strong support for the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty, and through tangible forms of technical safeguards assistance. 
82. In 1986 the United States programme of voluntary supplementary support 
for the Agency safeguards programme would be almost $6 million. In addition, 
the Department of Energy was continuing to invest significant funds in 
research and development activities that directly contributed to safeguards. 
That domestic effort was currently operating at a level of roughly $5 million 
and a significant fraction of the improved safeguards equipment now being 
employed by the Agency had evolved from that particular programme. 
83. It was hard to believe that almost 25 years had passed since the Agency 
performed its first safeguards inspection in 1962. There was no other 
operational activity in the entire United Nations system that was making a 
more valuable, day-to-day contribution to the preservation of international 
security. However, there was still a long way to go in broadening the 
application of Agency safeguards to additional States. It was encouraging 
that a large number of States, including other parties to the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty and non-adherents, appeared to share a basic 
non-proliferation ethic, and the IAEA had been of the greatest use in helping 
to create that frame of mind. 
84. The IAEA and its Member States had quickly responded to the challenging 
agenda placed before them over the past few months on account of the Chernobyl 
disaster. That illustrated the fact that the peaceful atom had become truly 
international. But tolerating unsafe reactors meant that there would always 
be unsafe reactors. The existing problems were human, designed and created by 
humans and they were capable of human solution. A start had been made the 
previous week, but it was only a start. It was a common goal to make sure 
that the peaceful atom remained a constructive force and that public 
confidence in nuclear energy was restored. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 22 


85. Mr. CAPRON (France) said that the fears engendered by the Chernobyl 
accident called for a clear and comprehensible response from the international 
nuclear community. The quality of that response would to a large extent 
determine the future of nuclear power. 
86. Since the accident, the very advisability of using nuclear power had 
come into question, at a time when certain other factors were also acting 
against it. For example, oil prices had now fallen almost to pre-crisis 
levels, and were likely to remain that way for some years, while the nuclear 
industry was hampered by high initial investment costs and long construction 
times. It was sometimes felt, furthermore, that nuclear energy's share in 
electricity production was excessive. 
87. In response to that, he noted that for the industrialized countries 
taken as a whole, nuclear power had in 1985 covered less than 10% of primary 
energy requirements, over 80% of which had been satisfied by fossil fuels. 
Those proportions would be even more marked if developing countries were taken 
into consideration. 
88. At the same time it was clear that energy needs in general, 
particularly in terms of electricity, would, despite the recent downward 
trend, continue to grow noticeably. Experts had predicted that from now to 
the year 2000, energy requirements would grow at an annual average rate of 
approximately 2% for industrialized countries and 3% for developing countries, 
while the annual increase in electricity demand for the same period would be 
of the order of 2.5% and 6%, respectively. 
89. France was of the opinion that nuclear energy should make a vital 
contribution to satisfying those future needs, since it was based on a tried 
and tested technology which was competitive alongside other energy sources and 
which embodied specific advantages. It was, in particular, the only energy 
option which combined added value to the consumer with an absence of pollution. 
90. The competitiveness of nuclear power was a measurable reality. In 
France, for example, the cost of a nuclear kWh was 30% lower than from 
coal-fired plants and 70% lower than from oil-fired plants for base load 
operation. Given the operational flexibility of nuclear plants, which was now 
comparable to that of the classic thermal plants, the nuclear kWh remained 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 23 


competitive up to an output of 2300 hours per year. He expressed the 
conviction that nuclear energy represented the most appropriate response to 
the world's present energy needs, all the more so since the industrialized 
nations had a duty to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels in order to give 
developing countries easier access to them. 


91. Governments and the Agency alike should realize that while it was 
necessary to take the views of public opinion into account, it was also their 
duty to enlighten the public as to what was really at stake. 
92. Turning to nuclear safety, he said that right from the beginning that 
had been the prime concern of the nuclear industry. For France, as for other 
major nuclear powers, such concern had not started with Chernobyl. As the 
French Minister for Industry had previously noted, the power to regulate in 
the area of safety could not be shared or delegated, but must be left to 
individual States. 
93. Good safety, moreover, was not simply a matter of implementing abstract 
parameters, nor did it result from the systematic application of unique, 
universal and absolute measures. Just as in the design, construction and 
operation of power plants themselves, good safety resulted from taking account 
of an integrated body of technical, political and human data which, by 
definition, were specific to each State and which could only be properly dealt 
with at government level. 
94. It was clear that the causes and effects of the Chernobyl accident had 
been directly linked with the specific characteristics of the type of power 
plant involved. It would, therefore, not be justified to modify the safety 
systems of other types of plant in the world, since they were based on designs 
which had not been called into question - on the contrary - by the analysis of 
the accident. 
95. That analysis had demonstrated the paramount importance of operational 
safety, involving operational management, manpower training, knowledge of 
technical systems and the implementation of procedures and regulations 
properly suited to all operating conditions. It was here that the Agency, in 
its safety programmes, could further extend its activities, in regard both to 
training and to the exchange of information among operators. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 24 


96. International co-operation, and in the present case, the Agency's 
safety programme, found its true justification when it helped States to assume 
their national responsibilities. There was no doubt that the Agency, which 
had acted rapidly and effectively after the Chernobyl accident, would 
adequately fulfil the role which fell to it in that connection. 
97. It was important, even under the present circumstances, not to lose 
sight of the fundamental balance in the Agency's activities between technical 
assistance and co-operation on the one hand and safeguards on the other. The 
Agency must not become merely a regulatory body serving those countries 
already having a nuclear power programme; it must remain a developmental body 
serving all countries. 
98. With regard to France's nuclear power programme, there were, as of 
1 September 1986, a total of 63 units either installed, under construction or 
on order (a total of 62 618 MW(e)), of which 43 units were industrial in 
nature. Of the latter, 38 were pressurized-water reactors (PWRs), five of 
which were rated at 1300 MW(e). Those reactors, the average age of which was 
four years, had attained an energy availability factor of over 80% in the 
twelve previous months, without any significant incident having occurred. 
99. Electricity derived from nuclear sources had in 1985 amounted to 
two thirds of total French electricity production, equivalent to one quarter 
of the country's primary energy requirements (50 million TOE), 66% of which 
were covered by fossil fuels. 
100. Future priorities in respect of reactors concerned, first, improvement 
of the operability, economic competitiveness and reliability of existing 
installations; second, the study of new, more economical, operable and 
flexible PWR designs to make more efficient use of fissile materials than 
existing systems; and third, the successful industrial commissioning of the 
Creys-Malville plant, incorporating the Superphenix fast breeder reactor, 
which had already attained 50% of its rated capacity of 1200 MW(e). The 
success of that installation would to a large extent determine the future of a 
system, the deployment of which was now a less urgent objective than a few 
years previously, but which remained a necessity in the long term. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 25 


101. In terms of the fuel cycle, efforts were being directed in particular 
toward extending the La Hague reprocessing plant, whose existing installation 
was now operating with remarkable regularity at its rated capacity, having 
reprocessed since its commissioning over 1600 t of fuel from light-water 
reactors; the successful commencement of mixed oxide fuel fabrication for PWRs 
by Eurodif; maintaining the very satisfactory operation of the Eurodif plant 
for uranium enrichment by gaseous diffusion; development of the promising 
technique of uranium enrichment by laser; the problems of radioactive waste 
management and storage, the technical solutions to which were already well in 
hand. 
102. The design and operational safety of all nuclear installations was a 
matter of permanent concern, but had naturally been particularly highlighted 
under the present circumstances. 
103. Given the scope of its nuclear power programme, it was understandable 
that France should figure prominently among those countries seeking the best 
possible safety conditions for developing that resource, and he wondered how 
the situation would evolve in the light of Chernobyl. 
104. His Government had already confirmed that the country's existing energy 
policy would be maintained. As far as nuclear power was concerned, that meant 
that new plants would be constructed in line with increasing electricity 
consumption. The present commitment was to one 1300 MW(e) unit every 12 or 
18 months. 
105. In conclusion, the Chernobyl accident should not cause people to forget 
that the world's energy requirements could only be satisfied at reasonable 
cost through a major dependence on nuclear power. The nuclear option would, 
for some countries, contribute significantly to economic and social 
development, while for some, facing the demands of an expanding population, it 
might also come to be the only solution possible. 
106. For those reasons it was important that an accident should not serve to 
bring into question an energy source which used tested and reliable 
technologies, and which alone was capable of reducing States' energy 
dependence in the long term. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 26 


107. Mr. HIREMATH (India) said that the present session of the General 
Conference was being held at a time of crucial importance for the future of 
nuclear technology owing to the unfortunate accident which had occurred a 
little over five months previously. That event had set in motion a chain 
reaction with world-wide repercussions on public opinion. Even in the past, 
from time to time, there had been misinformed criticism about nuclear power 
and its applications. However, nuclear power had fully demonstrated its 
utility as a stable source of energy, nuclear technology had also been applied 
to agriculture and medicine, and it had likewise led to benefits in industry. 
There had been general recognition of all those facts during the special 
session of the Conference which had just been held, although some delegations 
had expressed their doubts and concerns. India, for its part, was convinced 
that nuclear power could be developed with little risk to operating personnel, 
general public or environment, provided the necessary precautions were taken. 
108. The year 1985-86 had seen notable advances in the Indian atomic energy 
programme. On 18 October 1985 the first indigenously built Fast Breeder Test 
Reactor (FBTR) using indigenously developed mixed carbide fuel had reached 
criticality with no difficulties or complications, thus marking the second 
phase of India's nuclear power programme. The country's three-phase strategy 
had started with the use of natural uranium in PHWRs, to be followed by 
plutonium-fuelled FBRs and, in due course, by the utilization of the 
thorium-uranium-233 cycle. 
109. During the past year, India's nuclear power units had continued to 
operate with good availability and satisfactory load factors. Significant 
progress had been achieved in manufacturing key nuclear components with 
shorter lead times than in the past, thus promoting the economic development 
of nuclear power. India was continuously upgrading the safety standards of 
its nuclear plants and was also laying increasing importance on operator 
training and retraining. 
110. He wished to stress the great importance which India attached to the 
Regional Co-operation Agreement (RCA) from which developing countries had 
already benefited and which should be further expanded. The personnel so 
trained could be harnessed to the development of various programmes. India 
would be hosting RCA meetings and training courses and contributing the 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 27 


equivalent of US $50 000 for the implementation of such activities. He 
strongly urged that the RCA should add co-operation in nuclear power to its 
existing work on the medical, industrial and agricultural uses of 
radioisotopes. 


111. His Government recognized the great value to developing countries of 
the Agency's technical assistance activities, although it was not happy about 
some of the directions which the programme had taken in recent years, 
particularly the discriminatory practices introduced since 1979, after the 
adoption of the Revised Guiding Principles. Nevertheless, India would be 
paying its share of voluntary contributions for 1987 to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund and would, as in the past, make Type-II 
fellowships available to the Agency. 
112. Following a need identified by the Board of Governors, the Agency had 
convened a group of senior experts to advise on mechanisms to assist 
developing countries in the promotion and financing of nuclear power 
programmes. The developing world, had a great stake in the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, owing to a lack of possibilities of power 
generation from other sources, and he wished therefore to urge all concerned 
to support the expert group in its work. 
113. He had noted with interest the numerous proposals for enhanced nuclear 
safety that had been put forward by various experts during the discussions 
held in recent months. He naturally supported that increased concern for 
safety, and took the present opportunity to mention that an independent Atomic 
Energy Regulatory Board had been in operation in India since November 1983, 
with specific responsibility for overseeing all safety-related matters at 
Indian nuclear facilities. It was in that same spirit that India had actively 
participated in the meeting of governmental experts to draft the recently 
approved conventions on early notification and on mutual assistance, although 
his Government was disappointed that, in spite of the desire expressed by a 
large number of countries, including India, to draft an early notification 
convention that would cover accidents from whatever source, civil or military, 
including nuclear weapons and nuclear-weapon tests, it had not been possible 
to reach a consensus on such a full-scope instrument. India had, 
nevertheless, decided to sign both conventions, subject to ratification, 

GC(XXX)/0R.282 
page 28 


because of the solemn assurance publicly given by the five nuclear-weapon 
States that they would notify all nuclear accidents with possible 
transboundary radiological safety significance. 


114. Regarding the proposals currently under consideration for an expanded 
Agency programme of nuclear safety activities, he would emphasize that those 
proposals would have to be subjected to careful expert study, as would the 
financial implications of such a programme. 
115. India would continue to co-operate with the Agency in the 
implementation of safeguards at those Indian nuclear facilities for which the 
Government had voluntarily accepted an obligation to place nuclear materials 
under safeguards. The Agency safeguards inspectors had been able to carry out 
their tasks successfully and the relevant agreements were being scrupulously 
observed. 
116. From time to time statements were made that non-signatories of NPT 
should not shirk their duty to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
It was strange that even now, after three review conferences, there had not 
been sufficient recognition of the fact that NPT was inherently 
discriminatory. That inequitable treaty accorded to certain countries full 
freedom to continue with their nuclear weapon tests and thus further to 
elaborate their ever-incrasing nuclear arsenals, while others - in fact the 
very countries that did indeed pursue peaceful nuclear porgrammes - were asked 
to abide by much more rigid terms and conditions. In that context he noted 
with regret that, although there had been a unilateral initiative on the part 
of one country to halt its nuclear weapon tests, there had been no reciprocal 
response from the others concerned. 
117. In concluding, he wished to reiterate that the Conference was meeting 
at a time when the world's eyes were focused on nuclear energy and on its 
environmental implications. It could not be denied that an accident at a 
nuclear facility did lead to doubts about the safety aspects of that new 
technology, but nevertheless the net balance was very much in favour of 
nuclear technology, once its security and safety aspects had been adequately 
covered. 

GC(XXX)/0R.282 
page 29 


118. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of Germany) said that the last 
year had again witnessed a considerable expansion of nuclear power, now 
accounting for 15% of the world's electricity generating capacity. In the 
OECD countries the figure was indeed above 20%. Even if at present there was 
a virtual halt in the ordering of new plants, the completion in the coming 
years of a considerable number of plants now under construction could be 
expected. Nuclear power remained a source of energy of steadily increasing 
importance. 
119. It was against that background that the consequences of Chernobyl had 
to be dealt with, both by individual countries and in the international 
context. That accident had produced a profound and bewildering shock within 
the German population, a shock particularly severe because of the magnitude of 
the accident and its tangible and intangible consequences, and because of the 
prolonged lack of information on what had happened, why it had happened, and 
what it might lead to. Judging by that shock, he could only describe the task 
before the Agency as large, difficult and urgent. The previous week had seen 
the convening of a special session of the General Conference for the explicit 
purpose of guiding further international efforts to improve nuclear safety and 
to contain the consequences of nuclear accidents. 
120. It was by no means automatic or usual that in a moment of crisis the 
international community called upon an organization in the United Nations 
family to constitute the forum for discussions on the provision of guidance 
and on action. Why had that occurred in the present case? He believed that 
the world had turned to the Agency because of its reputation as a well-managed 
international body with competence to deal impartially both with frequently 
complex technical questions and with international political problems. That 
positive image was also based on the fact that the Agency had, so far, not 
allowed extraneous political considerations to interfere with its basically 
technical and scientific tasks. That situation should continue. 
121. The Agency's good reputation had been built up over a period of 
30 years, and had been the decisive factor influencing his Government's 
request that the Agency should give direction to the international debate. 
That trust was obviously shared by all Member States, as otherwise it would 

GG(XXX)/0R.282 
page 30 


not have been possible to find a consensus, in quite a short time, on the 
further steps to be taken. Particular tribute had to be paid to the prudent 
and expeditious guidance given to the Agency's efforts in those crucial days 
by the Director General, Dr. Hans Blix, and to the dedication of the Agency's 
staff in meeting the sudden challenge with ingenuity and hard work. 


122. Paradoxical as it might seem, the position of the Agency had been 
strengthened by the Chernobyl accident. It had been entrusted with new tasks, 
and it could firmly count on the support of its Members in responding to 
them. It was in the interest of everyone to preserve that context of fruitful 
international co-operation. The international community needed a strong and 
lively International Atomic Energy Agency. 
123. In the Federal Republic of Germany the continuous development of 
nuclear energy during the past five years, in particular the reliability and 
safety of the country's nuclear power plants, had helped to establish a 
positive climate for an improved acceptance of nuclear energy. The strong 
reaction of the public to the Chernobyl accident had deeply affected that 
climate, at least for the immediate future, and had led to a renewed and 
extremely controversial debate on energy policy. In that debate the Federal 
Government had strongly supported the continued utilization of nuclear energy, 
given the safety record of the nuclear power stations in the Federal 
Republic. In particular, it had emphasized that nuclear energy protected the 
limited reserves of non-renewable raw materials. Furthermore, a renunciation 
of nuclear energy would lead to greatly increased competition for fossil 
fuels. At the same time, the supply of raw materials would be affected - also 
for coming generations. Such a development would especially affect countries 
without indigenous resources, including many Third World countries. Also, 
renouncing nuclear energy, necessarily coupled with the expanded use of fossil 
fuels, would entail a drastic increase in environmental pollution, and would 
thus be in conflict with the central political goal of reducing, as fast as 
possible, emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and dust. In 
addition, for an industrial country like the Federal Republic of Germany 
nuclear energy had considerable technological and economic significance. 
Finally, the development of renewable sources of energy had nothing like 
advanced to such a degree that it could, in the foreseeable future, replace 
nuclear energy. 

GC(XXX)/0R.282 
page 31 


124. Turning to the specific features of nuclear development in the Federal 
Republic of Germany during the last year, he observed that one could again 
observe a period of steady growth. In the area of advanced reactors and in 
the nuclear fuel cycle, projects were running on schedule. It should be 
noted, in particular, that the 300 MW high-temperature reactor had started to 
operate during the previous year and that the 300 MW fast-breeder prototype 
was practically completed. The uranium centrifuge enrichment plant had 
reached a capacity of 150 t/a, and an expansion programme was under way. 
Preparations for waste repositories were progressing satisfactorily, and site 
preparations for a reprocessing plant at Wackersdorf in Bavaria had started at 
the end of 1985. 
125. Regarding international co-operation, he wished to mention that his 
Government had recently signed an agreement with the Soviet Union on 
scientific and technical co-operation, which would include the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. He expected that upon entry into force of that agreement a 
wide range of joint activities would develop. 
126. On the subject of the Agency's activities during the past year, he 
would first address himself to the nuclear safety programme. The first 
special session of the General Conference had afforded an opportunity to 
discuss the different aspects of international co-operation in nuclear safety 
and the role of the Agency in fostering such co-operation. While not wishing 
to continue that discussion in detail on the present occasion, he would just 
mention three points on which, in the opinion of his Government, particular 
attention and support were needed: 
1. 
The co-operation of the Agency in the implementation of the two 
conventions adopted the previous week; 
2. 
The further discussion of nuclear safety standards. Their updating 
and refinement in the light of the post-accident evaluation were a 
matter of urgency. Also, work on trying to elaborate safety rules 
to which States might commit themselves was an important and 
challenging task; 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 32 


3. 
The demonstration of a high level of nuclear safety to the 
international community. Operational Safety Review Teams, the 
Incident Reporting System and Radiation Protection Advisory Teams 
were already in action, and those services should be expanded. 
Nuclear safety was one of the most important assignments of the Agency. A 
well-structured, expanded safety programme was in the interest of all Member 
States, regardless of whether they wished to promote the use of nuclear energy 
on their own territory or whether they were primarily interested in ensuring 


its safe application in other countries. 


127. His Government was pleased to note that in 1985 the Agency again 
arrived at the conclusion that nuclear material under safeguards remained 
devoted to peaceful nuclear activities or was otherwise adequately accounted 
for. That conclusion was accepted by the international community because 
there was trust in the technical skill as well as in the political judgement 
of the Agency's management. As the number of facilities had increased only 
slightly, and as no rapid increase was expected in the near future, the 
safeguards system could now concentrate on still further improving its 
practical operations and its theoretical concepts, and on increasing its 
effectiveness and efficiency - for instance, by defining more realistic 
safeguards targets and improving safeguards technology. His Government would 
continue to promote efforts in that direction through its safeguards support 
programme by making available cost-free experts, equipment and appropriate 
safeguards methodology. 
128. About 30% of the Agency's inspection activities were taking place in 
his country. There was excellent co-operation by the operators of nuclear 
facilities with the safeguards inspectorates, which in the case of the Federal 
Republic of Germany included those of EURATOM. 
129. His Government was gratified that there were now four voluntary-offer 
agreements by nuclear-weapon States in force, and that a fifth nuclear-weapon 
State had indicated its intention to place some of its facilities under 
safeguards. Submission of a larger number of facilities of advanced rather 
than conventional technology would render the voluntary offers more meaningful. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 33 


130. The Federal Republic appreciated the considerable help which the Agency 
had provided for the nuclear programmes of its Member States. It was also 
pleased to note that during the past year substantially greater resources had 
been made available for that purpose, indicating the soundness of the present 
system of financing. He commended the Agency's efforts to cope with the 
growth of the programme by streamlining project preparation and implementation 
and by refining evaluation procedures. However, it would be helpful if the 
Agency, in presenting a new project, would spell out more explicitly its 
overall aim, indicating how the project contributed to the development efforts 
of the recipient country and how it fitted in with its own programme 
priorities. 
131. His Government noted with satisfaction the progress made by the 
regional co-operation programme in Latin America (ARCAL). The Federal 
Republic had been the first country from outside Latin America to support that 
initiative, and had increased that support in 1986, and he was pleased that 
other countries had also decided - or were about to decide - to contribute to 
the ARCAL programme. 
132. His Government had in 1985 again made a substantial contribution to the 
Agency's technical co-operation programme, and subject to parliamentary 
approval was prepared once more to pledge its full share of the target in 1987 
and to earmark additional extrabudgetary support for fellowships, experts and 
equipment, training courses, scientific meetings and co-ordinated research 
programmes. 
133. Mr. MORPHET (United Kingdom) said that the Agency had never before 
been so much in the public eye. The great responsibility which it carried in 
the field of international nuclear co-operation, and which it had long carried 
without over-much public attention, was being widely perceived since 
Chernobyl. Even so, the full extent of the Agency's achievements and 
capabilities had not yet been appreciated. In the coming months, there would 
be an unrivalled opportunity to establish international safety collaboration 
on a wider scale than ever before, and it was essential that the Agency should 
show itself ready to grasp that opportunity and carry the task through. 

GC(XXX)/0R.282 
page 34 


134. The follow-up work on nuclear safety and radiological protection must 
be undertaken with the same sense of urgency which had marked the Agency's 
activities during the Post-Accident Review Meeting in August and the first 
special session of the General Conference in September. Care must of course 
be taken to avoid overload and to ensure that the Director General and his 
staff were not burdened with inessential tasks; but it was imperative to 
maintain the momentum of the co-operative activity which had developed under 
the impetus of Chernobyl. 
135. For its part, the United Kingdom would do all it could to contribute to 
well-focused programmes in the key areas of operational safety, radiation 
protection, and the development of commonly shared safety concepts, and it 
expected the Agency to help disseminate the vital conclusion drawn by the 
INSAG experts that there was a need for a "safety culture" in all operating 
nuclear power plants. The INSAG report had identified three aspects of such a 
culture, namely training, with special emphasis on the need to acquire a good 
understanding of the reactor and its operation; auditing, both internal and 
external to the utility, to prevent complacency arising from routine 
operation; and permanent awareness by all personnel of the potential safety 
implications of any deviation from established procedures. Safety 
consciousness was essential, and to ensure that the story of Chernobyl and its 
lessons were fully understood, the nuclear industry in his country was now 
arranging for operating staff to receive extensive briefing on the reasons for 
the accident. 
136. There was no shortage of proposals for future work: the Agency's own 
revised safety and radiation protection programme for 1987, the 
recommendations of the INSAG experts, and other proposals made at the special 
session provided an ambitious range of work. The next tasks would be to 
determine the broad relative importance of those proposals, to distinguish 
immediate needs from matters which could be dealt with at greater leisure, and 
to formulate a clear, detailed schedule of international work, contacts and 
meetings over the coming year. In addition, a time-scale should be 
established for the important conceptual work which had been identified, 
including accident analysis, probabilistic safety assessment, and the 
difficult though important area of international safety standards. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 35 


137. While such conceptual work was continuing, his country's safety 
authorities would of course be carrying out their daily work as well, and that 
work was at the very heart of the matter. The quality of regulatory systems 
of nuclear inspectorates was fundamental to public assurance in all 
countries. Hence the importance of the proposals which his country's 
Secretary of State, Mr. Peter Walker, had made during the special session when 
he had urged that the Agency should update its information about existing 
national regulatory systems and promote best practices, possibly in due course 
forming an expert team to co-ordinate a peer review of such systems. 
138. Although the focus of attention at present was naturally on the 
Agency's nuclear safety work, it was to be hoped that the current public 
interest could be used to draw attention to the great importance of the 
Agency's work in other areas. For example, most people remained quite simply 
unaware of the immense achievement of the international community in the field 
of safeguards. It must be brought home to them that, while the world had a 
great and vital common interest in nuclear safety, it had an equally great and 
vital common interest in nuclear safeguards. The Agency's safeguards would 
continue to enjoy the fullest support of the United Kingdom which planned to 
contribute, through its support programme, to a wide range of research and 
development activities with a view to improving the efficiency and 
effectiveness of safeguards. In particular, expertise and facilities were 
being made available, and co-operation with other Member States was being 
maintained in important areas of safeguards development for more advanced 
operations, such as the mixed-oxide fuel cycle, large-scale reprocessing 
plants, and near-real-time accountancy. 
139. He had announced the previous year that the United Kingdom had 
concluded the arrangements for the implementation of Agency safeguards at 
Urenco-UK's Capenhurst enrichment facility, and he could now report that 
Agency inspectors were visiting that facility on a routine basis and that 
satisfactory safeguards under the voluntary offer were in force. 
140. In the future, further advances in nuclear technology could be expected 
to be made in the field of laser enrichment. It would be of great importance 
for safeguards considerations to be taken into account in the course of that 
development, and his country's nuclear industry was being encouraged to do so 
when designing new plants or developing new techniques. 

GC(XXX)/OR.282 
page 36 


141. His country was gratified by the continuing good progress of the 
technical assistance and co-operation programme, and would make its full 
assessed contribution of over US $1.6 million to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1987. In addition, it would double its contribution 
towards footnote-a/ projects in the period 1986-1991. 
142. The importance of public information for nuclear power had been 
underestimated in the past. In his country, the nuclear industry had recently 
brought together its public information activities in a Nuclear Electricity 
Information Group, whose task was to explain the facts of nuclear power - for 
the debate on nuclear power must be based on facts. Given the international 
dimension of that debate, the Agency also should undoubtedly assign high 
priority to its own public information work. 
143. In conclusion, he expressed appreciation of the work which had been 
done in the past few months by the Director General and his staff. In view of 
the heavy workload which still lay ahead on many fronts, it would be important 
to concentrate on essentials and to spare that staff in areas which were 
peripheral to the real work of the Agency. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXX)/OR.283 
April 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 29 September 1986, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. RAMANNA (India) 
later: Mr. CHERIF (Algeria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


Election of the President and Vice-Presidents 
of the General Conference and of the Chairman 
of the Committee of the Whole; appointment of 
the General Committee (resumed) 1-5 


General debate and annual report for 1985 
(resumed) 6-85 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 6-20 
China 21 - 27 
Republic of Korea 28 - 35 
Pakistan 36 - 47 
Czechoslovakia 48 - 56 
German Democratic Republic 57 - 64 
Poland 65 - 71 
Finland 72-85 


I*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 30 October 1986. 

[**] GC(XXX)/774. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/238/Rev.4. 


87-1176 
0867e/0130e 



GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 2 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENTS OF THE GENERAL CONFERENCE AND OF 
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE; APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL 
COMMITTEE (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference that the consultations on 
the election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Conference and of the other 
members of the General Committee had been completed. 
2. He proposed, in conformity with Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure of 
the General Conference, that the delegates of the following Member States be 
elected as Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: Algeria, France, 
Guatemala, Japan, Jordan, Thailand, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
and the United States of America. 
3. He proposed, pursuant to Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, 
Mr. de la Barre d'Erquelinnes of Belgium as Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole and, pursuant to Rule 40, that the delegates of the following Member 
States be elected as additional members of the General Committee: 
Czechoslovakia, Ireland, Kenya, Poland and Uruguay. 
4. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
5. The General Committee was thus duly appointed. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1985 (GC(XXX)/775 and Corr.l) (resumed) 


6. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), observing 
that the regular session was taking place immediately after the special 
session of the General Conference whose labours, devoted to a wide range of 
questions relating to the safe development of nuclear energy in the world, had 
been crowned with success, said that his delegation was most gratified that 
the final document of the special session recognized that nuclear energy, if 
properly used, would continue to be an important source of energy at the 
service of mankind. The special session had appealed to States to co-operate 
in order to further the development of nuclear energy while ensuring the 
maximum safety for people and for the environment. As was well known, the 
programme suggested by the Soviet Union to establish an international regime 
for the safe development of nuclear power had been widely supported by the 
participants at the special session. That programme envisaged a series of 
practical measures for the establishment of a scientific and technical basis 

GG(XXX)/OR.283 
page 3 


for the development of nuclear power. Their implementation through a common 
effort on the part of all States would make it possible to create the 
conditions in which nuclear power could meet the growing energy demand. 


7. The special session of the General Conference had approved two 
international conventions, major legal instruments which constituted an 
initial international commitment to serve as the basis of a future system for 
the safe development of nuclear power. The important decisions taken at the 
special session on that matter would require continued co-operation between 
States and would enhance the Agency's role and responsibilities in that area, 
which was so important for the whole of mankind. The Soviet Union was aware 
that only the initial stages had been accomplished, but it was ready to make 
further efforts to reach the desired objective. 
8. Safety in the peaceful use of nuclear energy was closely linked to the 
complete elimination of nuclear weapons in the world. The political realities 
of the present-day world required that effective measures be taken immediately 
to halt the nuclear arms race, to remove the latent threat of nuclear war and 
to protect the world from plunging into the abyss of a nuclear holocaust. 
That required wide international co-operation, based on the combined efforts 
of States, international organizations and peace-loving groups. 
9. In the area of disarmament, the main initiatives of Soviet foreign 
policy and the programme which the Soviet Union had submitted for the complete 
elimination of nuclear weapons by the end of the twentieth century opened up 
to humanity a real way to a world without nuclear weapons, to a world of 
genuine security for all States. As was well known, his country had decided 
to extend its unilateral moratorium on all nuclear explosions until 
1 January 1987. It was deeply convinced that a total ban on nuclear tests was 
the first and most effective step towards nuclear disarmament. A ban on 
nuclear explosions would be a serious and realistic procedure for limiting the 
arms race. Wide and effective international co-operation in the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy could be developed successfully only if all the conditions 
were met to prevent a nuclear war, to limit the arms race, particularly 
nuclear weapons, and to increase confidence between States. The Agency was in 
a position to make a constructive contribution to solving those problems. The 
Stockholm Conference had laid the foundations. 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 4 


10. In 1987 the Agency would celebrate its 30th anniversary. It was 
satisfactory to note that over the years it had become a universally 
recognized centre, able both to solve scientific and technical problems of the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy and to provide assistance to developing 
countries within its sphere of competence. The Agency was concerned with 
questions of special importance for all States, such as the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
It had gained the confidence of the international community by becoming one of 
the most competent and efficient international organizations whose activities 
served the interests of all States. The Agency was particularly well thought 
of in the Soviet Union, where it was hoped that its activities would be 
strengthened. In accordance with the Statute, the control of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime and 
the progressive development of the safeguards system occupied a special place 
in the Agency's activities. In that respect it was appropriate to note that 
the safeguards agreement signed between the USSR and the Agency would enable 
the Agency to acquire new experience in the application of safeguards. 
11. The annual report for 1985 showed that there had been positive results 
in that area during 1985. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea had 
become party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the 
number of parties to that treaty stood at 130. His country had always 
supported the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime and attached great 
importance to the universalization of NPT because it believed that that would 
serve the interests of the international community in general and would 
promote greater international co-operation, from which all countries would 
benefit. The success of the third NPT Review Conference had made a 
significant contribution to the development of the non-proliferation regime. 
The USSR wished to draw attention to the excellent work carried out by the 
Agency in preparing that important conference. The Agency had been given the 
essential task of verifying that the parties to NPT fulfilled their 
obligations. His delegation was pleased to note that in 1985, as in previous 
years, the Secretariat had, in carrying out the safeguards obligations of the 
Agency, not detected any irregularity which would indicate the diversion of a 
significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material - or the misuse of 
facilities or equipment subject to safeguards under certain agreements - for 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 5 


the manufacture of nuclear weapons or for any other military purpose, or for 
the manufacture of any other nuclear explosive device. That demonstrated 
Members States' confidence in the international safeguards system set up by 
the Agency. 


12. However, the Soviet delegation noted that in 1986 five non-nuclearweapon 
States had unsafeguarded facilities capable of producing material which 
could be used for the manufacture of nuclear weapons. The strengthening of 
the non-proliferation regime remained an urgent problem. It should not be 
forgotten that its solution depended directly on the functioning of the 
Agency's safeguards system, which was the only generally recognized system for 
the international control of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The 
Agency's efforts should be aimed at improving the effectiveness of that system 
in countries which could acquire nuclear capability and particularly in those 
which had not acceded to NPT. In those countries control activities should 
concentrate on the "sensitive" stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. As in the 
past, the Agency should continue to improve the effectiveness of control by 
recourse to more advanced methods, procedures and technical facilities and by 
optimizing its inspection activities. The Soviet Union was giving more help 
to the Agency's work in that area by providing assistance under its scientific 
and technical support programme for safeguards. The resources allocated to 
that programme for the period 1986-1988 had more than doubled to reach 
5 million roubles. In addition, the USSR had made a special contribution of 
330 000 roubles to finance the Agency's activities in the Soviet Union under 
that programme. 
13. His country intended to take an active part in the Agency's efforts to 
increase co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It greatly 
appreciated the work done by the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) and 
continued to believe that there were real possibilities for establishing 
principles of international co-operation in the area of nuclear energy and a 
system of assured supplies as part of the strengthening of the nonproliferation 
regime. It was convinced that all members of CAS would 
contribute constructively to the conclusion of agreements which would benefit 
all countries and ensure that nuclear energy was used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 6 


14. The Soviet Union actively supported, in its main outlines, the 
programme of scientific and technical co-operation with Member States for the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, particularly those activities which were of 
interest to all countries. It lent constant support to the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS), to co-operation on nuclear data research at 
the Agency and to work on nuclear power and the fuel cycle. It also supported 
the Agency's activities in the area of controlled nuclear fusion. 
15. In view of the importance accorded at present to problems of nuclear 
safety, his Government approved the proposal to undertake additional 
activities in the field of nuclear safety and radiation protection in 1987 in 
the amount of $2 030 000. Although in favour of the programme in principle, 
his delegation believed that the Board of Governors should give it further 
consideration in order to introduce the necessary modifications and amendments. 
16. The USSR had always believed that the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation activities were an important aspect of the organization's work, 
since they promoted the transfer of experience, knowledge and technology 
relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the benefit of the 
economic and social development of countries. A growing proportion of the 
Agency's budget was being spent on technical assistance. At its previous 
session, the General Conference had decided on an increase of 12%, by 
comparison with 1986, in the indicative planning figure for the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1987. His delegation approved that 
increase while urging that the principles of financing the Fund, namely 
voluntary contributions in national currency, should remain unchanged. The 
total amount of resources available for technical co-operation in 1987 would 
reach $42.5 million. That figure was a very good illustration of the Agency's 
success in the technical co-operation field and showed clearly that the 
financial resources allocated to that important area were continuing to 
increase substantially. The system of indicative planning figures had proved 
to be effective; it provided reliable, predictable and assured financing for 
the Agency's technical co-operation activities. 
17. The Soviet Union had continued to increase its participation in the 
implementation of the Agency's technical assistance programme. It paid its 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 7 


share of voluntary contributions to the Fund regularly and in full, and in 
1987 that contribution would be the equivalent of $3 434 000 in national 
currency. Those resources should be used to provide developing countries with 
equipment, instruments, facilities and material from the Soviet Union and to 
train Agency fellows under training programmes, study tours and other 
activities organized in the country. In addition, the USSR had allocated 
2 million roubles for the financing during the period 1986-1988 of footnote- a/ 
projects in countries party to NPT. His delegation believed that increasing 


the efficiency of the Agency's activities depended greatly on the use of 
proven mechanisms such as the implementation of long-term, large-scale 
technical assistance projects, international and regional co-operation in the 


implementation of projects and participation by other international 
organizations in Agency projects. The Agency had an important role to play 
with regard to mobilizing and making the best use of all the available 
resources: it should continue to improve its administrative procedures and to 
make regular evaluations of the results of technical co-operation. 


18. The analysis of the causes and consequences of accidents in nuclear 
power plants, which had taken place during August, had shown the important 
role of the human factor and the man-machine interface. In that respect, the 
Agency should make greater use of its training potential in order to improve 
the theoretical and practical knowledge of staff in recipient countries. His 
delegation noted that in previous years the implementation of the technical 
co-operation programme and the utilization of Member States' resources had 
generally led to positive results. That work should be continued 
unremittingly and new projects using all the financial resources available to 
the Agency for technical assistance should be regularly submitted to donor 
countries for their consideration. 
19. Since the Chernobyl accident, the question of nuclear safety had 
acquired a new urgency. In his delegation's view, the conclusion to be drawn 
from the accident was quite clear: nuclear energy should be developed under 
conditions which ensured the maximum safety both for the public and for the 
environment. In the USSR a series of measures had been taken to improve the 
monitoring of safety at nuclear power plants throughout the country. The 
Soviet Union had shown a great sense of responsibility in the conclusions 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 8 


which it had drawn from the Chernobyl accident and from accidents at nuclear 
power plants in other countries. The set of proposals for the establishment, 
through close co-operation between all States, of an international regime for 
the safe development of nuclear energy, which had been submitted by the 
Deputy-Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers, B.E. Shcherbina, at the 
special session of the General Conference, was based on those conclusions. 
The main elements of that programme had been described in the statements made 
by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of 
the USSR, Mr. M. Gorbachev, on 14 May and 9 June 1986. 


20. His delegation associated itself with those which had expressed their 
approval of the annual report for 1985 and wished to thank the 
Director General and the Agency Secretariat for the valuable and efficient 
work they had done during the past year. It was convinced that the Agency 
would remain a reliable instrument for the development of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy under a permanent regime 
of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
21. Mr. JIANG (China) said that 1985 had been marked by important 
activities in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and had on the whole been 
fruitful. 
22. The first special session of the General Conference had been a 
success. His delegation had very much appreciated the spirit of co-operation 
and understanding shown by the participants. That meeting had reviewed recent 
important events and had adopted by consensus two conventions which the 
majority of Member States had signed or were proposing to sign. That fact 
demonstrated that, provided account was taken of the different requirements of 
Member States and of the interests of the various parties in seeking a common 
ground without ignoring differences, it was possible to solve within the 
framework of the Agency certain important problems of common interest. 
23. His delegation approved the Agency's Annual Report for 1985. During 
that year Member States, particularly developing countries, had greatly 
appreciated the efforts made by the Agency to increase the implementation rate 
of the technical co-operation programme, to improve the effective utilization 
of technical assistance resources and the practical results of technical 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 9 


assistance, and to encourage developing countries to make their contribution 
to technical co-operation. His delegation sincerely hoped that the 
Secretariat would redouble its efforts in its future activities. It hoped, in 
particular, that the Agency would do everything in its power to increase the 
implementation rate of technical co-operation projects, to improve the 
effectiveness of technical co-operation and to strengthen international 
co-operation in the area of nuclear safety. Recalling certain suggestions 
made by the Governor from China at the meetings of the Board in June, his 
delegation wished to stress that in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy the Agency should increase expenditure on technical co-operation and 


the resources allocated to promotional activities in order better to meet the 
needs of Member States, particularly developing countries. 


24. His delegation believed that the development of relatively simple 
nuclear power plants, safe to operate and low in cost, was important for the 
development of nuclear power. It supported all the Agency's efforts in that 
area. With regard to the application of nuclear techniques in agriculture, 
his delegation believed that it was an extremely important area for developing 
countries and hoped that the Agency would continue its work therein so as to 
derive still better economic returns. 
25. Despite the controversies caused in international public opinion by the 
development of nuclear energy, China's view of nuclear energy was identical to 
that of the Director General who had commented in one of his reports that 
nuclear power was a very promising source of energy. His country would 
therefore continue its nuclear power programme as planned, in a positive and 
appropriate way in accordance with its principle of requesting foreign 
co-operation while safeguarding its autonomy. Nuclear power plants at 
Guangdong Daya Bay and Zhejiang-Qinshan were under construction. The first 
would have two 900 MW units and the second would have one of 300 MW. In both 
cases they would be pressurized-water reactors designed in accordance with the 
Agency's nuclear safety standards. In the design and construction of the two 
power plants priority was being given to safety and quality assurance, and 
China had made an in-depth study of the relevant experience of other 
countries. In order to improve effectively the safety of nuclear power 
plants, a Chinese State Nuclear Safety Administration had been established. 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 10 


In addition, a committee of nuclear safety experts had been founded. His 
Government attached great importance to international co-operation in nuclear 
safety. It had actively participated in meetings organized by the Agency 
during which Chinese experts, together with their counterparts from other 
countries, had examined technical, political and legal questions associated 
with nuclear safety and had put forward suggestions and proposals. In 
addition, China was ready to exchange information on nuclear safety with other 
countries. 


26. Since China had become a Member of the Agency, technical co-operation 
with the latter had increased every year, covering an increasing number of 
areas and producing increasingly tangible results. In 1985, the Agency had 
co-operated with his country in the organization of various courses: an 
advanced training course on elemental analysis by nuclear techniques, a 
training course/demonstration on radiation cross-linking applications in the 
wire and cable industry, and a training course on radioimmunoassay 
techniques. A number of international meetings had been held in China, 
including the Asian and Pacific Regional Seminar on Food Irradiation, 
co-sponsored by the Agency and FAO, the second meeting of the project on food 
irradiation in the Asian and Pacific Region and study tours on the same 
subject, as well as a meeting of experts on low-energy research reactors. 
China had contributed to those activities as host country. In 1986 the Agency 
and China had organized two training courses, on radiation-induced mutation 
and on non-destructive testing, a second training course/demonstration on 
radiation cross-linking applications in the wire and cable industry and a 
workshop on the radiosterilization of medical products. By participating in 
technical co-operation activities organized by the Agency, Chinese scientists 
and experts had been able to exchange views with colleagues from other 
countries, which had enabled everyone to learn from the strong points of 
others. His country believed that such international exchanges were very 
valuable. 
27. His delegation had announced at the twenty-ninth regular session of the 
General Conference that China would voluntarily place some of its civil 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards at an appropriate time, and that it 
would hold consultations with the Agency on that subject. Recently, a 

GC(XXK)/OR.283 
page 11 


delegation from the Agency, headed by Mr. Herzig, Director of the Division of 
External Relations, had visited Beijing. The first round of negotiations 
between China and the Agency relating to the voluntary submission of nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards had taken place and the planned objective had 
been reached. 


28. Mr. KWON (Republic of Korea) said that his delegation was 
particularly interested in the discussions at the thirtieth regular session of 
the General Conference concerning the activities to be undertaken to solve the 
crucial safety problems highlighted by the Chernobyl accident. That accident 
had provoked renewed public concern about nuclear safety and had served as a 
reminder of the need to be better prepared for emergency situations, both at 
international and at regional level. In that respect, his delegation was 
pleased to learn that the conventions on early notification and on emergency 
assistance had been adopted by consensus at the special session of the General 
Conference. His Government welcomed the adoption of those two conventions, 
which it fully supported, and proposed to take the necessary measures for 
their signature and ratification as soon as possible. 
29. Many constructive ideas had been submitted at the Post-Accident Review 
Meeting and at the meeting of governmental experts to prepare the two draft 
conventions; his delegation hoped that those ideas would be studied in 
greater detail at international level and that they would be taken up in the 
Agency's programme. It also hoped that all Member States would associate 
themselves with the Agency and spare no effort - particularly with regard to 
financing - to strengthen the Agency's role in nuclear safety. The 
participants in the Post-Accident Review Meeting had made very interesting 
recommendations regarding follow-up activities; those recommendations 
included the launching of a long-term programme for a comprehensive analysis 
at international level which would make it possible to apply the lessons 
learned to all types of reactors. However, it would perhaps take years to 
gather and analyse some of the data. His delegation was convinced that the 
Secretariat would make the full body of information available to Member States 
in an efficient manner, thus enabling them to strengthen the technical and 
economic aspects of preventive measures. 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 12 


30. With regard to the annual report for 1985, the Agency had made 
commendable efforts in the area of technical assistance and co-operation and 
had played an outstanding role in that area. The annual report showed that in 
1985 the Agency had adopted a series of measures designed to increase the 
implementation rate of the technical co-operation programme, to improve the 
utilization of the Technical Assistance and Go-operation Fund and to increase 
the overall efficiency of the technical assistance programme. His delegation 
noted with satisfaction that the technical co-operation activities had 
concentrated more on nuclear power and safety and that the net expenditure on 
technical co-operation had considerably increased. However, more than one 
third of the available resources had not yet been used, and the implementation 
rate for footnote-a/ projects had continued to decrease. His delegation 
therefore hoped that the Agency and Member States would endeavour to increase 
net expenditure still further and to improve the implementation rate for 
footnote-a/ projects. 
31. The Agency's safeguards activities played a key role since they made it 
possible to ensure nuclear non-proliferation while promoting the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. His delegation noted with satisfaction that in 1985, as in 
previous years, the Agency had not detected any anomaly which would indicate 
diversion of special fissile materials. The Agency was to be commended on the 
way in which it had implemented its safeguards system in 1985 and on its very 
important role in nuclear non-proliferation. It appeared that the Agency's 
safeguards system had been expanded and improved. In view of the increase in 
the number of nuclear facilities subject to safeguards, the financial and 
human resources allocated to inspections should be strengthened. However, 
neither that measure nor the increase in the frequency of inspections would, 
in themselves, be sufficient to ensure the development of the safeguards 
system. His delegation therefore urged the Secretariat to make efforts 
further to improve the safeguards system in terms of safeguards evaluation and 
the cost-effectiveness of safeguards activities. It hoped, for example, that 
the Agency would develop a standard safeguards system for pressurized heavy 
water reactors, which would make it possible to increase the overall 
efficiency of inspection activities. 

GC(XX.X)/OR.283 
page 13 


32. With regard to the nuclear power programme in the Republic of Korea, 
six reactors with a total capacity of 4800 MW providing about 26% of all 
electricity generated were already in service and three additional reactors, 
of 950 MW each, were under construction. The tendering procedure for units 11 
and 12 was in its final stage. It should ensure his country's autonomy in 
nuclear technology, since the construction of the facilities would be carried 
out by the national nuclear industry as the main contractor responsible for 
the design and manufacture of components and of the overall facilities, with 
foreign firms acting as sub-contractors. 
33. The Atomic Energy Law had been amended so as to take account of nuclear 
technology development in the Republic of Korea. The Atomic Energy 
Commission, which had formerly been headed by the Minister of Science and 
Technology, had been reorganized and was now headed by the Deputy Prime 
Minister, its membership including all ministers whose functions were related 
to nuclear energy. Furthermore, the law stipulated that electricity producers 
should set aside a fixed amount of the income from the sale of electricity for 
radioactive waste management, and likewise provided for the establishment of a 
national accounting and control system for nuclear materials. 
34. With regard to Regional Co-operation Agreement (RCA) activities, his 
country would strengthen its active participation in that regional 
co-operation effort, and there was every indication that the RCA programme 
would be accelerated. In April 1986 his country had hosted the eighth working 
group meeting of RCA member countries in Seoul, at which the participants had 
agreed to extend the agreement for at least five years and to move to the 
implementation of stage II of the UNDP industrial project, following the 
completion of stage I in 1986. It was also satisfying to note that just 
before the Seoul meeting responsibility for the RCA programmes had been 
transferred from the Agency's Department of Research and Isotopes to the 
Department of Technical Co-operation, in order to ensure better co-ordination 
between RCA projects and the Agency's technical co-operation activities. His 
Government wished to finance a new regional project, if possible as from 1987, 
on the medical and biological applications of nuclear techniques. In 
addition, his country intended to support the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities by providing extrabudgetary resources either for footnote-a/ 
projects or for other projects of benefit to developing countries. 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 14 


35. In conclusion his delegation trusted that the current session of the 
General Conference, aimed at the long-term improvement of nuclear safety, 
would lead to specific results which would strengthen the Agency. It was 
convinced that the Agency would remain a reliable instrument for the 
development of international co-operation while ensuring the effectiveness of 
the international non-proliferation regime and of the safeguards system. 
36. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) noted that the present session of the General 
Conference was dominated by the aftermath of the Chernobyl accident. The 
nuclear cloud had disappeared, but its shadow still hung over atomic energy, 
gravely compromising nuclear programmes all over the world. Since the last 
session of the Conference, misfortunes had multiplied: the slowing down of 
economic growth in developed countries had already cut down the demand for 
electricity, and then the fall in oil prices had reduced the relative economic 
advantages of nuclear power, which still involved substantial initial 
investment. After the Chernobyl accident, the very safety and viability of 
nuclear power had been seriously questioned. One should not underestimate the 
seriousness of the problems which beset the future of nuclear energy, whether 
from the technical, political or public acceptance points of view. It was 
necessary to undertake an agonizing reappraisal of the situation and to start 
out on a new course of action, so as to save the nuclear alternative and 
ensure a secure energy future for mankind. 
37. There were lessons to be drawn from Chernobyl which, if learnt in good 
time, could not only rehabilitate nuclear power but also strengthen it. The 
Chernobyl accident had obliged countries to think together, and had led to the 
realization that the world was very small and that in nuclear matters all 
countries were dependent upon each other. No country could plan and implement 
its nuclear programmes in complete isolation. The initial tendency to make 
political capital out of the tragedy which had occurred had soon given way to 
co-operation, when it had been realized that no country was immune to such 
accidents. Nuclear safety should transcend politics, for it was linked to the 
very survival of mankind. It was to be hoped that no one would exploit the 
incident in order to persuade Third World countries that nuclear power was 
unsafe for them and then use that excuse, along with the principle of 
non-proliferation, to withhold the sharing of peaceful nuclear technology with 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 15 


the developing countries, which were suffering from an energy deficit and 
which, in order to ensure their economic and social development, desperately 
needed that technology. Member States should work together to restore the 
credibility of nuclear power as an economically and technically viable source 
of energy for all countries, both developed and developing, to guarantee 
nuclear safety, and to preserve the nuclear option for the future. 


38. His delegation was greatly impressed by the solidarity and co-operation 
exhibited by the nuclear community, which had been reflected in the timely 
adoption and opening for signature, during the preceding week, of two very 
important conventions on early notification and on emergency assistance. 
Those were major steps in the right direction, but they were only the 
beginning: the aim must be not only the ability to handle post-accident 
situations but also the prevention of nuclear accidents in future. His 
delegation therefore unreservedly supported all measures which would help to 
increase nuclear safety. In that connection it considered that the Agency's 
expanded nuclear safety programme was of particular relevance. Pakistan 
advocated the universal adoption of the highest standards of safety in nuclear 
installations and the construction of inherently safe nuclear power plants 
which would be capable of overriding any human or operational errors. It 
endorsed the Director General's efforts to encourage the development of safe 
small and medium power reactors. It was greatly appreciative of the dynamic 
role which the Director General had played in making a quick and timely 
response to the situation after the Chernobyl accident and in setting in 
motion a whole series of useful activities, including the Post-Accident Review 
Meeting. 
39. The Pakistan delegation was convinced of the need for a wider sharing 
of nuclear safety related information through the Agency and in the context of 
multilateral and bilateral arrangements. In that connection it believed that 
a great moral and technical responsibility devolved upon the suppliers and the 
advanced countries. The latter must be generously prepared to help in 
enhancing the safety of nuclear installations by sharing their technical knowhow. 
Any further Chernobyls must be avoided. Pakistan trusted that that 
matter would receive serious consideration by Member States. There was 
another important aspect of the overall safety of nuclear power plants: it 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 16 


was necessary to prevent any accident from occurring as a result of an act of 
aggression, whether sponsored by a State or by an irresponsible group. 
Nuclear installations should not be at the mercy of would-be aggressors. That 
would jeopardize the future of atomic energy. Appropriate measures must be 
taken to adopt an international convention on the prohibition of armed attacks 
on nuclear installations. That problem was undoubtedly a complex one, but it 
was to be hoped that further discussions and negotiations would yield positive 
and rapid progress in that regard. 


40. Turning to those problems relating to Agency activities which were of 
particular concern to his Government, he noted that the General Conference and 
the Board of Governors had, for nearly a decade, had before them a proposal to 
amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, so as to remove the under-representation 
of the two areas of Africa and of Middle East and South Asia. The questions 
to be answered were whether Member States wanted a just and modest expansion 
in the number of Members of the Board, or a substantial one, and whether they 
wished to restructure the entire Board by introducing new concepts or by 
proceeding in a prudent manner. However that might be, it was necessary to 
put an end to the gross under-representation on the Board of Governors of the 
countries in the two areas in question, which together constituted about 40% 
of the entire membership of the Agency. The present situation was 
unacceptable for the Pakistan delegation, which trusted that Member States 
would give proof of a political will to resolve the problem in the very near 
future. 
41. Regarding technical assistance, a consensus as to the best way of 
financing it must be sought as quickly as possible. His delegation 
appreciated the increased voluntary contributions which Member States, 
particularly the developed countries, had made to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund in recent years. The needs of the developing countries in 
the technical co-operation area were expanding, and a corresponding increase 
was required in the resources allocated to technically sound and viable 
projects in those countries. In his delegation's view, technical assistance 
should be funded through the Agency's Regular Budget on a predictable, assured 
and adequate basis in accordance with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388 of the 
General Conference. 

GC(XXX)/0R.283 
page 17 


42. Turning to safeguards, he said that his delegation supported the 
Agency's safeguards system, which had given proof of its credibility and 
efficient operation. The system furnished an assurance that no diversion of a 
significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material took place, and that the 
nuclear material under Agency safeguards in 1985 had remained devoted to 
peaceful nuclear activities. However, his delegation felt that there was room 
for improving the management of the system so as to reduce the cost of 
safeguards activities. The Agency should maintain a proper balance between 
its regulatory and promotional activities, which were its two main functions 
under the Statute. 
43. On the subject of the staffing of the Secretariat, measures had been 
taken during the last four years to correct the previous marked underrepresentation 
of developing countries on the Agency's staff at the 
Professional level. His delegation was grateful to the Director General for 
his sincere, courageous and persistent efforts to implement resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/386 in that connection. The Pakistan delegation requested him 
further to improve the situation, for it believed that the developing 
countries, which constituted about two thirds of the membership of the Agency, 
should have at least one third of the Professional posts in the Secretariat. 
44. In spite of unjustified obstruction and other difficulties, Pakistan 
was continuing to operate its nuclear power plant at Karachi safely and 
efficiently using indigenous resources. All possible measures were being 
taken to improve the safety of that plant, and his Government would welcome 
the input of any relevant nuclear safety data which other countries might be 
able to provide. It sincerely hoped that it could count on international 
co-operation for building more nuclear power stations in order to overcome the 
country's grave and persistent electric power shortages. Pakistan likewise 
attached great importance to the application of nuclear energy in agriculture, 
medicine and industry. Pakistan's efforts had led to an important 
breakthrough in the development of new varieties of cotton, chick-pea and 
rice, which had now been introduced for general cultivation throughout the 
country with a very significant economic impact and gain. Pakistan had taken 
steps to expand its programme in the field of biotechnology and genetic 
engineering, particularly for reclamation of saline soils and research on 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 18 


fixation of atmospheric nitrogen by plants. Work on constructing a cobalt-60 


irradiator for the sterilization of medical and agricultural products had been 
started and should be completed in early 1987. In the realm of nuclear 
medicine, Pakistan's eight medical centres had treated nearly 120 000 patients 
during the past year; the construction of a ninth nuclear medical centre 


should be completed in the following year. 


45. Pakistan had organized at Nathia Gali, in collaboration with the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, the eleventh 
International Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs. His 
delegation commended the achievements of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics, which had very greatly assisted Third World countries by 
successfully encouraging collaboration and contact between East and West. 
46. His Government also recognized the value of North-South and South-South 
co-operation. It had actively participated in regional projects under the RCA 
and had hosted various activities relating to that programme. It had 
concluded bilateral co-operation agreements with several countries, advanced 
and developing. It had recently signed a bilateral agreement with the 
People's Republic of China for co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. In keeping with the policies of the two countries, any transactions 
in nuclear materials and equipment effected under that bilateral co-operation 
agreement would be placed under Agency Safeguards. 
47. Pakistan had participated actively in the preparations for the United 
Nations Conference on the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) and was looking forward to 
contributing to the work of the conference. It urged all Member States to do 
their utmost to ensure that the conference, scheduled for early 1987, would be 
successful. In conclusion, Pakistan genuinely appreciated the technical 
assistance and co-operation which it had received from the Agency, and wished 
to assure the Director General of its continuing support for the Agency's 
programme. 
48. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia) said that the experience of the past 
thirty years showed that the Agency had carried out good work, frequently 
under difficult conditions, and, in accordance with the provisions of its 
Statute, was contributing to promoting the use of nuclear energy for 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 19 


exclusively peaceful purposes. Czechoslovakia was in favour of deepening and 
strengthening international co-operation in the context of the Agency, with a 
view to ensuring the safe development of nuclear power and the use of nuclear 
energy for purposes other than power generation, but it was opposed to 
attempts to establish any new machinery for international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


49. The present session of the General Conference was being held in an 
extremely tense international atmosphere, at a period of acute world crisis, 
when the question was being asked whether the policy of peace would prevail 
over the policy of force. Everyone knew that peace was a necessity for all 
peoples. The preservation of civilization in the nuclear and space age called 
for a new political mentality; a halt to the armaments race, disarmament, and 
the establishment of living conditions which would enable mankind to enter the 
new century without the threat of atomic war should therefore be the only 
objectives. That was why Czechoslovakia gave its full support to the new 
peace initiatives of the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries, 
particularly the proposals for the total abolition of nuclear weapons and 
other weapons of mass destruction by the end of the century, and to the Soviet 
Union's unilateral moratorium, several times extended, on nuclear weapons 
testing. 
50. The strengthening of the principle of non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons was a vital element in the strengthening of international security. 
The conclusions of the Third Review Conference of Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons had confirmed the vital importance of 
that legal instrument, which prevented the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
and at the same time opened up new possibilities for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Czechoslovakia noted with satisfaction that the Agency, in 
the course of its inspection work, had detected no serious irregularities 
indicating that certain countries were illegally using nuclear materials to 
fabricate nuclear weapons or explosives for unknown purposes. Czechoslovakia 
was satisfied at the results obtained by the Agency in the safeguards field, 
particularly in the sensitive area of the nuclear fuel cycle, and at the 
introduction of an effective system for evaluation of safeguards activities, 
and was ready to support any action aimed at improving safeguards. The 

GC(XXX)/0R.283 
page 20 


expansion of international co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and the removal of any nuclear threat were closely linked with 
the safe development of nuclear power. One could not speak of the inherent 
danger of peaceful nuclear reactors while at the same time accumulating 
nuclear weapons which constituted a much greater threat. It was necessary to 
eliminate any attempt to exploit nuclear accidents for purposes of 
exacerbating tensions and distrust between States. Czechoslovakia was 
convinced that the solution to all those problems lay in the proposal by the 
Soviet Union to institute an international regime governing the safe 
development of nuclear power. The measures proposed in that connection would 
ensure that the safe operation of nuclear installations became an 
international duty. 


51. The conclusions of the special session of the General Conference and 
the international conventions on early notification and on emergency 
assistance were among the first results accruing from the efforts and 
initiatives of the Agency, of its Director General and of its Member States. 
Czechoslovakia approved of those two conventions and would take all the 
measures necessary to fulfil its obligations thereunder. The solution of 
international nuclear safety problems could also be assisted by measures to 
prevent any form of nuclear terrorism. In that connection, the Convention on 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material should come into force as soon as 
possible, and the Czechoslovak delegation urged Member States which had not 
yet done so to approve or ratify the convention. Czechoslovakia likewise 
accorded great importance to the efforts made by the Agency and certain Member 
States with a view to the protection of peaceful nuclear installations against 
armed attacks. 
52. Czechoslovakia's long-term economic and social development programme 
assigned an important place to nuclear power. Thus the share of nuclear power 
in the overall consumption of primary energy resources, at present 
approximately 3.5%, would be quintupled to reach 18% in the year 2000. The 
contribution of nuclear power plants to electricity generation would be 29.6% 
in 1990 and 52.4% in 2000, as compared with about 207o at present. That trend 
would make it possible not only to cover the necessary increase in energy 
resources but also progressively to close down coal-fired thermal power 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 21 


stations, which would go far to solving ecological problems, since the 
releases of sulphur dioxide would be reduced by one third in the year 2000 as 
compared with the present level. It was also intended to use nuclear power 
stations for district heating. The present year would see the commissioning 
of a heat pipeline 23 kilometres long linking the town of Trnava to the 
Bohunice power plant. 


53. Czechoslovakia had at present six WWER reactors in service, four at 
Bohunice and two at Dukovany, where a third reactor was scheduled to go into 
service by the end of 1986 and a fourth in 1987. The first units of the 
Mochovce (4 x 440 MW(th)) and Temelin (4 x 1000 MW(th)) power plants should be 
commissioned at the end of 1989 and of 1992 respectively. In recent years 
Czechoslovakia had acquired great experience in the production of nuclear 
material and in the construction and operation of nuclear power stations, and 
had created all the technical and legal preconditions for ensuring their 
safety. The accelerated development of nuclear power constituted one of the 
priority areas for multilateral co-operation among the countries of the CMEA 
up to the end of the century, as was indicated by the programme of scientific 
and technical development in the CMEA countries until the year 2000, adopted 
by the heads of government of those countries in December 1985. Czechoslovakia 
continued also to ascribe great importance to the use of atomic energy for 
purposes other than electricity generation. The supply of radioactive 
preparations for medical use had increased by 25%, particularly as regards 
products for radioimmunoassay, the range of which had been extended to such 
fields as endocrinology, gynaecology and oncology. The detection of hypothyreosis 
of the newborn had been organized at national level. In the field 
of irradiation, research was continuing on the preservation of dried fruit and 
the irradiation treatment of rhizobium substrate. Czechoslovakia was ready to 
participate in the Agency's research programmes and to offer effective 
assistance to the developing countries, with a view to their utilization of 
radionuclide methods in various branches of the economy. 
54. The document on the Agency's programme and budget for 198 7 and 1988 
indicated a balanced distribution of resources. A substantial role should 
continue to be assigned to guidance on nuclear power plant projects, 
particularly their economic aspects, for experience showed that the optimal 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 22 


development of nuclear power in a number of countries was dependent thereon. 
The Czechoslovak delegation supported the draft programme and budget in the 
form in which it was submitted^to the General Conference. 


55. The Agency's activities in the field of technical assistance and 
co-operation were essential for purposes of expanding the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy in the developing countries. For that reason Czechoslovakia 
approved of the target of $34 million for the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund in 1987. It hoped that the principle of financing by 
voluntary contributions would be respected. In 1987 it would contribute its 
share of the target and, as in previous years, would offer fellowships for 
further training of specialists from developing countries at higher 
educational establishments and scientific research centres in Czechoslovakia. 
56. The Czechoslovak delegation appreciated the Agency's efforts to secure 
implementation of the resolution on South Africa's nuclear capabilities, 
adopted at the previous session of the General Conference, but was concerned 
at the negative attitude of South Africa. In accordance with the basic 
principles of Czechoslovak foreign policy and in the interests of solidarity 
with the peoples of Africa, the Czechoslovak delegation called upon the 
international community urgently to adopt effective multilateral sanctions 
against South Africa. 
Mr. Cherif (Algeria). Vice-President, took the Chair. 
57


 Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) said that in 1985 the 
Agency had made great advances, especially in the area of technical 
co-operation. Its technical assistance and co-operation programme had been 
expanding continuously at a considerable rate, and the continuation of that 
trend was ensured by the agreement reached at the preceding session of the 
General Conference on indicative planning figures for the following years. 
There were some developments in technical co-operation which were worth 
emphasizing, for example, the degree of involvement of the Agency's technical 
divisions in programme implementation, the comparatively strong growth of 
activities in the field of nuclear power and nuclear safety and the 
increasingly active role played by developing countries. In supporting the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities, his country duly contributed its 



GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 23 


share of the target of voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund and, in addition to supplying equipment and materials, 
endeavoured to provide instruction for scientists from developing countries in 
the form of training courses, study tours and fellowships and by making 
available services of experts. 


58. As far as concerned the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, reaffirming 
his Government's position, he stressed that international co-operation was an 
essential prerequisite for the successful application of sophisticated 
technologies such as nuclear technology, an area in which co-operation was of 
particular importance owing to the inevitably associated problems of nuclear 
safety, radiation protection and safeguards. 
59. An example of fruitful co-operation on the regional scale was the 
implementation of nuclear power programmes in member countries of the Council 
for Mutual Economic Assistance. The latter's programme for scientific and 
technological development up to the year 2000 took account of the potential 
represented by international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
60. As regards nuclear safety and radiation protection, his Government 
fully endorsed the results of the General Conference's special session and the 
measures which the Agency had initiated in that context. 
61. Safeguards were inseparably associated with the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. The credible assurance provided by Agency safeguards that 
States were complying with their non-proliferation commitments played a 
fundamental role in fostering confidence among States and in strengthening 
their collective security. For that reason his country noted with 
satisfaction that in 1985 nuclear material under Agency safeguards had 
remained in peaceful nuclear activities or had otherwise been adequately 
accounted for and that there were no exceptions to the safeguards statement 
for 1985. Because of the importance of safeguards for the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, the German Democratic Republic would continue to assist 
the Agency in performing its tasks in that area. During the preceding year 
two training courses for newly recruited inspectors and one course for 
safeguards trainees from developing countries had been conducted in the German 
Democratic Republic. 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 24 


62. Considering that physical protection was closely linked to safeguards, 
he welcomed the progress made in the ratification of the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and hoped that it would soon come into 
force. 
63. He wished to reiterate that endeavours should be made to eliminate all 
nuclear weapons and to rid mankind of the nuclear threat. Mr. Erich Honecker, 
the Head of State of the German Democratic Republic, had stressed time and 
again that the preservation of peace on earth and in space was vital for 
human survival. That was why the people in his country had responded 
enthusiastically to the programme proposed by the General Secretary of the 
Soviet Communist Party, Mikhail Gorbachev, for elimination of all weapons of 
mass destruction by the year 2000. The stepwise implementation of that 
overall disarmament programme could result in a comprehensive system of 
international security. A halt to all nuclear weapon tests would be a first 
step towards the termination of the nuclear arms race. 
64. In conclusion, he wished to emphasize that his country would continue 
to support the Agency to the best of its ability. 
65. Mr. SOWIMSKI (Poland) noted with satisfaction that the special 
session of the General Conference had concluded with the signing of two 
important conventions and the adoption of two resolutions. The signing of the 
conventions by more than 50 States showed that the international community had 
drawn the right conclusions from the experience of recent months, creating 
thereby a climate of greater mutual confidence. He hoped that it would be 
possible to establish genuine nuclear safety, to implement a programme for 
safe nuclear power development and to rid mankind of the atomic menace. 
Implementation of the resolutions adopted by the special session of the 
Conference would require further improvement of the mechanisms of 
international co-operation. His delegation shared the view expressed by the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations and by the Agency's Director General 
that nuclear energy continued to be an important factor for development for 
the well-being of the inhabitants of the planet. 
66. His delegation highly appreciated the work of the Secretariat in 1985 
and noted that its activities concentrated increasingly on real problems. The 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 25 


draft programme and budget for 1987-1988 deserved particular attention since 
it concerned the Agency's future activities. As to the supplementary programme 
on nuclear safety and radiation protection, which was a good example of 
co-operation between the Secretariat and Member States, he wished to underline 
its four distinctive features, namely maximum utilization of the experience 
gained as a result of past accidents in nuclear power reactors and other 
nuclear facilities in order to prevent further such accidents, development of 
technical measures limiting the release of radioactive substances into the 
environment as a consequence of accidents, improvement of emergency 
preparedness and establishment of closer co-operation with other competent 
international organizations. 


67. He considered that the General Conference should give its general 
approval to that draft programme, as the Board had recommended, although it 
was necessary to make a more detailed analysis of the balance between the 
different aspects of the programme. Problems could thus be better related to 
the requirements mentioned, in particular, in the resolutions adopted at the 
special session, and account could also be taken of the results of the meeting 
of nuclear safety experts to be held in November. 
68. He welcomed the Agency's growing interest in nuclear energy uses other 
than power generation, in particular the protection of the environment, which 
was an important sphere of international co-operation. Poland, for its part, 
had a special interest in the use of nuclear techniques for removal of oxides 
of nitrogen and sulphur from flue gases. Those techniques had already been 
proven at the experimental level. He hoped that it would be possible under 
regional co-operation programmes to reduce the content of toxic substances in 
the atmosphere in Europe and in other regions of the world which were 
experiencing similar problems. Environmental protection concerned all 
countries because its effectiveness depended on the use of the most efficient 
techniques at the regional and even at the world level. In that connection it 
might be recalled that at the fortieth session of the United Nations General 
Assembly the Polish delegation had urged free exchange of technologies in that 
area. On its side, Poland would make every effort to lower the level of 
atmospheric pollution by developing nuclear power and by greater recourse to 
flue gas purification facilities. 

GC(XXX)/0R.283 
page 26 


69. At the twenty-ninth regular session of the General Conference, Poland 
had suggested active co-operation between the Agency and its Member States in 
a number of other areas, including radiation preservation of foodstuffs. That 
technique might be very useful from the economic and public health points of 
view. His country was participating actively in the establishment of a 
regional programme under the aegis of the Agency, and was willing to share its 
experience with interested developing countries by training specialists from 
those countries. It had therefore supported the establishment of a 
biotechnology laboratory by the Agency, which would be used mainly for 
training personnel from developing countries. Moreover, Poland was offering 
training in the operation of research reactors as part of its co-operation 
with the Agency and interested Member States. It was also willing to help 
interested countries in setting up a system for monitoring radioactive 
contamination of the environment and foodstuffs and for background monitoring. 
The existing system in Poland had proved its usefulness after the Chernobyl 
accident. 
70. He noted with satisfaction the information, contained in the Safeguards 
Implementation Report for 1985, that there had been an increase in the number 
of facilities at which inspection goals had been fully attained. That was the 
result of the growing efficiency of the Secretariat. However, there were many 
problems which the Secretariat was not always in a position to solve. One 
such problem was the designation of inspectors: the report indicated that 
only 25% of countries impose no conditions other than that they should be 
maintaining diplomatic relations with the inspector's country of origin. He 
hoped that general realization of the fact that non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons was also an element of nuclear safety would lead to greater 
co-operation among the Agency's Member States in the implementation of 
safeguards. 
71. Lastly, Poland fully endorsed the principles of financing technical 
co-operation and assistance and the 12% annual increase in the indicative 
planning figures for 1987-1989, which had been approved at the twenty-ninth 
session of the General Conference. In 1987 the Polish Government would pay, 
in national currency, its full share of the target, namely US $214 200. 

GC(XKX)/OR.283 
page 27 


72. Mr. TOERNUDD (Finland) wished first of all to welcome the 
delegation of Zimbabwe, which was participating for the first time in a 
regular session of the General Conference. The circle of States which worked 
for the fulfilment of the Agency's objectives had thus again widened. His 
Government believed that Member States could effectively pursue their common 
goals only by drawing all States of the world into the Agency without 
discrimination and, at the same time, into the system of commitments 
associated with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
73. The thirtieth session of the Conference represented a milestone in the 
evolution of the Agency. The latter had reached maturity that very year, 
which had seen a dramatic exacerbation of the problem of safety in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The first special session of the General 
Conference had concluded by entrusting the Agency with new tasks requiring 
consideration by the Conference, in addition to the other matters which were 
before it in accordance with normal practice. The special session had decided 
to refer all its discussions, proposals and statements to the Board of 
Governors. An analysis of all that material would undoubtedly show certain 
main streams of thought which would indicate the areas where rapid action was 
desired and where progress should be relatively easy to achieve. Although the 
work ahead would be laborious, there was a strong will to achieve substantive 
results quickly, even if that would require concessions from all. The will to 
co-operate and the need for international co-operation in nuclear safety were 
stronger than ever. 
74. The ideas put forward at the special session were, of course, of a 
varied spectrum. However, one could note that there was a general wish for 
concerted efforts, at both the bilateral and the multilateral level, and at 
the same time respecting national sovereignty, in order to strengthen and 
extend the nuclear third-party liability regime, to develop high standards of 
safety for universal adoption, to increase the openness of national regulatory 
practices relating to the design, construction and operation of nuclear 
installations, and to improve the modalities for disseminating safety-related 
information, especially keeping in mind the needs of developing countries. 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 28 


75. One of the obstacles to confidence in the use of nuclear energy arose 
from the very complex issue of waste management. In particular, the 
management of high-level wastes needed to be widely discussed. Appropriate 
principles concerning handling and disposal should be agreed upon 
internationally. From the safety point of view, a solution which left it to 
each State to make its own arrangements for ultimate disposal was far from the 
best. In some States, including Finland, advance arrangements had been made 
so that future generations would not have to bear the costs of waste 
disposal. It might be useful to promote further exchanges of experience in 
those matters within the framework of the Agency. 
76. In addition to the manifold questions of nuclear safety and 
radiological protection, there were other problems of international 
co-operation to which the Members of the Agency were seeking solutions. One 
of the mechanisms which the Agency had created with a view to harmonizing 
views on matters of vital importance for Member States was the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS). The work of that body had been slow, but 
especially during the recent sessions a certain convergence of opinions had 
emerged. It was to be hoped that that constructive atmosphere would continue 
to prevail. 
77. Another forum where widely accepted common goals were set was the 
Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Pro1iferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The final document of the most recent of those 
conferences contained a large number of observations and recommendations 
concerning action to be taken by the Agency, or within its framework. The 
safeguards applied on the basis of agreements concluded with the Agency played 
an important role in maintaining the credibility of the non-proliferation 
regime. Finland continued to urge all non-nuclear-weapon States which were 
not parties to NPT to make an international legally binding commitment not to 
acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices and to accept 
Agency safeguards on all their peaceful nuclear activities, both current and 
future, with a view to verification of that commitment. While the simplest 
way of achieving that objective was, of course, accession to the Treaty, any 
steps in the same direction would be welcomed by the international community. 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 29 


78. The last NPT Review Conference had ended on a hopeful note regarding 
the possibilities of progress in nuclear disarmament. After the Conference, 
further indications of a change for the better in international relations had 
emerged. The preceding year's meeting between the leaders of the Soviet Union 
and the United States had paved the way for a bilateral dialogue on a broad 
range of disarmament issues. His delegation was looking forward to an 
intensive and productive continuation of that dialogue at all levels. The 
outcome expected from the bilateral negotiations could do much to reduce the 
risks of war and to create more favourable conditions for international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
79. In the context of multilateral efforts for disarmament, the Conference 
on Disarmament in Geneva was charged with important responsibilities. One 
issue on its agenda had particular relevance to the Agency's activities. The 
Committee had for some years been engaged in negotiating a treaty prohibiting 
radiological weapons and attacks against nuclear facilities. It was 
regrettable that considerable differences of substance and approach continued 
to exist with regard to both those subjects. Finland considered that even 
limited disarmament measures were worth while. It would consequently welcome 
agreements on the banning of radiological weapons and attacks against nuclear 
installations, whether negotiated together or separately. 
80. The existence of military applications had from the outset complicated 
the international efforts to create mechanisms which would protect people from 
the dangers of the uses of nuclear energy. For reasons of national security 
it had not always been possible to incorporate in treaties comprehensive 
commitments reflecting international responsibility for the health and safety 
of the peoples of other countries. That was evident in the negotiations 
leading to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
Similar problems had arisen in the case of the Convention on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident. While his delegation regretted that 
tendency, it welcomed the declarations made by the nuclear-weapon States under 
Article 3 of that Convention as a step in the right direction. 
81. Recent experience had shown that a high level of safety was one of the 
prerequisites for public acceptance of nuclear energy. A serious blow had now 

GC(XXX)/OR.283 
page 30 


been dealt at that acceptance in many countries. Another prerequisite for the 
use of nuclear energy was the assurance that it would not be diverted for the 
fabrication of weapons, openly or under the guise of producing peaceful 
explosives. The Agency's safeguards system had been created to verify that 
that was not happening. That second pillar of public acceptance must not be 
allowed to give way or even to be slowly eroded. 


82. It was comforting to note in the Safeguards Implementation Report for 
1985 that in carrying out the safeguards obligations of the Agency the 
Secretariat had not detected any anomaly which would' indicate the diversion of 
a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material for proscribed purposes. 
However, it was not difficult to imagine the consequences for the use of 
nuclear energy if the Agency were not able to give such an assurance. In that 
context, it was regrettable that parts of Article XII of the Agency's Statute 
were not fully operative. That applied in particular to the question of 
international plutonium storage, which was at a standstill. 
83. The Director General's task was to ensure that the Agency's safeguards 
staff was competent, reliable and vigilant and that the safeguards procedures 
and equipment kept pace with a technology that was constantly developing. At 
the same time, it was the common responsibility of Member States to ensure 
that the Director General had the necessary means at his disposal to carry out 
that task. By "common responsibility" he meant that all Member States should 
participate in the financing of safeguards in a way which demonstrated full 
commitment to the objectives of safeguards. Also, it appeared from the 
Safeguards Implementation Report that the solution of too many problems 
encountered in the implementation of safeguards depended on the individual 
States. He appealed to all States to do their utmost to help the Agency 
ensure the credibility of its safeguards activities. 
84. Safe use of nuclear energy required a firm scientific and technical 
basis. One of the important missions of the Agency was to render technical 
assistance to Member States in creating and maintaining that basis. The 
Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities had been growing 
over the years, when more and more resources had been made available for the 
purpose. However, the mechanisms and procedures established to permit 

GG(XXK)/0R.283 
page 31 


supervision by the Board of that important activity no longer corresponded to 
the growth which had taken place. It was high time to streamline further the 
procedure for adopting the programme and to leave it to the Director General 
to implement the programme on the basis of general guidelines approved by the 
Board of Governors. 


85. The preparations for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) 
had reached their final stage. He sincerely hoped that it would fulfil its 
purpose by putting forward new ideas concerning international co-operation. 
It was clear, moreover that the Agency continued to be the appropriate 
instrument for further development of those ideas. Fully realizing that there 
was increased public awareness of all international activities in the nuclear 
field and that particular attention was being focused on safety, the Finnish 
Government would continue to co-operate closely with the Agency and with all 
other Member States in order to meet the new challenges that would appear. 
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m. 



GC(XXX)/OR.284 
April 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 


on Tuesday, 30 September 1986, at 10.10 a.m. 
Presidents: Mr. RAMANNA (India) 
later: Mr. BAEYENS (France) 


Item of thprovisional 
agenda** 
e 
CONTENTS 
Paragraphs 
4 Arrangements for the Conference 1 5 
(a) Adoption of the agenda and 
allocation of items for 
initial discussion 1 3 
(b) Closing date of the session 
and opening date of the next 
session 4 5 
6 General debate and annual report for 
1985 (resumed) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Switzerland 
Italy 
Ukrainian SSR 
Islamic Republic of Iran 
Chile 
Malaysia 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Argentina 
Organization for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
6 24 
37 
43 
69 
82 
94 
103 
23 
36 
42 
68 
81 
93 
102 
113 
114 - 125 

[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 14 October 1986, 


[**] GC(XXX)/774. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/238/Rev.4. 


87-01217 
0818e/0131e 



GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXX)/774) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee, 
at its meeting the previous day, had authorized him to report on the outcome 
of its consideration of the agenda and the allocation of items for initial 
discussion. The General Committee recommended that the agenda consist of all 
the items on the provisional agenda set forth in document GC(XXX)/7 74. 
2. The General Committee further recommended that those items be allocated 
for initial discussion as indicated in document GC(XXX)/7 74 and also 
recommended that the items be taken in the order in which they appeared, 
subject to the understanding that changes might have to be made in the course 
of business so as to make the best use of the available time. 
3. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
4. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee 
had authorized him to report that it recommended fixing Friday, 
3 October 1986, as the closing date of the thirtieth regular session and 
Monday, 21 September 1987, as the opening date of the thirty-first regular 
session of the General Conference, to be held in Vienna. 
5. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1985 (GC(XXX)/775 and Corr.l) (resumed) 


6. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) said that the thirtieth regular session 
of the General Conference was a moment to look back on the principal stages 
through which the Agency's activities had passed. The first decade had been 
marked by the consolidation of membership of the Agency and the initiation of 
various statutory activities; the second decade had seen consolidation of the 
Agency's role in the application of safeguards to ensure the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, first and foremost the emergence of the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the third decade had been marked 
by consolidation of the Agency's activities in the field of technical 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 3 


assistance to developing countries, and as far as the fourth decade was 
concerned, it was clear that consolidation of its activities in technical 
co-operation and the standardization of nuclear safety in general and that of 
the nuclear power plants in particular would be matters of priority. 


7. The special session of the General Conference had demonstrated that it 
was the express wish of governments to strengthen international co-operation 
in the main areas of nuclear safety and radiological protection, both on a 
multilateral and bilateral scale; to strengthen the Agency's role as a central 
pillar in that co-operation, and to work jointly towards the full implementation 
of its programmes in that regard. An encouraging event of the special 
session had been the signing of the conventions on early notification and 
mutual assistance in the case of nuclear accidents by 51 Member States of the 
Agency. His delegation and that of the Principality of Liechtenstein took 
pleasure in the fact that their Governments had also been able to sign them. 
Nevertheless, there was a great deal more to be done in order to put those 
conventions into effect as well as to improve nuclear safety and civil 
liability. 
8. With regard to the attitude of the Swiss authorities to matters of 
safety in the construction and operation of nuclear power plants, to the rapid 
provision of information and mutual assistance, as well as to civil liability 
and the standardization of criteria for emergency action in radiological 
protection, he referred to the speech made by the Swiss Minister of Energy the 
week before. Nevertheless, his delegation wished to repeat what the Minister 
had said with regard to international solidarity, namely that Switzerland was 
aware of the scope of national sovereignty and respected it, but the 
international nature of problems involved in the production of nuclear energy 
and the possible consequences of accidents equally deserved to be respected. 
It was not acceptable that national sovereignty should stand in the way of 
essential international collaboration. 
9. The new functions of the Agency in the wake of Chernobyl should not 
obscure the fact that the Agency continued to be a forum of vital importance 
in the search for an overall regime of co-operation in which nuclear supplies 
could be assured in a more predictable and long-term manner, with due regard 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 4 


for the mutually acceptable considerations of non-proliferation. It was first 
and foremost for the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) to make a contribution 
along those lines. His Government could only regret that the 
deliberations on principles of international co-operation had still not 
arrived at specific conclusions. Commitments to non-proliferation, in 
connection with assurances of supply, would have to be based on a national 
undertaking binding at international level, as well as on the application of 
Agency safeguards. It was to be hoped that CAS would arrive at a solution 
before the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). That 
solution would enable UNCPICPUNE to make greater efforts with regard to the 
technical aspects of utilizing nuclear energy, especially in the developing 
countries. He hoped that UNCPICPUNE would provide incentives that could 
enrich the work of the Agency. 


10. With regard to the application of the Agency's safeguards, it was 
encouraging to see that progress was continuing in the nuclear-weapon 
countries. The situation, however, in States that were not members of NPT and 
possessed major facilities that were not safeguarded still remained a matter 
of concern and those countries were urged to accept safeguards on all their 
nuclear activities in order to consolidate international security. 
11. During the last few months the nuclear scene in Switzerland had been 
almost completely dominated by the radioactive, technical and political impact 
of the Chernobyl accident. It would continue to be, moreover, for many years 
to come. Radiological measurements showed that the dose limit of 500 mrems 
per person had not been reached and in the case of the majority of the 
population doses had by and large remained below that value. 
12. His country did not feel, on the basis of the initial results of 
evaluation of the reasons for the accident, that any special measures in the 
area of its nuclear facility safety were called for. Nevertheless, an 
improvement programme had been decided on by the Swiss Government and it 
related mainly to radiological protection, alarm and information systems and 
emergency action. 

GC(XXX)/0R.284 
page 5 


13. On the political plane, two opposition movements had come into 
existence and might well lead to the need for a referendum. One of them aimed 
at a moratorium of ten years on the construction of nuclear power plants, 
while the other called for the closing down of existing plants, without 
replacement, in the shortest possible time. And that despite the fact that 
electricity consumption had increased by more than 4% in 1985. During the 
deliberations which would shortly take place on that subject in parliament, 
the Swiss Government intended to make it quite clear that it stood in favour 
of nuclear energy and believed that to abandon the use of it too hastily could 
have serious consequences. 
14. As far as safety activities in Switzerland were concerned, the five 
nuclear power plants had operated normally with availability factors between 
81 and 88%. The limit values for releases of radioactive materials and 
exposure of personnel were still being observed with a large safety margin. 
15. The Agency's NUSS programme, in which Switzerland took an active part, 
had been completed by the end of 1985. It was now a matter of applying it and 
examining the results. There would most likely have to be some amendments and 
additions in connection with the Chernobyl accident. Switzerland was ready to 
assist with any efforts aimed at improvement that might be needed. 
16. The Director General had appealed to Member States in July of the 
present year to make an additional voluntary contribution of $679 000 for the 
safety programme for 1986. Switzerland had responded to that appeal and had 
paid its share of the additional contribution requested. In the matter of the 
programme and budget for 1987, his delegation also approved the additional 
total envisaged for that purpose. 
17. In the area of radioactive waste management, CEDRA (National 
Co-operative Society for Radioactive Waste Disposal) had undertaken geological 
studies at three sites with a view to building a final disposal repository for 
low- and medium-level wastes. By the end of 1985, the total outlay incurred 
by that Society had attained 250 million Swiss francs for the whole of its 
programme. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 6 


18. In research and development, mention should be made of reactor 
development, where work was in progress on high-temperature reactors (HTR) as 
well as on small heating reactors with an output between 10 and 50 MW(t). In 
the former case, parliament had approved Swiss participation, at the design 
stage, in the HTR-500 project in the Federal Republic of Germany; funds made 
available by Switzerland for a period of three years totalled 27 million 
francs, with those provided by private industry amounting to 20 million 
francs. That was equivalent to some 16 million francs a year, which was 
essentially a major effort on the part of Switzerland. 
19. Three types of heating reactor were presently being studied in 
Switzerland - a miniature pressurized-water reactor, a small gas-cooled pebble 
reactor and a pool-type reactor known as "geyser" with a highly original 
design. In effect, the pool was designed in the form of a well 5 m in 
diameter and 50 m deep, in which the hydrostatic pressure of the water played 
the part of a pressure vessel. 
20. Lastly, mention should be made of Swiss research and development in the 
area of nuclear fusion. A new tokamak with special geometry - oval rather 
than circular - was being designed for studying plasma. A test facility able 
to produce a magnetic field of 12 T was intended for a coil design study with 
a view to the next European torus project. The coil delivered by Switzerland 
for the LCT (Large Coil Task) had successfully passed the commissioning tests. 
21. As far as technical assistance and co-operation were concerned, his 
country fully recognized the value of the Agency's work. It had paid its full 
share of the voluntary contributions for 1986 and had promised to pay a total 
of US $37 7 400 for 1987, even though the growth rate of the target for 
voluntary contributions clearly exceeded that of UNDP. 
22. In any case, in the technical assistance programme it was not volume 
that counted, but quality. The Agency's efforts to make efficient use of its 
resources and to improve evaluations were greatly appreciated, although 
further progress was still necessary. More effective management of the 
available funds for auxiliary expenditure could help to increase still further 
the project implementation rate. 

GC(XXX)/0R.284 
page 7 


23. In conclusion, his delegation wished to encourage the Agency and all 
its Member States to keep up their efforts to consolidate activities, more 
especially in nuclear safety, since it was in that area that international 
solidarity was a precondition for good relations between States. 
24. Mr. BOZZA (Italy) noted that the Conference was taking place at a 
time of general reflection about the prospects of nuclear energy in view of 
the Chernobyl accident. There was an increasing awareness of the need to 
intensify research and to devote greater efforts to guaranteeing the safe 
peaceful development of the atom. A more effective and wider exploitation of 
nuclear energy would only be possible if safety conditions were improved. The 
conclusions of the special session of the Agency's General Conference had 
demonstrated that awareness. The responsibilities and tasks of the Agency 
were consequently becoming more important and the Agency therefore needed 
continuing or rather increasing support from Member States. 
25. Under those circumstances it was essential to promote an even wider indeed 
universal - participation in the Agency, and to improve the 
effectiveness of its most important organs particularly the Board of 
Governors. His delegation believed that the Board of Governors' effectiveness 
would be proportional to the support of Member States and to the quality of 
their participation in its activities. That was why the question of 
representation in the Board of Governors was so important for future 
developments in the field of nuclear energy. 
26. His country had for a long time been convinced of the need to 
reconsider Article VI of the Agency's Statute and to review representation in 
the Board of Governors. It was of course important to protect the proven 
efficiency of the Board and to avoid upsetting its balanced mechanisms. The 
proposal introduced by his country together with Belgium, Portugal, Spain and 
Sweden, entailed a moderate enlargement of the Board to include 9 additional 
seats (4 designated and 5 elected), designed to promote a somewhat wider 
representation without disrupting existing equilibria. His delegation 
believed that such an amendment would lead to an improvement in the Board's 
operational capabilities, would facilitate the solution of certain regional 
difficulties and offered the only way to meet the justified aspirations of a 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 8 


certain number of countries, including his own, and to promote a degree of 
desirable stability. His Government was fully prepared to contribute to the 
efforts that the Board of Governors, and through it the Agency itself, would 
be called to deploy to promote the safe exploitation of nuclear energy and 
wider technological development in that area. His country's contribution to 
those efforts was important in view of its achievements in research and 
technological know-how in many areas including safety. Furthermore, his 
country had always made a substantial financial contribution to the Agency's 
activities especially in the field of technical assistance. 


27. His country had always done its utmost to promote the Agency's 
development activities. Many of those contributions had been made to finance 
special projects, particularly in the area of agriculture and medicine which, 
although approved by the Agency and judged to be of particular value, would 
not be implemented as a result of the lack of regular funding in 1984 and 
1985. His country had again been the largest single contributor to 
extrabudgetary funds for technical co-operation. His country also provided 
finance for a major part of the activities of the Trieste International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics which was jointly managed by the Agency and UNESCO. 
In addition to a regular contribution of US $3 million, equal to more than two 
thirds of the Centre's budget, his Government had granted an additional 
US $4.5 million in 1985 and in 1986 in order to extend the Centre's activities 
with particular reference to the needs of national centres in developing 
countries. 


28. His country actively supported the Agency's initiatives in the field of 
international nuclear trade particularly the activities of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS) aimed at setting up mechanisms for ensuring 
supplies and, at the same time, guaranteeing non-proliferation. The assurance 
of supply and the free access to scientific information and to new 
achievements in technological research constituted fundamental conditions for 
the wide and fair development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and for 
the gradual extension of the related economic benefits. His country also 
looked forward to participating in the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE) to be held in 1987. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 9 


29. His Government attached great importance to the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the safeguards system, which was an essential tool to ensure the 
credibility of the non-proliferation regime. That was why it was in favour, 
in principle, of the full-scope safeguards laid down by the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. However, a generalization of full-scope safeguards had to take place 
with the awareness and consent of all States concerned. Furthermore, any 
unnecessary increase in financial burdens should be avoided at a time when the 
concern for safety was paramount. The desirable improvements of safeguards 
mechanisms should therefore be promoted by rationalizing the system and not by 
resorting to expensive new measures. That rationalizaton could be achieved by 
a more effective use of inspection personnel, a greater attention to the 
application of safeguards in sensitive plants and the development of 
integrated accounting techniques. His Government also believed that more 
equitable mechanisms for financing safeguards would have to be devised as soon 
as possible. 
30. With regard to the economic situation in his country, its gross 
domestic product had increased by 2.3% in real terms, as against 2.8% in 1984 
and the rate of inflation had slowed from 10.3% to 7.3%. Industrial 
production had not repeated its performance of the previous year, and had 
grown by a mere 1.2% after the 2.9% growth in 1984. Unemployment had 
increased still further, to 10.6% of the labour force and the balance of trade 
recorded another deficit. The increase in the deficit had mainly been the 
result of trade in energy products, in which Italy's deficit had increased by 
9.8%. Oil imports had amounted to 25 357 billion lire in 1985, as against 
23 221 billion the previous year. As a result of the fall in oil prices and 
the depreciation of the dollar, the trade deficit had declined by 47% over the 
first four months of 1986 as compared with the same period in 1985, and the 
energy deficit by 31%. If, as was likely, that favourable situation lasted 
for the rest of 1986, it was also likely that his country's balance of 
payments, which had recorded large deficits over the past six years would 
register a surplus. 


31. Provisional data indicated that his country's total primary energy 
requirement had increased by 1.5% and that net energy imports had decreased by 
0.6% in 1985. His country's external energy dependence was 81.3%, and had 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 10 


remained virtually unchanged over the past three years. There had been no 
significant change in the relative contribution made by the various individual 
sources to overall domestic energy consumption the previous year. The upward 
trend in natural gas consumption had continued (+2.6% from 1984), while for 
the first time since 1979 oil consumption had not fallen, remaining steady at 
about 85 Mtoe, although its percentage share had declined, from 59.4% to 
58.6%. Primary electrical power production (hydroelectric, geothermal and 
nuclear) was 12 Mtoe. 


32. The total request for electricity on the grid was 195.4 billion kWh, 
2.8% higher than in 1984. The increased demand for electricity had been met 
by a rise in thermoelectric output (3.1% for oil, 8.5% for solid fuels) and by 
an increase in net imports, which amounted to 23.7 billion kWh the previous 
year. The rise in electricity imports had resulted from continuing favourable 
conditions abroad. Thus again, in 1985, the cost of imported electricity had 
been less than the marginal cost of electricity generated domestically by 
imported oil. The share of oil in electricity generation had increased 
slightly, from 40.7% in 1984 to 41.2% in 1985. 
33. Nuclear power generation had increased by 11.9% in the first half of 
1986 (from 4.34 billion kWh to 4.86 billion kWh) due to the good performance 
of the three nuclear plants in operation. In December 1985 the Italian 
Parliament had approved an updated version of the National Energy Plan, which 
confirmed the overall targets set by the original Plan of 1981. With regard 
to nuclear power, the updated Plan retained the objectives of commissioning 
plants to increase the nuclear capacity by 10 000 MW(e). 
34. Work on the first of those plants, located in Piedmont, was beginning. 
For the siting of the remaining 8000 MW(e) of planned capacity, the 
Interministerial Committee for Economic Planning had confirmed the sites 
chosen in Lombardy and Apulia and had designated four other regions. With 
regard to the two experimental reactors, one, a 40 MW(e) heavy-water-moderated 
light-water-cooled reactor, had been completed and construction on the other, 
a facility for testing fast reactor fuel, had progressed further during the 
past year. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 11 


35. On 3 June 1986, the Italian Parliament had approved a resolution 
calling for a number of measures including an immediate check on the safety 
standards of the nuclear plants now on line or under construction and the 
convening of a National Energy Conference to be organized by the Government by 
the end of the year (probably in December 1986). A wide ranging debate on the 
future of the National Energy Plan, and of the nuclear programme in 
particular, had been developing in his country and was having a strong impact 
on public opinion and political forces. 
36. In conclusion, following the Chernobyl accident, public acceptance of 
nuclear energy should be strengthened by ensuring effective international 
co-operation, outstanding performance of nuclear plants, systematic 
information programmes, open dialogue with the public and a correct evaluation 
of the global significance of nuclear energy to the economy and society. 
37. Mr. VISHNEVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
Agency had an important role to play in co-ordinating the joint efforts of 
States in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, as had been generally 
acknowledged during the special session of the Conference held the previous 
week. His delegation welcomed the resolutions taken by that session because 
they reflected a broad support for the Soviet Union's proposal to establish an 
international regime of safe nuclear power development. The adoption of the 
two conventions on early notification and on assistance in the case of a 
nuclear accident constituted a first practical step towards such a regime. 
38. His delegation had signed those important documents; however, it was 
pointless to strive for safe nuclear power without recognizing the dangers of 
preparing for nuclear war. That was why the Soviet leader, Mr. Gorbachev, in 
a speech held on 15 January 1986, had put forward a proposal for the total 
world-wide abolition of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction 
by the year 2000. The Soviet Union's decision to prolong the unilateral 
moratorium on nuclear explosions until 1 January 1987 was also directed 
towards that goal and demonstrated the honesty and seriousness of purpose of 
the Soviet programme for nuclear disarmament. The achievement of political 
agreement on that subject would undoubtedly also contribute towards 
strengthening the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
broadening international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 12 


39. The Third NPT Review Conference had confirmed the vital role of NPT in 
that endeavour; in that connection, his delegation was gratified at the 
success of the Agency's safeguards activities, which were aimed at preserving 
peace and international security. At the same time, further improvements in 
the Agency's efforts to maintain non-proliferation and in the effectiveness of 
its safeguards system must be sought, particularly where the nuclear ambitions 
of those States which persistently refused to place their nuclear activities 
under international safeguards were concerned. 
40. His delegation actively supported all Agency programmes directed 
towards the further broadening of international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, especially those relating to nuclear power and the 
fuel cycle, the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) and controlled 
nuclear fusion. A particularly important task was the expansion of the 
Agency's nuclear safety activities, and great significance was also attached 
to increased co-operation with developing countries: thus the Ukrainian 
authorities had decided to make a voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1987 amounting to US $432 000 in national 
currency. While taking a positive view of the Agency's technical assistance, 
his authorities considered that keeping the effectiveness of that assistance 
under constant evaluation would undoubtedly lead to further improvements in 
that important activity. 
41. Contemporary scientific and technical progress meant man's penetrating 
ever deeper into the secrets of matter with the help of accelerators, reactors 
and electronic devices of unprecedented scale and complexity. At the same 
time, the new technology made stringent demands on the training of highly 
qualified personnel. 
42. His authorities remained convinced that peaceful nuclear energy would 
remain an indispensable part of scientific and technical progress in his 
country. Development plans for power generation in the Ukraine foresaw a 
major expansion of nuclear power, whose share in the country's power output 
already amounted to 15%. Unfortunately, as recent serious accidents involving 
advanced energy-packed technologies had shown, mankind sometimes had to pay a 
high price for scientific and technical progress. International experts had 

GC(XXX)/0R.284 
page 13 


recognized the great significance of the experience gained during the accident 
at the Chernobyl power plant by the Soviet specialists and passed on by them 
to the international community. That accident had shown how dangerous atomic 
energy could be when it escaped from human control. However, the consequences 
of that accident were as nothing compared with those which mankind would face 


in a nuclear war. 


43. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that Islam did not 
recognize any national boundaries for gaining knowledge and had always 
encouraged the Moslems to pursue it, even to the farthest corners of the 
Earth. Of course, Moslems valued knowledge when it was complemented by 
virtue. The bombing of Hiroshima, and the present stockpiles of nuclear 
weapons were examples of knowledge without virtue. 
44. In spite of all international conspiracies and propaganda, the Islamic 
Republic of Iran did not harbour expansionist ideas. On the contrary, war had 
been imposed upon the Islamic Republic of Iran by the Superpowers, for whom 
violence and expansionism were a means of survival. 
45. That was demonstrated quite clearly by the fact that on the one hand 
the Superpowers were continuously expanding and upgrading their nuclear 
arsenals, involving frequent and often hazardous tests, while on the other 
hand discouraging and, indeed, forestalling any attempt by any other country 
which could be construed, directly or indirectly, as having any effect on the 
advancement of their peaceful nuclear activities. 
46. Third World countries were thus discouraged from developing any serious 
scientific basis in the nuclear field and were prevented outright from 
establishing serious nuclear programmes, particularly related to power 
applications. 
47. Some developing countries might feel that certain elaborate 
international organizations had been established to assist them in enhancing 
their scientific capabilities. If, however, they assessed the role of those 
organizations more closely they would find that their true function, under the 
tutelage of the Superpowers, was not to enhance but to regulate developing 
countries' scientific capabilities and to confine them within certain 
prescribed limits. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 14 


48. He emphasized that by progress in the nuclear field he was not 
referring to a capability to manufacture nuclear weapons. On the contrary, 
the Islamic Republic of Iran abhorred such weapons and the constant threat 
they posed to the human race. What he meant was that all developing countries 
should have access to the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy as an option 
in their economic and industrial development programmes. Nor should such an 
option be used as a tool in wielding political influence. 
49. The independent and the truly non-aligned developing States were 
restrained within the confines of certain basic, and often outmoded, research 
activities in the nuclear field, and although that was not formally expressed 
as a statutory objective, in practice it was most fervently adhered to through 
the imposition of numerous obstacles and constraints such as licence 
agreements, transfer of technology limitations, proprietary rights and export 
licence requirements, all of which amounted to regulatory tools and obstacles 
designed to control the progress of science and technology in developing 
countries. 
50. No such safeguarding system existed, of course, to control 
proliferation in the nuclear arsenals of the Superpowers and the other 
nuclear-weapon States. 
51. The situation he had described was, of course, unsatisfactory and 
unacceptable to most independent States. If it persisted in its present form, 
and as those States began to awaken to the facts, it would no doubt lead to 
the gradual weakening and eventual collapse of the international organizations 
concerned. 
52. While commending the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme and the improvement in the net expenditure rate for technical 
co-operation, he had been concerned to hear of certain difficulties involving 
a failure to observe the equal rights of Member States. That was totally 
unacceptable. 
53. The Islamic Republic of Iran had followed with interest the activities 
of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), which could have a direct 
effect on the enhancement of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing 
countries. In that connection, the Islamic Republic of Iran had suffered 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 15 


substantial direct and indirect damages since the United States had ceased to 
supply fuel for use in its research reactor. He had presented the details of 
that situation during the previous regular session but unfortunately the 
Agency's efforts to provide alternative sources of supply had so far remained 
fruitless. 


54. In its statement to the special session of the General Conference, the 
Islamic Republic of Iran had avoided the inclusion of political issues in a 
technical subject. He noted with deep regret, however, that the Iraqi 
delegation had presented political statements totally irrelevant to the theme 
of the special session. 
55. Iraq should accept the consequences of the war, which it had started 
and imposed on his country, and should not, therefore, blame the stagnation of 
its nuclear programme on the Islamic Republic of Iran. On the contrary, as 
the Islamic Republic of Iran had stated during the twenty-ninth regular 
session of the General Conference, Iraq had so far repeatedly attacked the 
Islamic Republic of Iran's Bushehr nuclear power plant, thereby preventing 
progress on that project. 
56. Both the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq had suffered tremendous 
human and economic losses as a result of the war. However, the Islamic 
Republic of Iran's nuclear programmes, in particular construction of the 
Bushehr power plant, had sustained far more damage than those of Iraq. 
Needless to say, the Islamic Republic of Iran was prepared to bear all 
consequences in order to bring that imposed war to a battlefield-dictated and 
just conclusion. 
57. A further example of the type of obstacle to completion of the Bushehr 
nuclear power plant was the impounding in the Federal Republic of Germany of 
certain components for the plant, under the pretext of export licence 
problems. In that way, the Islamic Republic of Iran's right to pursue the 
peaceful applications of nuclear power were being severely compromised. That 
attitude on the part of the Federal Republic of Germany, which was related to 
the Superpowers' desire to obstruct advances in the nuclear field by 
independent developing States, would surely damage its credibility as a 
nuclear equipment supplier, and he warned it of the serious consequences of 
breaching bilateral agreements. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 16 


58. His Government questioned the Agency's efforts on fulfilling one of its 
primary functions, namely, the safeguarding of nuclear materials and 
installations. Bearing in mind that substantial amounts were spent annually 
by the Agency on the implementation of safeguards, the Islamic Republic of 
Iran did not detect any tangible results in the form of a stagnation or 
decline in the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Furthermore, the Agency 
exercised no particular control in the area of vertical proliferation. 
59. Contrary to propaganda put out by the nuclear-weapon States, the real 
concern of people the world over was not the peaceful and limited nuclear 
installations of the developing countries but the horrifying arsenals of 
nuclear warheads continuously being stockpiled by the Superpowers. 
60. The funds spent on inspecting a few voluntarily offered installations 
in the nuclear-weapon States were wasted and served no real purpose other than 
to divert public opinion. The Islamic Republic of Iran was therefore no 
longer prepared to support such superfluous programmes and urged other 
developing States to follow its example. 
61. As reflected in the declaration of the Heads of State of the 
Non-Aligned Movement in Harare, the regimes that were active in the nuclear 
field but not committed to international regulations, namely, the racist 
regime of South Africa and the usurper regime of Israel, were potential 
threats to world safety. 
62. As yet, neither of those regimes had accepted the full implementation 
of Agency safeguards, thereby blatantly disregarding a number of Agency 
resolutions. 
63. He noted with interest that the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty 
had been concluded. The real issue, however, was the role played by such 
treaties in the face of the universal threat posed by the nuclear arsenals of 
the Superpowers. It would be interesting to know whether such treaties would 
prevent the Superpowers from deploying nuclear weapons when and where they saw 
fit. Obviously, unless the entire world was declared free from nuclear 
weapons and nuclear tests, no one would be entirely safe. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 17 


64. In order to achieve that ultimate goal, his delegation proposed that 
all the delegations from the Middle East and South Asia (MESA) formulate and 
conclude a "MESA Nuclear-Free Zone" treaty. He also urged other regions to do 
likewise. 
65. In that respect, he stressed the importance of establishing an 
international safeguard authority for the true safeguarding of all nuclear 
installations, whether civil or military, and also the effective and central 
role that the developing countries could play in that respect through their 
full co-operation. 
66. On the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, he noted that the 
present Board membership of 35 represented about 31% of the total membership 
of 113. However, only 9 Members, or roughly a quarter of those 35, related to 
Africa and MESA, even though the share of those two regions in the total 
membership of the Agency would soon reach 40%. It was regrettable that that 
state of affairs remained unresolved and that no consensus had been reached 
over the previous decade. The Islamic Republic of Iran therefore wished to 
place its concern on record and to seek correction of the present situation, 
which undermined the credibility both of the Agency and of its resolutions. 
67. He commended the Secretariat on the proposals relating to the documents 
on the Agency's 1987/88 programme and budget. However, his delegation opposed 
the policy of zero growth and its effects on the Agency's promotional 
activities, which were of benefit primarily to the developing countries. He 
noted with concern that the Secretariat had not considered the observations of 
the Group of 7 7 in that respect. 
68. In conclusion, he hoped that the present General Conference would 
discharge its full responsibility in removing obstacles to the peaceful and 
safe application of nuclear energy, particularly in developing countries. 
69. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) said that, during the past year, much 
attention had been paid in his country to nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, as already outlined in his delegation's statement to the special 
session the previous week. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 18 


70. In order to encourage uranium exploration by the private sector, the 
Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission had prepared a national uranium map, showing 
favourable locations where uranium might be found, and had also established a 
new laboratory for geology and mining. 
71. The programme for the application of isotopes and radiation was aimed 
at achieving a technological level which would allow the prompt and effective 
utilization of nuclear techniques for the overall development of the country. 
Special emphasis had recently been given to the area of food irradiation, 
which was expected to acquire great importance for exports in the near future, 
but work on nuclear energy applications in industry, hydrology, engineering, 
medicine and agriculture had also been continued. 
72. In addition, his country's desire to bring regional efforts together 
into a joint endeavour had led to the organizing of various training courses 
and other co-ordinating activities in Latin America, including a regional 
seminar on experimental aspects of Mossbauer spectroscopy and a regional 
workshop on radiation protection. In the same spirit, the Chilean Nuclear 
Energy Commission had actively participated in the programmes of the 
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission and had hosted a regional course on 
the application of radioactive tracers in industrial and natural processes 
sponsored by that organization. 
73. Turning to the agenda for the present regular session, he expressed his 
delegation's concern at the inclusion of topics, entirely political in nature, 
which had already been dealt with on previous occasions, but which were now 
being brought up again under different designations. Those topics drew 
attention away from other items more closely related to the fundamental 
objectives of the Agency, which were "to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world". Such political wrangles, in conjunction with recent dramatic events 
and the arguments brandished by anti-nuclear groups, were detracting from the 
image of nuclear energy. For that reason, increased efforts must be made to 
restore public confidence in the benefits of nuclear energy. His authorities 
had recently intensified their public acceptance campaign in order to 
counteract negative publications which had appeared in connection with the 
unfortunate accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 19 


74. Chile wished to make quite clear that it used nuclear energy only for 
peaceful purposes and condemned the exploitation of the atom for other 
purposes; it therefore wholeheartedly supported the Agency's safeguards 
system. The NPT, however, as his country had frequently pointed out, was 
discriminatory in that it made no mention of vertical proliferation, but 
covered only horizontal proliferation. Moreover, NPT had led neither to any 
nuclear disarmament nor to the objective of technology transfer in the nuclear 
sphere. 
75. With reference to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material, he explained that his country had not signed that instrument because 
it believed that submitting essential nuclear materials to further controls 
would make them even less accessible for developing countries, whereas the 
nuclear materials which the great Powers used for military purposes remained 
outside the scope of the Convention, thus permitting continued vertical 
proliferation with the concomitant dangers to world peace and security. Such 
additional controls were not only difficult to accept, but would also 
undermine the confidence of Member States in the Agency's safeguards system. 
76. On the other hand, he wished to inform the Conference that his country 
had decided to accept the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the 
Agency. 
77. Where the financing of technical assistance was concerned, Chile 
remained convinced that the best way of securing the necessary funds for that 
programme was to provide them under the Regular Budget. The present system 
evidently did not ensure that the established targets were met, since the 
shortfall currently amounted to nearly 40%. The Agency should seek a 
mechanism to prevent such financing shortfalls; it should also, in approving 
technical assistance projects in Member States, take into account the 
situation regarding pledges and actual payments to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund. Chile, although it was opposed to the present system 
of financing technical assistance, nevertheless pledged to contribute its 
share of the target for 1987. 
78. With respect to the Agency's programme and budget for 1987 and 1988, 
his country congratulated the Secretariat on the balance reflected in document 
GC(XXX)/777 and expected that the expanded programme of nuclear safety 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 20 


activities would receive wide support from Member States. Nuclear safety was 
a responsibility of all countries which could not be disregarded in any future 
nuclear activity without encountering great difficulties. 


79. As to the financing of safeguards, which had been under discussion for 
years without any solution being found, his country still considered that the 
developing countries should contribute a reduced, or at least frozen, amount 
towards that activity, whereas the advanced nuclear supplier countries should 
bear the main burden of the Agency's safeguards system. 
80. With regard to the staffing of the Secretariat, the Director General's 
efforts to increase the number of staff from developing countries were 
appreciated, but further efforts would be necessary. The expanded nuclear 
safety programme would offer an opportunity for the recruitment of new 
professionals from developing countries as of 1987. 
81. On the question of amending part or all of Article VI of the Statute, 
very little progress had been made towards accommodating the interests and 
aspirations of the large number of developing countries which were 
increasingly availing themselves of the benefits of nuclear energy, as was 
proved by the fact that, according to the Agency itself, the present volume of 
the technical assistance programme was twenty times greater than at its 
inception. 
82. Mr. JAMALUDDIN (Malaysia) said that the present General Conference 
was being held only a few months after the Chernobyl accident. That event had 
invited unfavourable publicity and strengthened fears with regard to the use 
and development of nuclear energy. Public confidence in the usefulness of 
nuclear power, which had gradually been restored after the Three Mile Island 
accident six years before, had suffered another serious blow. For those 
States which were committed to the peaceful use of nuclear energy there was 
now an urgent need to overcome the fears and misconceptions existing among the 
public by providing adequate information, particularly efforts in the area of 
safety, and taking action to minimize the risks involved. 
83. His country was greatly encouraged in that connection by the recent 
adoption of the convention on early notification and the convention on 
assistance in the event of nuclear accidents during the special session of the 

GOV/COM.8/OR.62 
page 21 


the same time, all parties involved in project implementation understood the 
importance of and were interested in the project effectiveness. His 
delegation hoped therefore that in future the work of evaluation would be 
carried out in close collaboration with all interested parties, and that they 
would thereby give a permanent impetus to the Agency's technical assistance 
and co-operation activities. 


71. The representative of BRAZIL pointed out with regard to the nuclear 
power training programme and the conclusions contained in the report 
GOV/INF/507 that his country was very interested in that programme which, even 
if liable to alteration, should nevertheless be pursued. 
72. The representative of CANADA expressed his satisfaction that the 
evaluation had become a component part of the Agency's programming, and 
encouraged the Secretariat to develop further and improve its evaluation 
activities. In that connection, the country programme evaluations mentioned 
by the Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation seemed a very good 
initiative. His delegation believed as a whole that the evaluation exercise 
should visibly affect the programming process. For that purpose it would be 
useful, for example, if in its annual evaluation report the Secretariat 
provided an account of the follow-up to recommendations of previous reports. 
Furthermore, Canada did not believe that the resources assigned to evaluation 
were adequate; there was therefore need to give serious consideration to 
raising the amount going into evaluation to the full 1% of the development 
budget fixed by the Board until the results of remedial measures had a more 
visible impact. 
73. With regard to the annex to document GOV/INF/507, he said first of all 
that recommendation I brought out a salient point that called for a more ' 
careful planning effort. There was need to set priorities by establishing 
better linkage between the nuclear power programmes of recipient countries, 
and the place of those programmes in their overall energy development, on the 
one hand, and the demand for and provision of training, on the other. 
74. Canada would not necessarily oppose the reconstitution of the Advisory 
Committee on Nuclear Power Training, but it was doubtful whether the problem 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 22 


Malaysia tried always to keep abreast of the latest developments in nuclear 
power technology. It also considered that nuclear energy as applied to 
agriculture, food, medicine and industry was of particular benefit to the 
developing countries. 


87. Malaysia supported the Agency's efforts in promoting such uses of 
nuclear energy through technical assistance, research contracts and regional 
co-operation activities. The seminar on technical co-operation to be held 
during the present General Conference would be helpful for effective 
implementation of technical assistance projects, 
88. One of the most successful innovations introduced by the Agency in its 
attempts to promote the peaceful uses of the atom was the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement (RCA). Malaysia supported the further extension of 
that Agreement. However, there should be at the same time careful assessment 
of the expense involved in the transfer of technology and of the 
appropriateness of the technology concerned. Appropriate technology should 
take into account the particular nature of problems in each area. 
89. Malaysia had entered into bilateral agreements with Australia in four 
particular areas of application as well as setting up a state system of 
nuclear materials accounting. The acquisition of technology was crucial not 
only for growth but for the capacity to grow. Efforts towards greater 
technological self-reliance had to be supported through international 
co-operation. How quickly and how best the technologies could be transferred 
was the question. In that connection, the UNDP/RCA project on industrial 
application of isotopes and radiation technology under the auspices of the 
Agency represented an important step forward. Malaysia had recently signed an 
agreement to extend that project for a further period of five years. 
90. With respect to the activities of the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS), his country was concerned over the lack of progress made. If nuclear 
energy was to be a viable source of power, the supply of nuclear equipment and 
services on a predictable and long-term basis in accordance with mutually 
acceptable considerations of non-proliferation had to be guaranteed. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 23 


91. His Government wished to emphasize the importance of the United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCP1CPUNE) scheduled for 1987. It would provide an 
opportunity for Member States to devise ways of overcoming constraints in the 
development of nuclear power and the application of nuclear technology. All 
States should have unhindered access to nuclear technology, equipment and 
material on a non-discriminatory basis so as to develop national programmes 
for social and economic development in accordance with their priorities, 
interests and needs. 
92. Malaysia deplored the racist policy pursued by the South African 
regime. It was regrettable that despite all the Director General's efforts 
pursuant to General Conference resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/442 on South Africa's 
nuclear capabilities, that country continued to refuse to place all its 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. Furthermore, South Africa should 
stop the exploitation and sale of Namibian uranium resources. 
93. In conclusion, his delegation wished to reaffirm its confidence in the 
part played by the Agency in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
94. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that he was grateful to the 
Agency for complying with his Government's request that the question of the 
Israeli nuclear threat be included on the agenda of the General Conference. 
That request had been accompanied by a brief explanatory memorandum, which had 
already been distributed. Evidence to prove Israel's nuclear power potential 
would be circulated in an annex in due course to delegates but, in summary, 
the evidence demonstrated that ever since its creation, Israel had spared no 
effort to acquire nuclear weapons. It had stolen uranium and equipment for 
that purpose. In October 1974, the President of Israel, as reported by the 
Guardian newspaper, had indicated that his country had always had the 
intention of promoting its nuclear capability and that it would soon be in a 
position to realize that potential. According to international news agency 
reports in 1985 Israel had deployed nuclear warheads in the occupied Syrian 
Golan Heights and those reports had never been denied by Israel. Even if the 
warheads had not been deployed, but were still in storage, the fact remained 
that Israel posed a nuclear threat. 

GC(XXX)/0R.284 
page 24 


95. There was no doubt that Israel was an aggressor. It had seized even 
more territory than that which had been allotted to it by the United Nations 
in 1947 and had evicted the people of Palestine from their homes and villages, 
the majority of whom were still living in refugee camps in Lebanon, Syria, 
Jordan and elsewhere. In 1956, Israel had attacked Egypt, and in 196 7 had 
invaded three Arab countries - Jordan, Egypt and Syria. Israel had also 
attacked Lebanon several times before invading it in 1982 and occupying half 
of its national territory. 
96. Israel was an expansionist State. In 1948 it had annexed Palestinian 
land and in 196 7 it had occupied and annexed Egyptian, Syrian and Jordanian 
territory. Had it not been for the stand taken by the Soviet Union and the 
United States, Israel would not have withdrawn from Sinai in 1956. 
97. Israel was an unethical State. There was evidence that Israel had been 
spying on its friend the United States of America. The Jonathan Pollard case 
had come to light in 1985 and in 1986 there had been mention in the Washington 
Post of the case of an Israeli who had stolen uranium from the United States. 
Israel was also a racist State. The United Nations had provided evidence of 
the racist practices against the Arab inhabitants of Palestine and had 
repeatedly condemned them. 
98. Israel was a terrorist State. The former Prime Minister, Menahim 
Begin, and Prime Minister Shamir had a record of terrorism. In recent years 
Israeli terrorist acts had included a raid on the Baghdad reactor, the raid on 
Tunis, and more recently the interception of a Libyan airliner in 
international air space, forcing it to land at an Israeli military airport, 
where the passengers had been held captive for a long time. Terrorist acts 
had also been carried out by uniformed Israeli officials. The whole world was 
worried about the possibility of nuclear weapons falling into the hands of 
terrorists and the dangers of such weapons falling into Israeli hands were 
obvious. Israel was now a party to the Star Wars programme and even without 
that programme Israel had acquired military superiority over Arab countries 
which the United States enabled it to maintain. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 25 


99. The Israeli nuclear threat extended beyond the Arab world to other 
countries especially in Europe where Jews had suffered during the Hitler 
period. Israel never forgot any act directed against it and was eager to take 
revenge. Israel had insulted both Chancellor Schmidt of the Federal Republic 
of Germany and President Waldheim of Austria. It was to be hoped that Europe 
would take the necessary steps to eliminate the threat and danger posed by 
Israel. His country, together with other Arab States, planned to submit a 
draft resolution to deal with that threat. 
100. The South African Government was a racist terrorist regime like Israel 
and steps should be taken to protect other African States from the nuclear 
threat posed by South Africa. 
101. It was no secret that his country intended to set up nuclear reactors 
and in doing so it was keeping in close contact with the Agency. An agreement 
had been reached with the Soviet Union to build a research reactor with 
limited capacity and a contract had been signed for the study and selection of 
a site for a WWER-440 MW nuclear power plant. 
102. The conclusions reached by the special session of the General 
Conference the previous week were very important. However, all conventions 
and treaties related to nuclear safety still lacked an essential element and 
in that respect the Soviet Union's moratorium on nuclear testing and its 
initiatives to halt the arms' race were very commendable. 
103. Mr. COSTANTINI (Argentina) said that the most important event for 
his country's nuclear programme during the past year had probably been the 
clear and definite reaffirmation of the present Argentine Government's 
political will to continue the current development plan, while adapting it to 
national energy needs and the general economic situation, with a view to 
achieving self-sufficiency and the resulting freedom of decision. Those goals 
had been outlined by the Argentine President on the occasion of the 
thirty-sixth anniversary of the Argentine National Atomic Energy Commission, 
on which he had also laid the foundation-stone for a new Argentine atomic 
centre which would comprise a 22 MW reactor, a new radioisotope production 
plant and a cobalt-60 encapsulation facility. 

GC(XXX)/0R.284 
page 26 


104. In addition to increasing the production of radioisotopes by means of a 
new cyclotron, his country was also developing and building sophisticated 
equipment for nuclear medicine, an application of nuclear energy which was 
clearly oriented towards people's well-being and not towards increasing the 
power of the State. 
105. The year 1986 had been a very active one for Argentina where 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was 
concerned. On the multilateral level, Argentina had maintained its full 
support for the Agency's technical co-operation programme, significantly 
increased the number of Argentine experts made available to the Agency and the 
number of fellows receiving training in Argentine facilities, and organized a 
number of training courses on various subjects relating to nuclear energy. In 
that connection, he wished to emphasize particularly his country's special 
support for the ARCAL programme and to urge the Agency to find means of 
contributing more substantially to the ten projects approved under the ARCAL 
programme, since financing was currently assured for only three of them. 
Similarly, he appealed to Member States that were habitually generous in their 
contributions to other Agency programmes to be so also with respect to the 
ARCAL programme. 
106. As in previous years, he was again able to pledge a voluntary contribution 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1987, which 
would as usual be paid in Argentine currency. 
107. Within the Organization of American States, his country had continued 
to support the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission, whose fourteenth 
regular general meeting had been held in Buenos Aires in April. In addition, 
two training courses for participants from various Latin American countries 
had been held in Argentina, and there had been other multilateral activities 
organized by his country as well. 
108. On the bilateral level, there had been co-operative efforts with many 
countries in almost all continents: Argentina was a party to 17 specific 
co-operation agreements, and a number of others were currently at an advanced 
stage of negotiation. The relations between his country and Algeria, Brazil, 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 27 


India, Iran and Peru were particularly promising examples of genuine 
horizontal co-operation between developing countries for mutual benefit; in 
addition, fruitful co-operation had also been kept up with the Federal 
Republic of Germany and other European countries in specific areas. 


109. Turning to the Agency's technical co-operation programme, he 
congratulated the Secretariat on its excellent work, but expressed his concern 
at the fact that the Department of Technical Co-operation appeared to have 
reached the saturation level with respect to its capacity for handling 
projects. That capacity must be increased as soon as possible, particularly 
in view of the demands which the ARCAL programme could be expected to bring. 
Moreover, the deleterious discriminatory attitude taken by several countries 
in making the provision of technical assistance through the Agency contingent 
upon adherence to a certain treaty had persisted during the past year. 
Imposing such conditions was expressly prohibited by the Agency's Statute. 
That was why he was reiterating his country's request that the Agency should 
refuse to sponsor any activity offered by Member States which did not respect 
the equal rights of all Member States and attempted to apply discriminatory 
policies, for whatever reason. 
110. As for the other great responsibility of the Agency, the application of 
safeguards, he was gratified to note that Member States had again abided by 
their undertakings and that, consequently, the Agency was able once more to 
state that there had been no diversions of safeguarded material for 
non-peaceful purposes. However, in that connection he wished to reiterate his 
country's position that the new type of full-scope safeguards agreement which 
had recently been negotiated with a Member State should not be taken in any 
way to constitute a legal precedent for future safeguards negotiations, even 
though his country had not objected to that agreement out of respect for the 
sovereign right of any Member State to conclude whatever agreements it pleased. 
111. With regard to the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), 
his delegation had already pointed out during the Board meetings in 
February[1] that if no widely acceptable compromise was found within a short 
[1] See document GOV/OR.645, para. 40. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 28 


time - not necessarily one which fully satisfied all the aspirations of all 
participants, but one which constituted a "lowest common denominator" for 
mutual understanding - then the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 


International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) 
would begin under a cloud and, instead of offering a unique opportunity for 
encouraging harmony and dissipating distrust, would become yet another forum 


for the mutual recriminations with which everyone was by now familiar. He 


therefore urged the States participating in CAS to make renewed efforts at 
being flexible and showing a spirit of compromise; if that were not possible, 


it would be well to stop harbouring false hopes with regard to the results of 
UNCPICPUNE. 


112. The Agency's work in the field of radiation protection and nuclear 
safety was deserving of the highest praise; in particular, the Secretariat had 
reacted to the unfortunate accident at Chernobyl with remarkable promptitude 
and efficiency. He would not go into that subject on the present occasion, 
since it had already been discussed extensively during the recent special 
session, but it was clearly time for many developed Member States to start 
paying more attention to the Agency's work in that field and to implement the 
Agency's standards and recommendations in their national regulations. In that 
context, Argentina approved without reservation the expanded programme for 
nuclear safety and radiation protection and would support it in every way 
possible. 
113. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director General and the 
Secretariat on their dedicated efforts to overcome the often almost insoluble 
difficulties which arose in their daily work. His Government promised to lend 
the Agency all its support in those endeavours and to participate in the 
Agency's activities with the same enthusiasm as in previous years. 
114. Mr. STEMPEL PARIS (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America) said that the coming century would constitute a significant 
challenge for the destiny of the inhabitants of the globe, for it was not 
possible or acceptable to prevent certain peoples from gaining the benefits of 
the peaceful use of atomic energy at the price of creating such an obvious 
imbalance with its incalculable consequences. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 29 


115. When the parties negotiating the Tlatelolco Treaty had agreed on Agency 
safeguards on all the nuclear activities of Member States as the main basis 
for ensuring the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international 
security, they had been well aware of the risks that the improper use of such 
technology could bring not only for their own peoples, but for the other 
countries in the world. A number of nuclear accidents at the facilities of 
certain States with advanced technology in that field had made it clear that 
there was still a long way to go in man's development of that new potential in 
order to master it and eliminate its risks to human survival, should it ever 
go out of control. 
116. Latin America sought to offer its peoples the benefit of that new 
technology. The countries most advanced in the field had changed the 
landscape of a zone free from nuclear activities to one where there were 
different levels of development in the harnessing of nuclear energy and that 
fact clearly determined the need for the IAEA and OPANAL (Agency for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America) to consider various 
procedures for inclusion in safeguards agreements. 
117. The establishment of denuclearized zones as a collateral disarmament 
measure was a new step towards the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
althought their objective was the same as far as the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was concerned, the approach was different 
with respect to the safeguards system and to its scope in terms of 
experimentation with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
118. Within Latin America there was already one country that had mastered 
the technique of enriching uranium by gas diffusion which, as all knew, was a 
jealously guarded secret. The future plans of that country - Argentina included 
acquisition of the engineering skill necessary for building nuclear 
power stations as an integral part in acquiring the technology of the entire 
fuel cycle. As a consequence of that, a new concept had been introduced into 
the formulation of the safeguards agreement which would need to be negotiated 
and the result of which other Latin American States with a nuclear potential 
were awaiting before fully acceding to the Tlatelolco Treaty. 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 30 


119. The Argentine representative to the ninth regular session of the 
General Conference of OPANAL had stated the year before that, in 1979, his 
country had entered into negotiations with the IAEA for the purpose of 
finalizing the text of the safeguards agreement due to be signed when the 
Tlatelolco Treaty had been ratified, but had stressed the fact that the IAEA 
had not devised a safeguards system appropriate to and in keeping with the 
letter and spirit of the Tlatelolco Treaty, and that it had incorrectly placed 
the agreements devolving from the Latin American instrument on the same 
footing as the "discriminatory obligations" of NPT; in so doing he had 
stressed his country's desire to reach an agreement that did not restrict 
peaceful nuclear developments but did not at the same time leave open the 
possibility that States from outside the continent might set up nuclear 
weapons on its territory; as a result agreement had not yet been possible. 
120. The safeguards agreement, which had been under negotiation between the 
Argentine Republic and the Agency since 1979, was still being examined in 
detail by the Director General in a search for various ways in which the 
process might be completed. Despite the difficulties, OPANAL was confident 
that the political will to draft an agreement of that kind still prevailed. 
He believed that among the objections and reservations expressed by the 
Argentine Government with regard to ratification of the Tlatelolco Treaty that 
point was the one that should be first resolved. 
121. OPANAL had no doubt at all as to the Argentine intention to use the new 
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, in keeping with the Agency 
international safeguards system, the objectives of which were the timely 
detection of diversion of significant quantities of nuclear material from 
peaceful nuclear activities to the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other 
explosive devices or for purposes unknown, and deterrence of such diversion by 
the risk of early detection. 
122. Agency safeguards had passed through various phases, which was an 
indication of their adaptability to the new situations emerging; as far as 
the Tlatelolco Treaty was concerned, an important phase had been the fact of 
the first agreement with a State that did not have nuclear activities and was 

GC(XXX)/OR.284 
page 31 


not party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty - Panama - which suggested that new 
political and technological factors might have to be considered when 
concluding different types of agreements. 


123. The Tlatelolco Treaty provided for other fields of activity than 
keeping the zone free from nuclear weapons, but for that purpose the zone 
would have to be completely integrated with the States most advanced in 
nuclear technology. His organization had always been ready for a dialogue to 
overcome difficulties; the resolutions of the OPAHAL General Conference had so 
far been adopted unanimously by consensus despite the regulations existing in 
that connection, which made it possible to adopt them by a two-thirds majority 
of the States present and voting. 
124. The accidents that had occurred at nuclear facilities, especially the 
case of Chernobyl, had made it clear that national nuclear development 
programmes were closely bound up with international security The concept of 
inviolable sovereignty had in that sense ceased to exist. Latin America was 
not in a position to wait for the announcement that a test explosion had been 
carried out or that an accident had occurred at some nuclear facility within 
the zone delineated by the Tlatelolco Treaty; hence it was encouraging that 
the steps necessary not only to prevent accidents at future facilities, but 
also in existing ones, were being taken. Argentine and Brazil had signed a 
co-operation agreement along those lines. 
125. It would soon be twenty years since the Tlatelolco Treaty had been 
opened for signature. It was fervently hoped that all nuclear States would 
have by then ratified Protocol I, which guaranteed that in territories which 
were de jure or de_facto under their jurisdiction the status of 
denuclearization would be applied; that States which had still not done so 
should sign and/or ratify and/or waive Article 28, so that the instrument 
could fully enter into force and be evidence to the world that the political 
will of Latin America and the Caribbean was devoted to peace. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 



GC(XXX)/OR.285 
April 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


For official use only 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 30 September 1986, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. CASTILLO CONTOUX (Guatemala) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** Paragraphs 
General debate and annual report 
for 1985 (continued) 1 135 
Statements by the delegates of 
Australia 1 - 16 
Japan 17 - 29 
Viet Nam 30 - 37 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic 38 - 46 
Canada 47 - 60 
Peru 61 - 71 
Bulgaria 72 - 82 
Guatemala 83 - 90 
Brazil 91 - 103 
Netherlands 104 - 116 
Egypt 117 - 126 
Iraq 127 - 135 

{*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 3 December 1986. 


[**] GC(XXX)/789. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/238/Rev.4. 


87-1223 
1071e/0161e 



GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1985 (GC(XXX)/775 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. KELSO (Australia) noted that 1986 had been a significant year 
both for the Agency and for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy: it had seen 
new records of nuclear power production. At the same time, the Chernobyl 
accident had led - for the first time - to radiation-caused facilities 
directly associated with nuclear power and to a subsequent re-evaluation by 
many countries of the place of nuclear power in their energy plans. The 
Agency had reacted to the international situation following the Chernobyl 
accident in a way which had reflected credit on the organization, on its 
Director General and on its Secretariat. The actions taken since May which 
had culminated, the previous week, in the conclusion of the work of the first 
special session of the Agency's General Conference had led to major advances 
in international arrangements to deal with nuclear accidents with 
transboundary effects and in programmes to strengthen nuclear safety. The 
Australian delegation was confident that the positive spirit of co-operation 
established between States and the Secretariat in the field of nuclear safety 
would continue during implementation of the new programmes. 
2. It was in that spirit that Australia would host in April 1988 in Sydney 
a major Agency conference on radiation protection and nuclear energy as a 
contribution to co-operation in the field of nuclear safety. Public opinion 
expected to be assured by the nuclear industry that nuclear activities were 
safe and that they would remain peaceful. Australia looked to the Agency as 
the principal international authority in a position to provide that assurance. 
3. His delegation supported the expanded nuclear safety programme, 
although it considered that the Agency should, as was customary, ensure that 
that programme was subject to continuous effective financial and 
administrative scrutiny and that projects should be implemented only after 
thorough preparation and justification. It was also important that nuclear 
safety activities should not be implemented at the expense of the Agency's 
statutory and international legal responsibilities, particularly in the area 
of safeguards. The Agency's safeguards activities were crucial to the 
assurance flowing from non-proliferation commitments undertaken at 
international level, particularly under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 

GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 3 


4. The fact that a number of facilities in non-nuclear-weapon States, 
including many sensitive fuel cycle facilities, were still not under 
safeguards was inevitably a cause of concern to the whole international 
community. While such facilities continued to operate outside safeguards, 
the risk of the proliferation of nuclear weapons would continue. It should be 
stressed once again that facilities and indigenous technology dedicated to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy were in no way compromised by safeguards 
inspections. Furthermore, legally binding international non-proliferation 
commitments did not compromise or complicate the security of supply; on the 
contrary they enhanced it and provided the framework for stable, peaceful 
nuclear trade. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) was making only 
slow progress, but it was useful in that it served as a forum for dialogue on 
those important questions, which would also be discussed in 1987 during the 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). Australia believed that in 
its examination of ways of improving co-operation in that area, the Conference 
should concentrate its efforts on the common ground that existed. 
5. Australia believed that NPT played a key role in preventing the spread 
of nuclear weapons and that it was the main means of facilitating co-operation 
between States in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It welcomed the fact 
that, since the previous session of the General Conference, three further 
countries had become party to the treaty, namely the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, Colombia and Malawi, which had brought to 135 the number of 
States Party. The Third NPT Review Conference in 1985 had stressed that the 
treaty was essential for international peace and security and had made a 
number of practical recommendations which the Secretariat had followed up in 
1986. Australia urged the Secretariat to continue that work in 1987; it was 
in the light of a recommendation made by the NPT Review Conference concerning 
international plutonium storage that Australia had requested, at the meetings 
of the Board of Governors in June, that the data base established by the 
expert group on international plutonium storage be updated. His delegation 
continued to think that further discussion and development of the concept of 
international plutonium storage was necessary. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 4 


6. After a major review of Australia's nuclear policy, a Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation (Safeguards) Bill was now before the Australian Parliament. 
That would strengthen the role of the national system of accounting and 
control of nuclear material, constituted as the Australian Safeguards Office. 
Also, enactment of the legislation would enable Australia to proceed to 
ratification of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
7. Legislation had also been introduced into Parliament aimed at modifying 
the arrangements governing nuclear science research and development, so as to 
place greater emphasis on the application of nuclear science and technology to 
community needs such as industry, agriculture and medicine; the Australian 
Atomic Energy Commission would then become the Australian Nuclear Science and 
Technology Organization. Those changes were expected to be implemented early 
in 1987. 
8. With regard to radioactive waste management, research and development 
work on "Synroc" was continuing: that process had real potential as a secondgeneration 
form of waste management in view of its technical and processing 
advantages over other types of waste management and the option of storing 
spent fuel without reprocessing. Collaboration agreements for research into 
"Synroc" had been signed with Japan, the United Kingdom and Italy and tests on 
samples containing nuclear waste were being conducted in Japan and in the 
United Kingdom. In Australia, a non-radioactive pilot plant for demonstrating 
the feasibility of manufacturing full-size "Synroc" blocks was due to be 
commissioned early in 1987. 
9. Like many of the Agency's Member States, Australia was facing severe 
economic conditions and had to adopt policies cf financial stringency. Public 
expenditure had been cut in all areas, including overseas aid. That situation 
would inevitably have repercussions on some of Australia's contributions to 
the Agency in 1986/87, but it should not be interpreted as a diminution in 
interest on the part of his country in the Agency or of the support given to 
it. The Agency, like many of its Member States, had continued to operate 
under conditions of intense budgetary stringency, which could not be expected 
to change in the near future. Australia commended the way in which the 
Secretariat had, under those conditions, prepared the budget for 1987 using 
the well-established process of consultations with Member States. It also 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 5 


welcomed the fact that the proposed budget was close to zero real growth. The 
Agency should continue to maintain the objective of establishing a zero-growth 
budget. Difficult decisions about priorities would have to be made. 


10. Continued priority should be given to safeguards, so that the 
safeguards system could meet the challenges facing it and the Agency could 
carry out its legal responsibilities in that area. His delegation believed 
that even within the limits of overall zero real growth there was a case for 
increasing the resources allocated to safeguards. 
11. Technical assistance also continued to be a key Agency activity, since 
it could provide considerable assistance to Member States in the 
implementation of their development programmes. The Agency continued to 
demonstrate its competence and efficiency in the transfer of nuclear 
technology. 
12. In addition to the contributions which it had made to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF), Australia had continued to make 
contributions under the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) during the past 
year. It supported the extension of that agreement, which was due to expire 
in 1987. The RCA had demonstrably enhanced the use of nuclear techniques in 
the region and had become a key element in the implementation of the Agency's 
activities in Asia. Furthermore, it was an example to other regions of the 
way in which regional agreements could lead to positive results. 
13. The provision of training was occupying an increasingly important place 
in Australia's relations with the Agency. During the past year, the 
Australian School of Nuclear Technology had organized, under the auspices of 
the Agency, four training courses attended by 6 7 participants from 13 
countries in the region. Two covered the utilization of nuclear techniques 
(one in health-related environmental research and monitoring and the other in 
mineral processing) and the other two hospital radiopharmacy and national 
systems of accounting for and control of nuclear materials. Furthermore, 
Australia had continued to accept Agency fellows in public and private 
institutions. In addition, bilateral co-operation in the nuclear field was 
one of the features of Australia's relations with Indonesia and Malaysia. 

GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 6 


14. In view of the continuing budgetary restraint, it was incumbent upon 
all participants in the technical assistance programme - donor countries, 
recipient countries and the Secretariat - to emphasize the effectiveness of 
delivery and the quality and relevance of the assistance provided. Programmes 
should be designed so as to meet real needs relevant to the Agency's functions 
and capabilities. After all, that was a more accurate measure of the value of 
the technical assistance programme than levels of available funding. In that 
respect his delegation welcomed the Director General's comment that in 1986 
programme implementation under the Technical Assistance and Co- operation Fund 
(TACF) would place greater emphasis on implementation rates than on the amount 
of money spent. 
15. Australia intended to continue - through co-operation with the 
Secretariat and in the Board of Governors - to participate actively in the 
Agency's work and to support its efforts to promote the peaceful and safe use 
of nuclear energy, while strengthening the barriers against its misuse; those 
were the twin crucial responsibilities of the Agency which explained why the 
Australian Government attached so much importance to the unique role of the 
Agency and its statutory functions. It was essential that the Agency's 
resources be deployed effectively in the carrying-out of those 
responsibilities. 
16. It was important to bear in mind the common objectives of Member States 
and to ensure that no extraneous political issues or sectorial demands 
compromised the Agency's ability to meet its responsibilities. It was up to 
the Member States to create the conditions in which the Agency and the 
Secretariat could work towards the achievement of the common objectives with 
maximum efficiency. Australia expected the General Conference to act in a 
responsible way, keeping those objectives in view. In conclusion, his 
Government approved the Agency's Annual Report for 1985. 
17. Mr. MURATA (Japan) observed that it was unfortunate that the most 
serious accident in the history of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had 
coincided with the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of the Agency. That 
accident had not only left many victims and damaged property in the Soviet 
Union but had also had significant radiological repercussions in neighbouring 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 7 


States. It had also been a great shock to all experts involved in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The accident had re-opened the debate on 
nuclear safety in States where it had been carried on at a less intense level 
following the Three Mile Island accident. Since the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy had become frequent in many Member States, nuclear safety was not a 
problem limited to an individual State but an issue common to all. It was 
regrettable that the fear expressed on many occasions by Japan that an 
accident which occurred in one country might affect the nuclear programmes in 
other States had materialized. All States using nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes should take the present opportunity to reaffirm their commitment to 
bear full responsibility for the safety of their national programmes, also 
with respect to other States. It was encouraging to note that everyone agreed 
that the Chernobyl accident should not jeopardize the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy - an agreement that had led to timely action within the 


framework of the Agency. Japan welcomed the results of the special session of 
the General Conference; the unanimously adopted final document had confirmed 
the usefulness of co-operation under the auspices of the Agency and the 
competence of the Agency itself. 


18. Japan believed that international nuclear co-operation should go hand 
in hand with the development of nuclear programmes in Member States. The 
Agency was called upon to play a key role in such international co-operation. 
Japan therefore supported its activities in that area, particularly the 
establishment of safety standards and the exchange of information on incidents 
occurring at nuclear facilities. Also, it would support the Agency in 
carrying out the functions which it would have to carry out upon the entry 
into force of the two conventions adopted at the special session. 
19. Reviewing the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in 
Japan, he noted that they had been resumed in 1956 - the year of the founding 
of the Agency. Following the tragic events of the Second World War, Japan had 
decided to use nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful purposes. That 
commitment was stipulated in the Atomic Energy Law, and all nuclear activities 
had been carried out strictly in accordance with the provisions of that law. 
The Japanese Government had immediately prepared a comprehensive programme for 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 8 


the peaceful uses of nuclear energy so as to fill the gap caused by the 


suspension, after the Second World War, of all nuclear-related activities. 
Research institutes had been established, research facilities constructed, 
personnel trained and so on, and Japan's programme could be regarded as a 
reflection of the great hopes which the Japanese public had placed in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. A number of difficulties had been 
experienced in implementing the programme, but the initial objectives had been 
reached as a result of strong public support and the re-establishment of a 
strong national infrastructure, together with co-operation offered through 
bilateral and multilateral agreements. 


20. In the 1960s, a nuclear power programme had been launched and the 
construction of nuclear power plants started. In the 1970s, issues such as 
nuclear safety, environmental protection and public acceptance had emerged; at 
the same time, during the first "oil shock" the Government had accelerated 
Japan's nuclear power programme. It was during the 1980s that the efforts 
made in the 1970s in the field of nuclear safety, environmental protection and 
public acceptance had begun to bear fruit. The peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy had made a considerable contribution to Japan's social and economic 
development, and at the same time the Japanese public had arrived at a greater 
awareness of that contribution. 
21. Since the founding of the Agency, many nuclear power plants had been 
commissioned in a considerable number of Member States. The annual report for 
1985 indicated that the total world installed nuclear capacity had reached 
250 GW(e) at the end of 1985, by which time nuclear power plants were 
accounting for 15% of world electricity generation. Nuclear power was playing 
a major role in Japan; in some Member States, on the other hand, it had been 
decided that nuclear power should be phased out, postponed or abandoned. It 
could be said that the decade of the 1980s was seeing a diversification of 
opinions on nuclear power. In that connection his delegation wished to stress 
that the Agency was becoming increasingly recognised as one of the most 
important organizations providing scientific information valuable for Member 
States' decision-making. 

GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 9 


22. Japan considered that nuclear power was one of the main alternatives to 
oil. At present the country was operating 33 nuclear power plants with a total 
capacity of 24.7 GW, which had accounted for 26.3% of the country's total 
electricity generation in 1985. Twelve plants with a capacity of 11.1 GW were 
under construction, and 5 plants with a capacity of 5.4 GW were planned. In 
1985 the availability factor for Japan's nuclear power plants had been 76%, 
which confirmed that nuclear power was a reliable source of energy. Japan was 
not content with simply maintaining the good performance record of its nuclear 
power plants; close co-operation between Government and industry in improving 
still further the operational safety of the plants in service and developing 
advanced light-water reactors with better operational safety features and a 
high level of economic performance would continue. 
23." It was also Japanese policy to aim at making maximum use of the 
potential energy of uranium; to that end, research and development work had 
been carried out on an advanced thermal reactor, a fast-breeder reactor and 
the technology of using plutonium in light-water reactors. Since the reliable 
operation of nuclear power plants had been virtually mastered, priority was 
being given to the establishment of a national nuclear fuel cycle and a 
national waste management system. With the support of the Japanese 
Government, companies were engaged in preparations for the construction of a 
commercial uranium enrichment plant, a large-scale reprocessing plant and a 
final storage facility for low-level radioactive wastes. Research and 
development work on high-level wastes was continuing as planned, and a project 
on the decommissioning of a major research reactor had been drawn up and would 
serve as an excellent opportunity to develop decommissioning technology, and 
to acquire experience for future use. Japan was continuing its nuclear fusion 
research and development programme, which should not only help to solve future 
energy problems but also, more generally, contribute to progress in science 
and technology. A facility known as JT-60 had been inaugurated in 1985 and 
was at present being upgraded with the installation of additional components. 
Japan hoped that the results of its experiments would be useful for the INTOR 
Workshop. In the field of accelerator applications, two projects - one on 
medical applications of heavy-particle accelerators and one on advanced 
industrial applications of accelerators - had been launched recently. 



GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 10 


24. In promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, non-proliferation 
measures had to be applied in order to prevent any diversion of nuclear 
materials for military purposes; also, it was necessary to ensure that those 
measures were applied in such a way as not to impede unnecessarily the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy - it was a question of the co-existence of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear non-proliferation. The regime 
established by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) 
provided an important international framework for promoting the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy and preventing nuclear proliferation. In order to enhance 
the universality of NPT, Japan had, on various occasions, urged countries 
which were constructing or operating unsafeguarded nuclear facilities but had 
not signed NPT to become party to the Treaty as soon as possible. Japan had 
also urged those countries to accept full-scope safeguards so as to provide an 
initial indication of their commitment and alleviate the concerns of the 
international community. Since the Third NPT Review Conference, the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea had become party to NPT and the 
Socialist People's Republic of Albania had accepted the application of 
full-scope safeguards; those were small but significant advances. For the NPT 
regime to be more effective, there needed to be less inequality in the 
treatment of nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States. Japan had 
therefore urged all nuclear-weapon States - whether or not they were parties 
to NPT - to submit their peaceful nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. 
Recalling that, at the previous General Conference session, the delegate of 
China had announced his country's willingness to accept Agency safeguards and 
noting that Chinese and Agency officials had in August held a meeting in 
preparation for the negotiation of a safeguards agreement between China and 
the Agency, he said that Japan welcomed the co-operation between the Chinese 
Government and the Agency with a view to concluding a safeguards agreement. 
Japan hoped that all the peaceful nuclear facilities in nuclear-weapon States 
would eventually be placed under Agency safeguards. 


25. The Agency's safeguards system had continued to operate effectively in 
1985. It was essential that that system should keep up with progress achieved 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - in other words, with the increases in 
the number and variety of facilities. In the implementation of Agency 

GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 11 


safeguards, due account should be taken of national systems of accounting and 
control, progress in safeguards techniques, improvements in safeguards 
approaches and evaluation methods, and the need for cost-effectiveness. Japan 
hoped that the work of the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGS1) would soon result in the establishment of new 
safeguards approaches, appropriate to national systems of accounting for and 
control of nuclear material and the characteristics of national nuclear fuel 
cycles. Japan was co-operating with the Agency in various ways in order to 


facilitate safeguards implementation and to improve its effectiveness and 
efficiency. In addition, it would pay a cash contribution to support the 
development of new safeguards approaches in large reprocessing plants, where 
the application of safeguards was particularly important. 


26. Since it had benefited from bilateral co-operation and co-operation 
with international organizations to reach its present status in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, Japan had in return undertaken to offer its assistance 
and co-operation to countries which were just starting out on that road. 
Japan had paid its full share of voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF). It had also made contributions in 
support of RCA projects. Furthermore, it had offered expert services, 
accepted fellows, organized training courses and donated equipment. It 
intended to increase those co-operation activities as much as possible, 
financial circumstances permitting. 
27. Japan welcomed the fact that various RCA projects had achieved their 
purpose through the active participation of the parties to that agreement. It 
believed that the agreement, which provided a general framework for cooperation, 
should be revised in order to streamline project implementation. 
Fourteen years had elapsed since the entry into force of the agreement, and 
RCA activities had developed considerably since then. 
28. The Agency's draft budget for 1987 envisaged an increase of 2.2%, 
including the expanded nuclear safety programme. Japan had joined the 
consensus which had emerged in the Board of Governors in June on the 
additional budget for the expanded nuclear safety programme, thereby 
respecting the wishes of many Member States. While recognising that the 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 12 


Agency was doing useful work, Japan believed that the Agency's budget should 
continue to be strictly controlled and that budgetary increases should be 
minimal, since the financial situation of Member States remained difficult. 
The Secretariat should therefore continue to exercise care in the allocation 
of budgetary resources, in organization and in staffing so that the Agency's 
programme could be implemented to the maximum extent using the limited 
resources available. 


29. The Agency's role in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy had grown year by year. Many technical questions remained to be solved 
in that area, but all knew that the Agency would do everything possible to 
solve them with its available resources. The success of the measures taken 
after the Chernobyl accident could be attributed to the spirit of co-operation 
prevailing in the Agency. His delegation was convinced that that spirit was 
the factor which would enable the Agency to undertake the difficult task 
assigned to it and that that spirit should be further developed. 
30. Mr. LE BA CAP (Viet Nam) said that it was encouraging to note that 
the Agency was playing an ever more important role in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, human health and prosperity throughout the world. During the 
year that had just elapsed it had secured substantial results, particularly in 
the fields of co-operation, assistance and nuclear safety, and had met the 
immediate and legitimate needs of Member States conducting programmes for the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
31. All the developing countries were seeking to increase their technical 
knowledge with a view to ensuring their economic development and raising the 
standard of living of their populations, and in that context they were 
interested in the application of nuclear science to the two eminently 
important areas of agriculture and medicine. That was why the strengthening 
of technical co-operation with developing Member States should remain the 
Agency's principal objective, in accordance with its Statute. However, 
although the Agency's technical co-operation was vital, it was essential that 
the countries benefiting from it should show initiative in the use of the help 
they received from outside. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 13 


32. Viet Nam was satisfied at the results of the special session of the 
General Conference devoted to nuclear safety. The Soviet Union which, 
30 years previously, had inaugurated the era of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, had shown a sense of responsibility in the case of Chernobyl by 
applying all the means at its disposal to cope with the emergency situation 
and to reduce the consequences of the accident to a minimum, both within and 
outside the country. The statement by the General Secretary of the USSR 
Communist Party Central Committee on 14 May 1986 had contributed substantially 
to strengthening international co-operation in nuclear safety and to the 
drafting of the two international conventions adopted at the special session. 
33. Viet Nam was at the start of its programme for the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy. It attached particular importance on the one hand to the 
training of specialists and on the other hand to the application of nuclear 
science in agriculture, medicine and biology. It wished sincerely to thank 
the Agency and friendly countries for the assistance they had afforded it in 
several of those areas, and also the Agency's experts for the high sense of 
responsibility which they had manifested. 
34. Viet Nam had taken an important decision in adhering to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and in 1981 had signed a 
safeguards agreement relating to the 550 kW Dalat research reactor. 
35. The peoples of the world longed for peace, national independence and 
economic development. The struggle against the warmongering and highly 
reactionary forces of the modern era had the essential purpose of preserving 
peace and international security, reinforcing friendship and co-operation 
between peoples, encouraging dialogue and detente, and promoting the peaceful 
co-existence of countries with differing social systems. 
36. Viet Nam unreservedly supported the peaceful initiatives undertaken by 
the Soviet Union and by the six Heads of State or Government who had met at 
New Delhi and Mexico City, and also by other countries in connection with 
disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament. The decision by the Soviet 
Union to extend its unilateral moratorium on nuclear tests was courageous and 
realistic: it had the aim of putting an end to the armaments race and of 
saving mankind from the catastrophe of a nuclear war. 

GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 14 


37. The foreign policy of Viet Nam was a policy of peace and friendship. 
Viet Nam supported the proposal to transform South Asia and the Pacific into 
an area of peace, friendship, equality and co-operation. It was more than 
ever important to pursue the dialogue, to establish a framework for peaceful 
co-existence in South East Asia, and to ban all external aggression, 
intervention and threat in the region. It was in that spirit that Viet Nam 
was prepared to co-operate with other States in the region and with all 
interested countries, and that it gave its unqualified support to the proposal 
to establish a nuclear-free zone in South East Asia. 
38. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) observed 
that the decisions taken at the special session of the General Conference and 
the two conventions signed by more than 50 countries constituted a real basis 
for deepening co-operation between States and for strengthening the Agency's 
role in the establishment of an international regime of safe development of 
nuclear power, the specific programme for which had been proposed by the 
Soviet Union. 
39. Numerous statements made at the special and regular sessions of the 
General Conference had been marked by the search for a systematic and overall 
approach to nuclear affairs. Nuclear and radiological safety, the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the physical protection of 
nuclear material, the prevention of attacks and acts of terrorism against 
nuclear installations, those were the essential aspects of the problem of 
safety, which arose alongside that of mastering the threatening force of the 
atom. It was, nevertheless, impossible to guarantee real safety for all 
States and for all peoples without the complete abolition of nuclear weapons 
and without putting an end to nuclear tests and to the preparations for atomic 
war. The Soviet Union had therefore proposed measures progressively to 
abolish all nuclear weapons in the coming 15 years. The realities of the 
nuclear and space age were stark and simple: civilization would not survive 
an atomic war. The most advanced technical systems could be affected by 
unforeseen and catastrophic incidents, as witness the tragedy of Challenger 
and the accident at Chernobyl. There was only one way to preserve peace and 
life on earth, namely the abolition of weapons of mass destruction. That was 
the most important task facing all States, all social movements and all 
international organizations. 



GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 15 


40. The Byelorussian delegation noted with satisfaction that the Agency's 
main progranunes were being carried out according to plan, and it approved the 
annual report and the Agency's accounts for 1985. Regarding the draft 
programme and budget for 1987 and 1988, the budgetary restrictions were 
reasonable, the interests of Member States and of the international community 
were on the whole respected, and the balanced implementation of projects and 
the establishment of priorities were ensured. The expanded nuclear safety 
programme, some features of which had already been put into effect, reflected 
the complexity of evolving specific recommendations concerning, inter alia, 
increased operational reliability of power plants, the improvement of safety 
systems, accident-prevention measures, the solution to the problem of 
radioactive wastes, and the unification of safety and radiation protection 
standards. The Agency's long-term programme in those fields should take 
account, to a very great extent, of the proposals put forward at the special 
session of the General Conference. 
41. He wished to stress the importance of close international co-operation, 
under the Agency's auspices, in the development of a new generation of power 
reactors and nuclear power plants taking account of the present state of 
knowledge, of the practical experience accumulated throughout the world, and 
above all of present safety requirements. With reference to the search for 
new solutions to numerous aspects of the nuclear safety problem, he was in 
favour of the broadening of international co-operation and the intensification 
of research on fusion, especially in connection with the INTOR project. 
42. Particular attention should also be given to NPT and the Agency's 
safeguards system. Improvements had been wrought in implementing the 
safeguards programme and in the efficiency and reliability of inspection 
results, the credibility of the safeguards system had been strengthened and 
the staff engaged on study of the technical problems and the development of 
inspection procedures was becoming ever more highly skilled. The increased 
computerization and standardization of activities and the development of 
computer resources to support the work of inspectors were positive 
developments. Still more facilities were necessary for increasing the 
effectiveness of inspections. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 16 


43. The modifications and additions made to 1NIS merited approval, 
particularly in connection with the uses of low-level heat, the improvement of 
reactor technology, fast-breeder reactors and high-temperature gas-cooled 
reactors. 
44. Regarding the Agency's technical assistance activities, it was possible 
to observe steady progress in planning and efficiency. Embracing practically 
all the aspects of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, those activities had 
the ultimate aim of establishing a nuclear infrastructure and of training 
highly qualified technical and professional staff in the developing 
countries. The Agency had available ever larger financial and technical 
resources for carrying out that vital task. The volume of voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) should 
increase by 12% per year. Resources emanating from the Regular Budget were 
also on the increase. While the unused balances had greatly decreased, 
certain problems nevertheless remained unsolved. The procedures for financing 
technical assistance were fully satisfactory and should not be changed. The 
Byelorussian delegation approved the indicative planning figure of $34 million 
fixed for the TACF in 1987. Byelorussia's voluntary contribution would be 
increased to the equivalent in national currency of $115 600. 
45. Byelorussia was using nuclear energy in agriculture, industry and 
scientific and medical research. The results of some of that research and the 
experience acquired could be useful for the Agency's work, and his country was 
prepared to consider co-operation in that direction. Byelorussia intended to 
make greater use of nuclear energy for electricity and heat generation. Thus 
work was in progress on the construction near Minsk of a nuclear power plant 
equipped with two pressurized-water-moderated-and-cooled reactors having a 
total output of almost 6000 MW(th). 
46. In conclusion he wished to thank the Director General and the 
Secretariat for their effective and fruitful work in pursuit of the 
development of international co-operation in the peaceful and safe uses of 
nuclear energy and in the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
47. Mr. GIGHAC (Canada) said that, without dwelling on the 
concatenation of events since the Chernobyl accident, he wished to stress 
three positive aspects of that tragic occurrence. First, the international 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 17 


community had shown itself capable of acting quickly and of effectively 
deploying its resources to cope with the situation, as was shown by the very 
rapid preparation of the two conventions adopted at the special session, and 
of which Canada was also a signatory. Second, Governments had shown that they 
had the political will to pool their experience in order to improve nuclear 
safety. Finally, the events in question had drawn attention to those features 
of the Agency's programmes concerned with safety. Canada intended to 
collaborate in the expanded nuclear safety programme. 


48. Recognizing the Agency's nuclear safety objectives, the reaction of the 
international community had been admirable, but that should not eclipse the 
Agency's other important activities in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
namely safeguards and technical assistance and co-operation. The Canadian 
delegation trusted that Governments, having become more conscious of nuclear 
safety and of its importance for international co-operation, would not thereby 
forget those two other areas of Agency activity. The events of 1986 had 
afforded Member States the opportunity of reaffirming their basic goal: the 
safe and efficient use of nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful purposes. 
Those events had also highlighted the Agency's essential role in co-ordinating 
and organizing the relevant activities at international level. 
49. Canada remained committed to the development and utilization of nuclear 
energy. Its national programme contained significant elements which might 
also serve the needs of developing countries. Within the Canadian nuclear 
power programme, the province of Ontario had recently decided to continue 
construction of its 3400 MW generating station at Darlington. That plant 
would bring the installed nuclear capacity to 15 000 MW by 1992. The reactors 
used were of course of the CANDU type, which, according to a recent study, was 
among the best in the world as regards performance and efficiency. Canada now 
had available a CANDU reactor of 300 MW. That reactor, which combined the 
well-known advantages of the CANDU 600 with several new features, met all the 
Agency's reliability criteria. It would generate power at the same price as 
the CANDU 600, but would cost half as much and would be twice as fast to 
build, which should render it particularly attractive for countries with small 
grid systems. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 18 


50. Canadian research establishments remained extremely active, 
particularly as regards studies on the environment, materials, fundamental 
physics and the effects of radiation. The tandem accelerator superconducting 
cyclotron at Chalk River placed the Canadian scientific community in the 
vanguard of research on heavy ions. Canada continued to develop and market 
its MAPLE research reactor concept. That highly flexible reactor type could 
be adapted to the requirements of the developing countries, whether for 
research, training or isotope production. 
51. On the world nuclear scene, industrial irradiation equipment and 
medical therapy equipment using cobalt-60 continued to be a growing factor. 
Canada intended to remain an important supplier of the rapidly expanding world 
market for preservation of foodstuffs by irradiation. It was at present 
constructing an irradiation centre under a collaboration scheme between Atomic 
Energy of Canada Limited (AECL) and the Institut Armand Frappier at Montreal. 
That was simultaneously a demonstration facility and a research centre, of 
which the international community might take advantage for purposes of 
training and process development. In 1988 the centre would host an Agency 
conference on food irradiation. In the medical field, a new process developed 
in Canada was now in use for producing iodine-123, an isotope of particular 
diagnostic importance. 
52. AECL was responsible for the national fusion programme, in co-operation 
with Hydro-Ontario (studies on fusion fuels technology) and Hydro-Quebec 
(tokamak programme). Canada was examining the possibilities of international 
and bilateral collaboration. The research company of AECL was also conducting 
major programmes in reactor safety. Canada had just developed a series of 
small reactors known as local energy systems, which were based on the 
inherently safe SLOWPOKE design and would make it possible to bring 
electricity and heat to remote areas which had no access to the power grid. A 
demonstration unit was under construction. 
53. Turning to the question of irradiated fuel management, he said that 
Canada's research programme bore principally on evaluating the concept of 
burial in the plutonic rock of the Canadian Shield, which was a highly stable 
geological zone. Canada had growing confidence in that technique as a means 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 19 


of protecting the public and the environment. Irradiated fuel disposal was 
not an urgent problem in Canada, with the result that the choice of burial 
sites would not be made before the technique had been thoroughly studied. 


54. Canada was not only among the leading exponents of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, but also had an annual uranium production capacity which would 
be maintained at about 12 000 tonnes until the end of the present decade. The 
working of several deposits recently discovered in the Athabasca basin in 
Saskatchewan could yield a production of about 16 000 tonnes per year by the 
end of the 1990s. 
55. Safeguards were a sphere of activity of the highest importance, and he 
wished to congratulate the Director General, the Deputy Director General for 
Safeguards and the Secretariat for their efforts further to strengthen the 
safeguards programme. Canada remained a firm champion of nuclear 
non-proliferation. In that connection, and particularly regarding the 
Agency's safeguards agreement with Albania, he believed that extreme prudence 
should be exercised when considering alternatives to NPT. For its part, 
Canada would continue to urge all States to accede to that treaty. 
56. The Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR) for 1985, discussed by the 
Board of Governors in June 1986, showed that several measures taken by the 
Director General and the Deputy Director General for Safeguards were yielding 
good results. In particular, the development of long-term criteria for the 
implementation and subsequent evaluation of Agency safeguards was a matter 
which had been in abeyance for many years. It was clear that the systematic 
and comprehensive approach now applied was well directed and entirely 
appropriate. The Canadian Government was most satisfied with that new 
initiative, because it was convinced that, in order to ensure the ongoing 
improvement of the Agency's safeguards system, it was essential to issue as 
soon as possible consistent, long-term implementation criteria for the 
guidance of Member States and the Secretariat. Agency safeguards would enable 
Member States to supply each other with credible evidence that they were 
meeting their non-proliferation commitments. There was no other 
internationally acceptable solution. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 20 


57. Canada was a Member State which, in addition to its Regular Budget and 
voluntary contributions, made other contributions to the Agency's funds. The 
Canadian safeguards support programme was one of those supplementary 
contributions. Under that programme, two significant milestones had just been 
reached in improving safeguards techniques. First, an eight-camera closedcircuit 
television system had been supplied to the Agency. Laboratory tests 
on the system had been extremely satisfactory, and the Agency was purchasing 
several of the units for field trials. Secondly, the first field trial of an 
underwater safeguards containment and sealing system for spent fuel had 
recently been started by the Agency, with the assistance of Canadian 
authorities and a nuclear power plant operator. Such a sealing system, in 
combination with surveillance of the cooling pond, should greatly enhance 
confidence in the Agency's conclusions regarding spent fuel. 
58. Canada had a special interest in the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme. Thanks to its broad expertise and experience in the 
applications of nuclear energy, Canada was in a position of special advantage 
to contribute to that programme. The Agency's success in that difficult area 
was praiseworthy, but his Government nevertheless believed that the value of 
the programme could be further enhanced. Thus, the Agency should encourage 
the involvement of a larger number of women in its development programmes, and 
plan an increase in its technical assistance and co-operation activities in 
Africa, in the light of the key development issues identified by the special 
session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa. The administration 
of such a large and complex programme was not an easy task, and Canada 
appreciated the Agency's efforts to effect a systematic evaluation of 
implementation. It was to be hoped that the technical co-operation seminar 
held during the current session would yield results that would still further 
enhance the effectiveness of implementation of the programme. 
59. Efficiency was a basic requirement in realizing the whole of the 
Agency's programme. The Canadian Government remained firmly in favour of zero 
real growth. Recognizing the importance of an expanded nuclear safety 
programme, Canada had joined the consensus of Board Members regarding the 
budget ceiling for 1987, and it was co-operating with other Member States and 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 21 


with the Secretariat in defining a programme for that year and later. 
However, efforts to identify priorities must be continued, so that the most 
effective programme could be achieved with the minimum cost. 


60. In conclusion, he recalled that the Canadian Government, like others, 
held the view that there was an indissoluble link between enlarging the 
contribution of nuclear energy to human well-being and the need to ensure that 
that energy was used for peaceful purposes only. Canada rejected the notion 
that those two elements could be separated; they were in fact two sides of the 
same coin. It was in that spirit of commitment to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy that Canada supported and would continue to support the Agency. 
61. Mr. FLORES PINEDO (Peru) said that in spite of serious economic 
and social problems which had their roots in the injustice rampant in the 
present international order, particularly as regards commercial exchanges, 
Peru was continuing its efforts to derive benefit from the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy for its own development. That policy was served by a plan 
which should make it possible rapidly to achieve with the slender resources 
available the specific objective which had been set. 
62. Peru's medium-term nuclear plan, defined in 1976 with the direct 
assistance of UNDP, was unequivocal, clear and well suited to the aim 
pursued. Its first phase, carried out beween 1977 and 1983, had made it 
possible to establish an infrastructure on which subsequent development could 
be based. At present, Peru already had available a substantial number of 
operational facilities; three biology and medicine centres, an advanced 
nuclear research centre, a zero-power training reactor built and commissioned 
in 1978 with the assistance of the Argentine National Atomic Energy 
Commission, a computer centre, a 14 MeV neutron accelerator associated with a 
gamma spectrometry laboratory, and a computerized nuclear physics laboratory. 
63. Among those facilities there stood out, thanks to its importance and 
size, the Nuclear Research Centre of Peru - costing a total of $110 million 
and due to go into service in 1987 - with which were associated an isotope 
production plant and a national radiation protection centre. The latter was 
to monitor the observance of optimum safety levels, fixed in accordance with 
Agency standards. It would also supervise the proper use of facilities and 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 22 


would assist the Peruvian Government to protect the population against the 
hazards of ionizing radiations. A national sampling network to monitor the 
environment would be established for that purpose. 


64. Regarding personnel training, improvements had been made during the 
preceding ten years in the training and advanced training of specialists, 
taking advantage of the fellowship programmes operated by the Agency and other 
international organizations, and of the programmes set up under bilateral 
agreements. In 1985, some 30 Peruvian specialists had benefited from Agency 
training: they were now contributing to implementing the programmes of the 
Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute and of other national bodies. 
65. Believing that the establishment of infrastructures was sufficiently 
advanced to permit transition to a phase of much more concrete achievement, 
the Peruvian Government was intending to encourage the growth in the number of 
studies on the biomedical applications of nuclear energy, which in 1985 had 
already reached the record figure of 8000, by putting into service two 
additional pilot centres in the towns of Trujillo and Arequipa. 
66. In agriculture, it was the application of nuclear techniques in barley 
growing which had given the best results, yielding mutants of the Zapata 
variety which were both early and highly resistant to disease. Wheat and 
beans were also the subject of thorough studies whose purpose was to develop 
varieties much more resistant both to disease and to the frosts of the Andean 
zone. In the sphere of animal nutrition, an evaluation had been made of the 
reasons for the low reproduction rate of livestock grazing on high-lying land 
poor in minerals, as a result of which it had been possible to achieve gains 
of up to 35% in terms of animal weight and up to 20% in terms of reproduction 
rate. In order directly to support that programme, an institute specializing 
in the use of nuclear techniques in agriculture was being established. 
67. The first phase of the project to eradicate Mediterranean fruit fly had 
been carried out thanks to a generous contribution of $1.5 million by the 
Italian Government. That had made it possible considerably to reduce the 
damage caused by the insect to fruit crops in areas near the Chilean 
frontier. In view of the importance of continuing that project, Peru was 
endeavouring to obtain the assistance, which it deemed extremely valuable, of 
the European Economic Community. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 23 


68. In the field of mining, research carried out over a period of more than 
a decade under the auspices of the Agency and of UNDP had led to the 
identification on the altiplano of the area representing the greatest uranium 
potential. A feasibility study for an investment project was in progress; it 
concerned the evaluation of reserves (which were of the order of 5000 to 
10 000 tonnes) and should result in the launching of a project to mine and 
process ore at low cost. 
69. Important work was envisaged in the industrial sector: Peru already had 
available experts in non-destructive testing techniques, which were essential 
for quality control in national industry. It was also intended to establish, 
with Agency assistance, a multipurpose irradiation facility which would serve 
for launching a joint programme on radiation preservation of foodstuffs and 
radiosterilization of medical supplies. 
70. All those achievements revealed two very important facts: first, the 
firm will of the Government and of Peruvian technicians to continue putting 
forth every effort to achieve national targets in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy; secondly, the advantages of international technical co-operation, 
which should be continued because it usefully supplemented national efforts in 
the scientific and technical fields. 
71. The Peruvian Government wished to express its deep gratitude to the 
Agency, and to the Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany, the United 
States of America, Finland and Italy, whose extrabudgetary contributions had 
made possible the implementation of extremely important technical assistance 
projects in Peru. It also extended particular thanks to the Argentine 
Government for the very generous assistance which it had provided. In view of 
the promising results of the first special session of the General Conference, 
Peru had no doubt that countries with nuclear programmes and the Agency would 
be prepared to offer their help in the field of nuclear safety, pending the 
putting into service of Peru's Nuclear Research Centre. Their co-operation 
would clearly reflect the will of the international community to derive as 
much benefit as possible from nuclear energy, provided that the latter served 
only the welfare of mankind and was not a threat or a cause of destruction. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 24 


72. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) noted with satisfaction that the special 
session of the General Conference had achieved its objectives by adopting two 
important conventions which laid the foundation for an international regime 
governing safe nuclear power development. That session had, in addition, 
confirmed the Agency's central role and the need for expanding co-operation in 
the future, within the framework of the Agency, in the safe use of nuclear 
energy. The safety of nuclear power was also linked to the physical 
protection of nuclear material. The entry into force of the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material would contribute to carrying out 
further work in that area and to the prevention of terrorist acts. Bulgaria 
had ratified that convention and called upon all States which had not yet done 
so to follow suit as soon as possible. 
73. Strengthening international co operation in nuclear safety would be 
meaningless if the danger of a nuclear war was not averted. For that reason, 
it was necessary to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons, to limit the 
nuclear arms race and to proceed to nuclear disarmament. His country 
therefore noted with satisfaction the greater effectiveness of the Agency's 
activities on safeguards and the strengthening of the non-proliferation 
regime. It supported the Agency's efforts to enhance the effectiveness of 
safeguards, in which area it was necessary to continue work on improvement and 
standardization of procedures, methods and documentation, on the development 
of new devices and instruments for monitoring and surveillance, and on 
computerization of the basic operations of collection, processing and analysis 
of safeguards data. 
74. Bulgaria attached great importance to the Agency's nuclear safety 
activities. It therefore endorsed the special programme in that area in 1986 
and would make an additional voluntary contribution for the purpose. It also 
supported the draft, programme and budget for 1987, which, as a result of 
rational planning and the reduction of administrative and common services 
costs, ensured the necessary financing of the Agency's priority activities. 
While expanding its nuclear safety activities, the Agency should pay due 
attention to important areas such as safeguards, technical assistance and 
co-operation, nuclear power and the application of nuclear techniques. His 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 25 


delegation approved in principle the supplementary nuclear safety programme 
for 1987 and the resources proposed for its financing, provided that those 
resources were allocated to priority tasks. 


75. Bulgaria noted with satisfaction the strengthening and improvement of 
the Agency's technical assistance activities. It contributed regularly to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) and collaborated with the 
Agency in the efficient utilization of those resources. The voluntary nature 
of the contributions to that Fund should be maintained. His country approved 
the indicative planning figure for 1987 and undertook to contribute the 
equivalent in national currency of US $54 400. 
76. As regards the question of amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 
and of the revision of Article VI as a whole, his delegation considered that 
the present composition of the Board of Governors was well balanced and that 
the Board functioned efficiently. The objective conditions for an amendment 
had not yet arisen, as the discussions showed. 
77. The development of Bulgaria's energy sector was based predominantly on 
the use of nuclear power. In 1985 the Kozloduy nuclear power station had 
produced more than 13 000 million kWh accounting for about 32% of the 
country's total electricity generation. Kozloduy, which was equipped with 
Soviet reactors, was the most reliable and stable energy source in the 
Bulgarian electricity system. Nevertheless a number of technical measures had 
been taken in 1986 to improve the safety of the power plant. Those related to 
centralized control of operation, seismic stability, fire-fighting systems and 
personnel training. The construction of the fifth and sixth units, each with 
a capacity of 1000 MW(th), was continuing at an accelerated rate. The first 
units of the second Bulgarian nuclear power station were under construction. 
It was also planned to build two Soviet-designed AST-500 reactors in order to 
meet the capital's heating requirements. Being interested in nuclear safety, 
Bulgaria was participating in the regional programme on safety calculations 
for nuclear power plants and, as the next step of participation in 
international collaboration, it had joined the Agency's programme on 
probabilistic risk assessment in 1986. It had been suggested to the Agency 
that a regional centre for methods of calculation for risk analysis be 
established in Bulgaria. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 26 


78. The Agency's safeguards had continued to be implemented successfully in 
1986. Bulgaria's co-operation with the Agency was reflected in the successful 
completion of the contract on computerization of reports submitted to the 
Agency and in the conclusion of a contract on the testing of new safeguards 
equipment at the Kozloduy nuclear power station. His country was continuing 
to provide practical training facilities for new Agency inspectors who 
accompanied regular inspectors during their visits to its nuclear plants. 
79. Bulgaria's progress in the development of nuclear electricity in all 
its aspects was due both to the effective mobilization of national forces and 
resources and to fruitful collaboration with countries of the socialist 
community, but first and foremost to bilateral co-operation with the Soviet 
Union and the technical assistance provided by it. 
80. Apart from the development of nuclear power, Bulgaria attached special 
importance to the application of ionizing radiation and related techniques in 
the national economy. A national co-ordination programme on extending those 
applications for 1986-1990 had been launched. In addition to economic 
effects, it would have a considerable social effect in the area of health and 
environmental protection. The Agency's technical assistance would contribute 
to the implementation of that programme. By the end of the following year an 
irradiation facility for sterilization of medical supplies was expected to go 
into operation. It would provide the basis for developing advanced techniques 
in that sector and for substantially improving the quality of medical 
supplies. Furthermore, Bulgaria was participating in the technical assistance 
programme of the Agency, at whose request an irradiation facility had been 
delivered to Albania and two others were being made ready for supply to Zambia 
and Pakistan. 
81. His Government considered co-operation with international organizations 
and especially the Agency to be of great importance. It had taken steps to 
enlarge and strengthen such co-operation, with a view, in particular, to the 
establishment under the Agency's auspices of an international regime for safe 
nuclear power development. 
82. In conclusion, he expressed his appreciation of the fruitful work done 
in 1985 by the Director General, Mr. Blix, and the Secretariat, and hoped that 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 27 


the role of the Agency as an international organization co-ordinating Member 
States' activities in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and as an important 
factor in consolidating the non-proliferation regime would be still further 
strengthened. 


83. Mr. CASTILLO CONTOUX (Guatemala) said that his country was not 
expecting to use nuclear power in the foreseeable future, since it had other 
still undeveloped, energy sources. However, his Government fully supported 
nuclear applications, which contributed to the country's economic and social 
development. It had therefore given preference to techniques which could 
contribute to the improvement of health, and in that connection he had 
pleasure in stating that, with significant assistance from the Agency, a 
second nuclear medicine centre had been commissioned in August and that the 
X-ray fluorescence analysis laboratory was in full operation, providing 
services to the mining, petroleum and other industries and also carrying out 
research and teaching functions. 
84. Being a country with a highly developed agriculture, Guatemala welcomed 
every effort which promoted the use of nuclear techniques in food and 
agriculture. Various working groups consisting of representatives from 
agricultural institutions in the public sector and from the National 
University were carrying out studies on crop improvement by induced mutation, 
on nitrogen fixation and on the radiation preservation of foodstuffs. 
85. The use of nuclear techniques for the control of the Mediterranean 
fruit fly was contributing to the solution of a problem of great economic 
importance in that it caused the loss of large quantities of fruit, increased 
costs because of quarantining, and hindered the marketing of products in areas 
which were free from the pest. The Medfly Commission used, among others, the 
sterile-insect technique and had two production laboratories for the purpose. 
The first had a capacity of 120 million pupae per week and applied the 
production system developed in the Agency's laboratories; the second, which 
had recently been completed, was designed to produce 90 million pupae per week 
by the method developed in the laboratories of the United States Department of 
Agriculture. Thanks to the Medfly programme, 64% of Guatemalan territory was 
free from the pest. Under the Agency's programme of scientific visits, the 

GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 28 


Medfly Commission had made its experience available to technicians from other 
countries, and Guatemala would continue to welcome technicians from 


institutions which considered its experience to be of value in developing 
their own programmes. He wished to point out that the Medlfy programme had 
received financial and technical assistance from the Governments of the 
United States of America and of Mexico and valuable technical assistance from 
the Agency in the form of equipment, fellowships and expert services. 


86. The Guatemalan Government attached great importance to the promulgation 
of the law on the control, use and application of radioisotopes and ionizing 
radiation. Those activities had been declared to be of public importance in 
view of their basic role in the country's economic and social development and 
also of the potential risks which they involved for the health of the 
population, property and the environment. 
87. In spite of the difficult economic situation, the Ministry of Energy 
and Mines had accorded priority to the construction of the laboratories of the 
Directorate General of Nuclear Energy, not only because it was regarded as the 
counterpart to the Agency's valuable assistance but also because the 
Guatemalan authorities were convinced that nuclear techniques could contribute 
to improving the quality of life in the country. The facilities would 
comprise a secondary radiation protection and dosimetry laboratory, and 
laboratories for the application of nuclear techniques to agriculture, 
industry and health. The work was expected to be completed in the latter half 
of 1987. 
88. Guatemala regarded regional co-operation as the appropriate mechanism 
for accelerating the progress of science and technology by improving the 
efficiency of utilization of physical and human resources. It therefore 
supported the co-ordinated research programmes, the regional project on 
non-destructive tests for Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Regional 
Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology 
in Latin America (ARCAL). 
89. His Government commended the Agency's safeguards activities, which 
contributed to ensuring the peaceful nature of nuclear activities. It also 
valued the Agency's technical assistance programme, which had significantly 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 29 


promoted the transfer of technology to Guatemala; for that reason he hoped 
that the funds for technical assistance would be increased so that a greater 
number of sound projects could be financed. His Government expected to pay 


its full share of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF), 
subject to the approval of its current budget by the Congress of the Republic, 
and wished to express its willingness to meet its commitments to the Agency. 
He was confident that the latter would be able to strike a balance between its 
nuclear safety and safeguards activities and its programmes on the promotion 
of nuclear techniques in the areas of health, food and agriculture, and 


industry, which should be continued and enlarged in order to help the 
developing countries. 


90. Lastly, his Government expressed its full support for the Agency, to 
which it was grateful for the help it had received, and its gratitude to the 
donor countries for their spontaneous collaboration, to the Director General 
for his successful efforts and to the Secretariat staff whose dedication 
enabled them to carry the burden of the additional work resulting from the 
growth in the Agency's activities. 
91. Mr. ALVES (Brazil) said that the oil crisis of the 1970s had made 
it imperative to launch programmes relating to alternative sources of energy 
with a view to reducing dependence on external sources of supply, and had 
given rise in some countries to an increase in the share of nuclear power in 
primary energy production. The accidents at Three Mile Island and, more 
recently, at Chernobyl had had a strongly negative effect on public acceptance 
of nuclear power. The information disseminated about those accidents, 
especially that on the long-term effects of radiation, had contributed to 
public concern and raised doubts about the real balance of the risks and 
benefits of nuclear power. 
92. The economic situation in Brazil and the opposition to nuclear power 
after the most recent accident had led the Brazilian Government to make a 
detailed evaluation of its nuclear programme, taking into account the 
financial and economic changes adopted to reduce the inflation rate and the 
availability of raw material and technology as essential elements for the 
choice of an energy alternative. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 30 


93. In that regard, his Government had established a committee composed of 
representatives of the academic, scientific and industrial sectors, not 
directly involved in the Brazilian nuclear porgramme, which had been asked to 
make recommendations, taking into consideration the fact that, in spite of the 
scarcity of financial resources and its high hydroelectric potential, Brazil 
remained convinced that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were an important 
factor for the future of its economy and for the well-being of its 
population. The committee's recommendations had given rise to a number of 
decisions. 
94. The Brazilian nuclear programme, would be maintained at an adequate 
level for mastering nuclear technology on an independent basis, in order to 
satisfy the electricity demand and to extend its applications to medicine, 
agriculture and industry. The development of the programme would be based on 
a careful balance, considering energy needs and the comparative costs of 
alternative sources of energy. Co-operation, particularly financial, with the 
Federal Republic of Germany in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was to be 
maintained, account being taken of the modifications resulting from the new 
pace of implementation of the programme. The Government would support the 
research and development work carried out by the National Nuclear Energy 
Commission and by NUCLKBRAS, and the participation of Brazilian engineering, 
consulting, planning and construction enterprises. 
95. The construction of the Angra-Il and Angra-III nuclear power plants, 
which were to start operation in the mid-1990s, would be continued. However, 
the decision on the construction of a fourth nuclear power plant would be 
postponed until 1989, by which time the competent authorities should have a 
clearer idea of energy needs beyond 1995. The manufacture of heavy components 
would continue, according to the needs of the plants under construction, and 
new markets for such components would be explored in Brazil and other 
countries. Activities relating to the nuclear fuel cycle were to be carried 
on and would be progressively nationalized. In that connection it had been 
decided to relate the production of uranium concentrate in the industrial 
complex of Pocos de Caldas to the needs of the nuclear power plants, to 
proceed with the technical and economic viability studies of known uranium 
deposits with a view to future decisions about their mining, to postpone the 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 31 


construction of the demonstration plant for isotopic enrichment by the Becker 
process until other technological options could be compared with the first 
enrichment cascade now nearing completion, to defer the implementation of the 
spent fuel reprocessing project and, lastly, to develop an integrated 
programme of radioactive waste management and disposal, particularly with 
regard to the selection of disposal sites. 


96. As regards human resources, it had been decided to promote greater 
participation by universities and technical centres in research and 
development programmes, to enlist more researchers in the study of scientific 
and technical questions related to the transfer and development of technology, 
and to give material support to universities and technical centres so as to 
enable them to re-equip their laboratories and to carry out research and 
development work in the area of basic nuclear science. 
97. The success of the measures recently adopted in Brazil to promote 
nuclear energy depended, as in many countries, on regaining public confidence 
in the safety of nuclear installations. Brazil had always attached great 
importance to the initiatives taken by the Agency in the area of nuclear 
safety, as it had reaffirmed by signing the conventions on early notification 
and on assistance in the case of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency. 
98. Less than 30% of the Agency's Member States had a nuclear power 
programme. The Agency's technical assistance programme was consequently 
dedicated mainly to the other peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Those uses, if 
properly promoted, could play an important role in public acceptance of 
nuclear energy. As a developing country, Brazil considered the Agency's 
technical assistance programme to be an important tool for its own 
development: that assistance had contributed to various Brazilian 
achievements, especially in radiation protection, dosimetry and nuclear 
safety. That was also the case, for example, with the Brazilian Amazon 
Project, the purpose of which was to study by means of isotope techniques the 
effects of changes in land use on ecology and climate. 
99. He commended the Secretariat for the results obtained during the 
critical evaluation of equipment supply through the technical assistance 
programme, and supported the follow-up of that evaluation. As to fellowships, 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 32 


Brazil had made every effort to respond to the requests channelled through the 
Agency. During the past year 26 fellowships had been awarded to candidates 
from other developing countries for training in various fields in Brazil. In 
1986 Brazil had hosted or was to host a workshop on food irradiation, ARCAL's 
third planning and co-ordination meeting, the Seminar on Management Options 
for Low and Intermediate Radioactive Waste and the Seminar on Radiological 
Protection, Dosimetry and General Aspects Related to the Chernobyl Accident. 
Three interregional courses were also planned, on multichannel analysers and 


interfacing (ARCAL), on exploration drilling and ore reserve estimations for 
uranium deposits, and on in-country radiological dose assessment. Also, 
cost-free experts had been made available by Brazil under the Agency's 
technical assistance projects to other developing countries. The increasing 
requests for Brazilian experts reflected the fruitful results of that 
co-operation. 


100. It was gratifying to note the expansion of regional co-operation within 
the framework of the Agency, which had taken the form of establishment of the 
institutional mechanisms of the expanded ARCAL programme. Brazil wished to 
reiterate its support for that programme, taking into consideration the 
recommendations approved at the most recent ARCAL meeting held in 
Rio de Janeiro. It was also satisfying to observe the support given, as 
donors, by States which were not members of ARCAL. He wished to congratulate 
the Director General on his continuous efforts to keep the technical 
assistance programme free from discriminatory practices and to increase the 
use of experts from developing countries in the Agency's projects. However, 
Brazil considered that the volume of equipment purchases in developing 
countries for Agency technical assistance projects continued to be too modest. 
101. His Government reaffirmed its commitment to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and supported the Agency's role in the area of safeguards. The 
mechanisms of the safeguards system were perfectly capable of assuring 
universal and non-discriminatory control and of contributing to the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In that connection it might be 
mentioned that the establishment of the Brazilian Safeguards Laboratory had 
now been completed with the assistance of the Agency. Apart from its routine 
activities, the safeguards laboratory, in co-operation with the Los Alamos 

GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 33 


National Laboratory, had implemented two major projects, one on the 
measurement of fuel assemblies manufactured in Brazil and the other on the 
measurement of the first batch of irradiated fuel from the Angra-I nuclear 
power plant. The safeguards project being implemented in collaboration with 


the Federal Republic of Germany would soon enable the Brazilian national 


safeguards system to be fully harmonized with the Agency's system for 
measurements of nuclear material. Furthermore, the Brazilian Nuclear Energy 


Commission had offered to host a regional training course on safeguards 


accounting and control systems for Latin American countries. 


102. Brazil's efforts in the field of co-operation had not been limited to 
the multilateral sector. In November 1985 the Presidents of Brazil and 
Argentina had signed a joint declaration expressing the willingness of the two 
countries to increase their co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and to examine ways and means of contributing to the maintenance of 
peace in Latin America. Since then Brazil and Argentina had been holding 
technical meetings in order to translate into action their political will in 
that regard. The exchange of information on each other's programmes had made 
it possible to identify areas where such co-operation might be developed. The 
right to use nuclear energy for peace and development had thus been reaffirmed 
by the two Presidents, who had signed important economic and nuclear 
co-operation agreements. 
103. In conclusion, he stressed his Government's commitment to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and its determination to use that energy with enhanced 
safety in order to promote development for the benefit of its population. 
104. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands), expressing his admiration for the 
rapid and efficient way in which the Director General and his colleagues had 
responded to the Chernobyl accident, said that the special session of the 
General Conference had been a remarkable and encouraging example of multilateral 
decision-making on vital urgent issues. It had proved the vitality of 
the international co-operation system. First, Member States had unanimously 
expressed their desire to strengthen international co-operation in the area of 
nuclear safety. Secondly, the first results of that co-operation had been 
obtained through the adoption and subsequent signing by 51 countries of 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 34 


two international conventions. Finally, the special session had laid the 
foundations for establishing an effective system of co-operation in the area 
of nuclear safety. It was essential to continue along the path which had been 
opened, obeying the prevailing sense of urgency and the political momentum 
that had been built up. 


105. A number of proposals for specific activities had been submitted at the 
special session. It had been decided that the Board of Governors would 
continue to examine those proposals with the participation of all interested 
Member States, which was essential since nuclear safety was of vital 
importance for all. That was why the Netherlands supported the Swedish 
proposal that the Board of Governors should establish an open-ended ad hoc 
committee on nuclear safety. 
106. Two proposals which would be discussed by the Board had been submitted 
by the Netherlands. One was concerned with international nuclear civil 
liability, the other with the need to establish a more objective additional 
criterion for the early notification of a nuclear accident. The Netherlands 
naturally hoped that those two proposals would receive the support of the 
Board of Governors. With regard to the question of nuclear civil liability, 
the Netherlands welcomed the studies which had already been made by the 
Secretariat in collaboration with the Nuclear Energy Agency of OECD on the 
relationships between the two existing international conventions in that 
field. It would be a good idea for the Secretariat to embark on an even more 
ambitious task by studying the possibility of improving the present 
arrangements on a worldwide basis. 
107. Although each State was responsible for the safety of its nuclear 
facilities, the safety of those facilities still remained of vital importance 
for other States. That combination of national responsibility and common 
interest in nuclear safety matters called for close international co-operation 
including the preparation of safety standards to be applied universally. In 
an open society like the Netherlands, the use of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes had always received the support of the general public. That was why 
the outstanding operational record of nuclear power plants in the Netherlands 
was of great importance. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 35 


108. The uranium enrichment facility at Almelo, operated jointly with the 
Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom, was a unique case of 
international co-operation which gave the Netherlands a privileged position in 
the nuclear field. The Netherlands was also very well placed as far as other 
applications of nuclear energy were concerned, particularly the use of 
radioisotopes and food irradiation. 
109. His Government, which had decided, with Parliamentary approval, to 
proceed with the construction of new nuclear power plants so as to ensure the 
country's long-term energy supply, would now have to reconsider its plans. No 
final answer could be given at the present stage regarding the construction of 
additional power plants, since the Netherlands would have to re-examine very 
carefully all aspects of safety as well as alternative means of energy 
production. The necessary studies would begin in the near future and 
decisions were expected in the first half of 1988. The Agency's work in the 
area of nuclear safety would naturally play an important role in those studies. 
110. Chernobyl should not in any way distract attention from the positive 
effects of the use of nuclear energy in the short and in the long term. In 
that connection it was appropriate to mention nuclear fusion, which had long 
been a subject of discussion in the Agency. Moreover, the Heads of State of 
the United States and the Soviet Union had given new impetus to that question 
during their meeting in Geneva in 1985. As an active partner in the European 
Community's fusion programme, the Netherlands supported the Agency's 
activities promoting international co-operation in that area. That 
co-operation was justified by the enormous costs and the scale of research and 
development activities associated with that promising source of energy. 
111. It was understandable that during the past year, in which attention had 
been focused on nuclear safety and improved co-operation between States in the 
event of an accident, the question of non-proliferation had been to some 
extent neglected. However, non-proliferation and safeguards continued to 
figure among the most important tasks of the Agency. The Third NPT Review 
Conference had been successful and had greatly strengthened the 
non-proliferation regime. However, much remained to be done to implement the 
results of the Conference. It was gratifying to note that the Agency's Annual 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 36 


Report for 1985 showed that the efficiency of the Department of Safeguards had 
improved and the percentage of inspection goals achieved had increased. The 
statement that there had been no misuse of safeguarded nuclear material in 
1985 was very important. 


112. Non-proliferation remained a sensitive area which deserved constant 
attention, not only because it concerned weapons of mass destruction but also 
because there was an element of inherent instability in the co-existence of 
nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States, which was complicated by the 
fact that some States were party to NPT and others were not, some were members 
of military alliances and some were non-aligned States. Under such conditions 
it was hardly surprising that the question of what non-proliferation 
commitments should be made in exchange for guarantees of long-term supply 
remained a stumbling block to progress in the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS). The formal commitment made by States that no misuse would be 
made of nuclear materials transferred for civil purposes ought to be an 
integral part of nuclear trade. Agency safeguards played a crucial role in 
the verification of those commitments. They were of benefit to all Member 
States and were their joint responsibility. The financing of safeguards 
should reflect that fundamental principle clearly and simply and should of 
course take into account the circumstance that less of a burden should be 
placed on Member States with limited financial resources. In view of the 
amounts involved it was, as the Director General had pointed out, deeply 
regrettable that it had not been possible to agree on the reasonable proposals 
made by the Chairman of the Board. If no consensus was reached in the near 
future on a new basis of calculation, the Netherlands delegation considered 
that an extension of two years for the present arrangements should be a 
maximum. 
113. The United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) was due to 
take place in the spring of 1987. In view of the outstanding role played by 
the Agency in such activities, particularly in the area of safeguards, any 
follow-up of the Conference should naturally be entrusted to the Agency. It 
would therefore not be necessary to create a new international mechanism or to 
hold any follow-up or review meetings. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 3 7 


114. The importance of the technical co-operation component of the Agency's 
activities could not be emphasized too strongly. The Netherlands had recently 
decided to finance an Agency project on the application of radioimmunoassay 
techniques to improve the reproduction rates and the health of African 
livestock. In the future, the Netherlands Ministry for Development 
Co-operation intended to consult the Agency regularly on ways of co-operating 
in technical assistance projects, particularly in the areas of agriculture, 
food and health. The new projects which would be proposed by the Agency 
should conform to the parameters applied by the Netherlands for assistance to 
developing countries, in other words to its sectorial programmes on rural and 
industrial development, training and research. 
115. As the Netherlands Minister for Housing, Planning and the Environment 
had stated at the special session, it would be unfair to request the Director 
General to carry out additional work on nuclear safety without giving him the 
necessary resources to do so. However, it was essential to establish 
well-defined priorities. That was why the financing of those activities 
should not overshadow the fact that the Agency also needed resources to carry 
out equally important tasks in other areas. His Government had agreed to 
contribute to the additional expenditure for 1986. It supported the Board's 
recommendations for 1987 and 1988 and accepted that the principle of zero real 
growth should not apply to the budget for those two years. 
116. The events which had followed Chernobyl and the Agency's remarkable 
capacity to act decisively in time of crisis as well as its achievements in 
other fields of activity had emphasized its importance as an international 
organization. The Agency, more than ever, needed the full support of all its 
Members. The latter should reject any attempt to politicize the organization 
by introducing questions which should be dealt with by the appropriate organs 
of the United Nations. They should defend the principle of universality and 
oppose any attempt to expel Member States and to deprive them of their rights 
on grounds inconsistent with the Statute. The Netherlands for its part would 
do all it could to safeguard the Agency's integrity. 
117. Mr. SHASH (Egypt) said that the special session of the General 
Conference, which had examined measures to strengthen international 
co-operation in the area of nuclear safety, sanctioned the expansion of the 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 38 


Agency's activities and resulted in the preparation of two international 
conventions and in technical discussions on the analysis of the Chernobyl 
accident, had emphasized the Agency's central role in international 
co-operation in the field of safety. That role had been carried out with 
remarkable competence and efficiency. 


118. His delegation actively supported all those efforts and Egypt had been 
one of the first countries to sign the two conventions, believing that if one 
was to continue to develop the utilization of nuclear energy, particularly for 
electricity generation, it was essential to maintain the efforts made both 
nationally and internationally in the field of nuclear safety. 
119. In that connection his delegation wished to reaffirm its support for 
the expanded Agency activities planned for 1987. It believed that the success 
of the work of the special session, the increase in the number of international 
commitments made in the area of nuclear safety as well as the 
increased role accorded to the Agency and to its programmes in that area, 
would considerably help to re-establish international public confidence in 
that source of energy which was essential for the economic and social 
development of various countries. For its part, Egypt had set up a special 
nuclear safety service within its nuclear energy regulatory body, which was at 
present preparing safety regulations based on the Agency standards and would 
be responsible for developing a technical and legal framework in the area of 
safety. The establishment of that service, which was benefiting from support 
provided by the Agency, members of the European Community and the United 
States of America, formed part of an overall strengthening of safety measures 
designed to ensure the optimum utilization of nuclear energy. 
120. The United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCP1CPUNE) would take 
place in a few months time. His delegation was convinced that the success of 
the special session of the Agency's General Conference would give new impetus 
to the work of that Conference, to the preparation of which the Agency had 
made an effective contribution. Egypt would participate actively in the work 
of the United Nations conference as well as in the implementation and 
follow-up of its recommendations. 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 39 


121. His delegation hoped that the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) 
would, at its next meetings, agree on the principles of international 
co-operation which would guarantee the security of supply within the 
non-proliferation framework. It noted with satisfaction that the Committee 
had been able to agree on a number of measures on the implementation of 
emergency and backup mechanisms as well as the revision of nuclear supply 
agreements. It considered that in order to develop the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy it was essential that the supply of nuclear materials should be 
stable, equitable and non-discriminatory. 
122. The Agency had set up a group of experts to study the mechanisms which 
would help developing countries to extend and finance their activities in the 
nuclear field. The relevant study, which was already well advanced, 
concentrated primarily on problems related to financing, the technical 
framework, the infrastructures and the size of electricity grids. The Agency 
had an important role to play in the area of financing since it was able to 
provide credit institutions with objective information on the technical and 
economic reliability of nuclear power programmes and thus to give considerable 
help to developing countries in obtaining the necessary credits and financial 
facilities. Furthermore, the Agency should intensify studies on the design of 
power reactors which would be safer and better adapted to the conditions and 
needs of developing countries. 
123. In recent years, there had been a continuous increase in the resources 
allocated to the Agency's technical assistance programme, both from the 
Regular Budget and from the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
(TACF). That programme helped developing countries to take full advantage of 
the considerable potential of nuclear energy applications in agriculture, 
medicine, industry and research while at the same time strengthening 
international co-operation. Thus the programme of training in radiotherapy 
for cancer of the uterus, launched in Egypt in 1983 and which was supported by 
a contribution from the Italian Government, had made it possible to train not 
only many Egyptian specialists but also a number of Sudanese, Tanzanian and 
Kenyan specialists. Moreover, Egypt was playing an important role in regional 
technical co-operation in Africa and had contributed actively to the 
organization in 1985 and 1986 of a number of regional seminars on the 

GC(XXX)/0R.285 
page 40 


utilization of nuclear techniques, the monitoring of the reliability of 
nuclear medicine equipment, nuclear safety in developing countries and the 
ecological effects of nuclear energy. 


124. The approval by the General Conference at its twenty-ninth regular 
session of an annual increase of 127o in the resources of the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) in 1987, 1988 and 1989 was an 
essential step in order to meet the growing needs of developing countries, and 
should be accompanied by an increase in the implementation rate. Furthermore, 
it was necessary to redress to some extent the balance of the technical 
assistance programmes so as to give the African continent a fair share in 
accordance with the scale of its needs and its development requirements. 
125. Egypt attached primary importance to the Agency's safeguards system and 
had always urged that it be strengthened and made more effective, in the 
belief that it was essential for creating a climate of confidence and for 
developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. However, there was one thing 
which caused grave concern to Egypt and to the international community: the 
nuclear activities of Israel and South Africa were not subject to Agency 
safeguards, and those two countries continued to disregard the decisions 
adopted on that subject by the General Conference and by the United Nations 
General Assembly. That situation was all the more alarming since those two 
countries, the nature of whose nuclear activities was well known, were 
co-operating closely, were not party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and refused all international control of their nuclear 
activities. As long ago as 1974, Egypt had proposed the creation of a 
nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, and that proposal had been the subject 
of many resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, the last 
one without any objections on the part of Israel. In addition, Egypt had 
supported the proposal to make Africa a nuclear-free zone, since it believed 
that that measure would make it possible to counter the threat posed to the 
African continent by the racist and aggressive practices of the Pretoria 
regime. It also considered that the problem of the protection of nuclear 
installations was fundamental and invited the Agency to formulate 
international measures to prevent attacks against such installations. 



GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 41 


126. The Agency was playing an essential role in the transfer of advanced 
technology. All States should therefore contribute to its development without 
applying the principle of zero real growth to technical assistance 
activities. His delegation hoped that the seminar on technical co-operation 
and assistance, which would take place during the present session, would help 
to strengthen activities in that area. His delegation regretted that, owing 
to lack of time, the special session of the General Conference had been unable 
to examine the proposals made to ensure the integral safety of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, and hoped that those proposals would be brought to the 
attention of the Board of Governors and that the latter would inform the 
General Conference of its conclusions thereon at the following session. 
127. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) recalled that from 1979 to 1985 the number of 
nuclear power plants in service in the world had increased from 224 to 370. 
However, the percentage of such plants in developing countries had not 
increased in that period, despite everything that had been said and continued 
to be said about the importance of nuclear power for the world in general and 
for developing countries in particular. There were many reasons for that 
unacceptable situation. 
128. The international economic system and the economic policies of the 
advanced countries only aggravated the problems facing developing countries 
instead of helping to resolve them. In that connection, one might refer to 
the policy adopted by exporting countries known as the "Guidelines of the 
London Club", which restricted the transfer of technology referred to by the 
term "sensitive" or by other designations of a similar nature foreign to the 
spirit of the Agency's Statute. The concept of "sensitive" technology had 
even been extended to cover in certain cases all material and equipment used 
for nuclear research. That situation had had negative repercussions on the 
work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), which was unlikely to 
reach the objectives which it had set itself and which five years after its 
establishment had still not reached agreement on the principles of 
international co-operation. It had also adversely affected the preparatory 
work for the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) which, 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 42 


initially planned for 1983, would not take place until 1987. There was every 
reason to wonder whether, under those conditions, co-operation was simply a 
pretext for discussions and submission of studies or whether it was a real 
necessity both for developing and advanced countries. 


129. The Three Mile Island accident which had occurred in the United States 
in 1979 had led to extensive discussions and studies on nuclear power plant 
safety. The reassuring data on the share of nuclear power plants in the total 
irradiation dose received by the population had not stopped the continuation 
of efforts to improve safety, and the Agency had undertaken a number of 
programmes in that area, including the Nuclear Safety Standards Programme 
(NUSS). However, it had not been possible to prevent the Chernobyl 
catastrophe, which in terms of its scale and its consequences had been much 
more dangerous than previous accidents. The technical development and 
improvement of reactor design were therefore not sufficient in themselves to 
prevent nuclear accidents, since the man-machine interface remained one of the 
main causes of that type of accident. That had been the conclusion of the 
Chernobyl Post-Accident Review Meeting and that conclusion had confirmed those 
made on the subject of Three Mile Island. 
130. As a result, although it was possible to reduce the probability of 
nuclear accidents and to lessen the effects, it was not possible to eliminate 
them completely. Although the usefulness of nuclear power was indisputable, 
it was nevertheless up to each country to decide whether it would have 
recourse to such power by carefully weighing the relevant factors, namely its 
energy needs and the safety and economic performance of nuclear power. Safety 
was closely dependent on man, and the training and retraining of staff should 
be one of the Agency's main tasks. The Agency should develop programmes to 
increase the competence of operating staff and to prepare them to deal with 
accidents. 
131. In 1979, the General Conference had rejected the credentials of the 
delegation of the South African racist entity and had forbidden it to 
participate in its work since then. Iraq had believed at the time that, 
following that decision, retaliatory measures would be taken against the South 
African entity and the Israeli entity which co-operated with it in order to 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 43 


force them to abandon their racist and aggressive policies and their policy of 
nuclear armament, which posed a severe threat to security in Africa and the 
Middle East. One simple measure which the General Conference should have 
adopted would have been to cease all forms of co-operation and assistance 


likely to help those two countries to develop their nuclear capability unless 


they submitted all their nuclear facilities to international safeguards, 


abandoned all policies of nuclear armament and accepted the creation of 
nuclear-free zones in the Middle East and Africa. 


132. His delegation noted with regret that some States continued to 
co-operate with Israel either openly or secretly, supplying it with the 
necessary materials to build up a nuclear arsenal, even going as far as to 
deliver enriched uranium without informing the Agency, knowing full well that 
Israel had the necessary means to process that material for military 
purposes. Well-informed sources very close to Israel had confirmed that that 
country had possessed nuclear weapons for some time. Israel's nuclear 
armaments constituted a real danger, and the Iraqi delegation invited the 
General Conference to take the necessary decisions. It believed that some 
States which had exercised and continued to exercise pressure on the General 
Conference by threatening to withhold their financial and technical 
contributions to the Agency, should bring their pressure to bear in other 
quarters and put an end to all forms of co-operation likely to assist the 
Zionist regime in pursuing its nuclear armament programme. They should also 
cease providing that regime with political protection which encouraged it to 
persist in its policy of political aggression, a policy which had led it to 
launch a deliberate armed attack against Iraqi nuclear facilities devoted to 
purely peaceful purposes and subject to international safeguards. By acting 
in that way, those States would enhance the role, the objectives and the 
credibility of the Agency, and of its safeguards system. 
133. His delegation called upon the General Conference not to be influenced 
in its decision-making by any threat or pressure, and it regretted that the 
Conference had been unable to make a decision about the armed Israeli attack 
on Iraqi nuclear facilities, which was the most serious event which had faced 
the organization. The regrettable events occurring at the previous regular 

GC(XXX)/OR.285 
page 44 


session of the General Conference, when the Conference had rejected a draft 
resolution which had obtained 41 votes and approved another which had obtained 
only 31, were the result of an erroneous application of the Rules of 
Procedure. Iraq, which had always given its full support to the Agency, 
believed that it was its duty to refuse to accept that kind of situation and 
that it should help to make the General Conference a forum for the exchange of 
views between States enjoying the same rights and subject to the same 
obligations, and not an assembly in which certain States enjoyed privileges 
proportional to their financial contributions to the Agency's budget. 


134. In line with its conception of the Agency, Iraq continued to request an 
amendment to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute in order to ensure an equitable 
representation of all geographical regions on the Board of Governors, thereby 
reinforcing the principle of equity and equality. That was why it opposed all 
proposals or measures which did not take account of that principle. 
135. In conclusion, his delegation expressed its deep gratitude to the 
Agency for the technical assistance provided to Iraq which had contributed in 
a positive way to the development of the country's programme for the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy, particularly as regards site selection studies 
carried out with a view to constructing the first Iraqi nuclear power plant 
and in the areas of training and radiation protection. 
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m. 



GC(XXX)/OR.287 
May 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 


on Wednesday, 1 October 1986, at 10.15 a.m. 


President: Mr. RAMANNA (India) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
6 General debate and annual report 
for 1985 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Sweden 
Nigeria 
Sri Lanka 
Mexico 
Bangladesh 
Hungary 
Cuba 
Venezuela 
Morocco 
Ecuador 
Portugal 
Sudan 

Paragraphs 


89 


1 --5 


6 --15 
16 --21 
22--29 
30--35 
36 --41 
42--54 
55--60 


61--69 
70 -
--74 
75--77 
78--89 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 3 December 1986, 
[**] GC(XXX)/789. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/238/Rev.4. 


87-1250 
1087e/0151e 



GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT B'OR 1985 (GC(XXX)/7 75 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. ALER (Sweden), describing the present situation in Sweden in 
the nuclear field, said that 1985 had been marked by the commissioning of the 
last two units of the Swedish nuclear programme. Nuclear and hydro now 
accounted for about equal shares of electricity generation in Sweden. The 
units in service had a very high availability factor, and Swedish industry 
maintained excellent standards of quality and reliability in its work on 
development, manufacture and services. Sweden remained convinced that the 
direct disposal of irradiated fuel was the best solution both from the 
economic and from the safety points of view. The central facility at 
Oskarshamn for intermediate storage of spent fuel had now been in operation 
for more than a year. The construction of an underground installation for 
final storage of low- and intermediate-level radioactive wastes at Forsmark 
was proceeding according to plan and the facility would go into operation 
in 1988. He wished to reiterate his Government's opposition to disposal of 
wastes into the sea, a position now shared by numerous States. Sweden had 
shown that it was perfectly feasible to find other solutions acceptable from 
both the technological and the economic points of view, and also in regard to 
safety and environmental protection. 


2. On several occasions during the year, Sweden had had the opportunity to 
show in practice that it regarded the Agency as the principal organization for 
international co-operation in the nuclear energy field. When the Agency's 
programme was discussed, it was now normal to begin by first examining 
co-operation in nuclear safety. At the special session of the General 
Conference held the previous week, the Swedish Minister of the Environment and 
Energy had proposed a large number of items which, in his Government's 
opinion, should figure in the revised safety programme. Sweden was in favour 
of the budgetary appropriations recommended by the Board of Governors, but 
believed it essential that the numerous new suggestions which had been 
submitted should be thoroughly examined by the Secretariat with the assistance 
of outside experts, and discussed by all interested Governments. Agreement on 
priorities should be reached as soon as possible, not least in view of the 
heavy burdens already resting on national authorities. During the coming 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 3 


years the Board might have to reconsider certain other technical programmes in 
order to release resources for the expanded nuclear safety programme. Sweden 
also believed that the Agency should re-evaluate those programmes in the light 
of the priorities at present obtaining in national programmes as a result of 
new developments on the energy market and the austerity measures applied in 
the majority of countries. 


3. Regarding the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme, 
he believed that the arrangement of indicative planning figures fixed several 
years in advance offered a sound basis for financing the programme. Sweden 
had already pledged its full voluntary contribution for 1987. It likewise 
endorsed the Agency's technical co-operation programme by paying substantial 
extrabudgetary contributions, which were largely devoted to the Trieste Centre 
and to assistance in food and agriculture. Sweden further considered that a 
project approach should gradually give place to a programme approach. That 
would make it easier to evaluate priority areas for co-operation between the 
Agency and Member States, and would open the way to closer collaboration with 
national institutions in the receiving countries. Sweden was likewise of the 
opinion that the effectiveness of the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation could be enhanced by certain changes in administrative procedures 
and by an increased delegation of authority to the Director General. 
4. Sweden attached great importance to the Agency's safeguards system as 
an instrument in the service of peace. The experience gained from inspections 
might also suggest solutions in other areas of disarmament and armaments 
control, as the Director General had pointed out in his opening statement. In 
the previous year, the Third KPT Review Conference had reached a consensus on 
the principle of universal application of Agency safeguards to all peaceful 
nuclear activities in all States. The Conference had urged all nuclear-weapon 
States to take action to eliminate the present situation of inequality between 
States as regards peaceful nuclear activities. In his Government's view, the 
Agency should step up its safeguards activities in nuclear-weapon States. 
Sweden was also concerned at problems of safeguards associated with the 
backend of the fuel cycle. A rational basis was required for identifying the 
necessary controls, and studies should be undertaken on the Agency's statutory 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 4 


obligations in connection with international plutonium storage, and on the 
possible analogies between the problem of growing stocks of spent fuel and 
that of separated plutonium. The volume of the Agency's safeguards programme 
was constantly increasing, and Sweden therefore believed it necessary 
periodically to re-examine the goals and the criteria used in assessing the 
achievements of safeguards operations. The present methods did not appear to 
be adequate. Sweden was at the same time convinced that the funds devoted to 
safeguards should be increased in the years to come. In that connection it 
welcomed, as an interim solution, the proposal by the Board to prolong for 
three years more the present formula for financing safeguards. During that 
period it should be possible to find a permanent solution. Sweden had decided 
to join those countries participating in the special support programme for 
safeguards, and hoped that other Member States would increase their 
extrabudgetary contributions, particularly for the development of safeguards 
techniques. 


5. The Swedish delegation noted that the discussion on a more equitable 
system of representation on the Board of Governors was continuing. His 
Government maintained that the present distribution of seats, whether elective 
or designated, did not reflect changes in membership in the various regions or 
the technical capabilities of several countries. Sweden remained convinced 
that a reasonable solution could be found only by reviewing Article VI as a 
whole. His delegation noted with regret that the commendable efforts made by 
the Chairman of the Board in her consultations had not been successful. It 
was high time to act, and Sweden had co-sponsored a proposal (document 
GC(XXX)/780) which might offer a more balanced solution. 
6. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) said that the developing countries, and Africa 
in particular - where 26 of the 36 least-developed countries of the world were 
situated - had great need of the Agency's assistance. It emerged from the 
annual report that the volume of technical assistance supplied to Africa had 
decreased compared with 1984. The Agency should endeavour to increase its 
technical assistance to Africa, not only in relative but also in absolute 
terms. Agency training courses and study tours, especially those organized 
under the Joint IAEA/FAO programmes, were of interest to Nigeria, which hoped 
to benefit from a larger number of such training activities. It was also 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 5 


satisfactory to note the emphasis in the programme for Africa on agricultural 
production and stockbreeding. The project for biological control of tsetse 
fly using the sterile-insect technique (B1C0T project) was progressing well, 
and constituted a very successful aspect of the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme for Nigeria. 


7. Turning to the generation of nuclear electricity, he wished to make two 
remarks. The first was that nuclear power had come to stay. However, most 
developing countries would be unable to take advantage of that new source of 
power owing to the inadequate level of their technology. The majority of the 
Members of the Agency, particularly the African Members, fell into that 
category. The Agency should make a conscious and deliberate effort to ensure 
that the Agency membership of those countries should be not merely symbolic 
but genuinely meaningful. The second remark he wished to make was that the 
impressive nuclear record of 1985, emerging from the annual report, reflected 
the situation before Chernobyl. It was now more than ever necessary to 
bolster public confidence in nuclear power by constructing safer reactors in 
accordance with very strict standards. In addition, training facilities would 
have to be supplied to the developing countries in the field of nuclear safety 
and radiation protection. 
8. Although Nigeria was an oil-producing country, it was also interested 
in the use of nuclear energy for electricity generation and in its 
applications in well-known and important peripheral areas such as medicine and 
industry. The Nigerian delegation believed that oil and gas were resources 
too valuable to be wasted for electricity generation, when there were other 
viable options available for that purpose. Apart from the fact that oil and 
gas were finite and depletable, they had more useful and profitable 
applications in the petrochemical and agro-based industries, whose by-products 
formed a chain of raw materials for other industries. The continued use of 
oil and gas as a fuel for power generation was therefore not in the interests 
of the country's economy. For that reason Nigeria had begun to evaluate other 
options. Nuclear energy had commended itself as one of the best options for 
meeting future energy demand, which was at present growing at an annual rate 
of 13%. When the final decision was taken by the Government, Nigeria would 
certainly need the Agency's assistance. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 6 


9. At present, two Nigerian universities were being supported by the 
Government in the area of research and development on nuclear energy. The 
University of Ife had already acquired a tandem accelerator, which was to be 
installed at the beginning of the following year. Nigeria had already 
requested technical assistance from the Agency in order to enable its 
technicians to participate in the installation and commissioning of a similar 
accelerator at Zagreb, Yugoslavia during the present month. If granted, that 
assistance would help familiarize Nigerians with the technical problems 
involved in installing an accelerator, and the experience gained would stand 
them in good stead when they returned to Nigeria for conducting a similar 
exercise. Also, the Ahmadu Bello University at Zaria had a particle generator 
for research and training purposes. The Agency's assistance would be needed 
there also. 
10. He now wished to turn to a very vexing issue, not only for his 
delegation but for all delegations which believed in the equality of man and 
in human dignity - the issue of the racist minority regime in South Africa and 
its nuclear capabilities. It was worth repeating that the nuclear 
capabilities of South Africa constituted a threat not only to the African 
continent but also to international peace and security. In resolution 40/64A, 
the General Assembly of the United Nations had again expressed its anxiety 
over the evil policies of the South African regime, not only by calling upon 
the Security Council to apply sanctions against the racist regime under 
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter but also by urging all organizations 
in the United Nations system and other international organizations that had 
not already done so forthwith to exclude South Africa from membership. It was 
now time for the International Atomic Energy Agency, which had a central role 
to play in the atomic energy field, to decide whether South Africa should 
continue to enjoy the rights and privileges of membership of the Agency. 
11. The racist regime had been deceiving the Agency for many years past. 
It had not respected the principles of the United Nations, on which the 
Agency's Statute was founded. For years it had treated the Agency's 
resolutions with contempt and disdain, and had approached all negotiations 
with the Agency in a spirt of unbridled arrogance. Recently, there had been a 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 7 


breakdown in the negotiations between the Director General and the South 
African authorities due to the intransigence of the latter and the 
unacceptable conditions demanded of the Agency before conclusion of an 
agreement on the so-called semicommercial enrichment plant. The Director 
General's report[1] on the matter to the Board of Governors in September 


stated that South Africa had made proposals for amendments, "the most 


substantive [of which] raised issues fundamental to South Africa's basic 
undertaking under the Agreement and to the provisions of termination of the 
Agreement. They would have required the introduction of concepts which have 
not been used in any safeguards agreement concluded so far on the basis of 
document INFGIRC/66/Rev.2". There one had a regime which claimed to have 
sincere and honourable intentions as regards the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes, but which demanded from the Agency the freedom to withdraw 
safeguarded materials for unspecified purposes. South Africa obviously wanted 
to have all the advantages. It wanted the advantages and respectability of 
membership, but it was ready neither to behave like a responsible member of 
the international community nor to abide by the purposes and provisions of the 
Agency's Statute as did all other Members of the organization. 


12. The racist regime was flaunting the conclusion of a safeguards 
agreement on a semicommercial enrichment plant before the eyes of the Agency 
merely in order to gain time, as usual. It had more diabolical intentions. 
In pretending to talk about a semicommercial enrichment plant, South Africa 
wanted to lull the Members of the Agency into a sense of false security, while 
covertly perfecting its bomb of mass destruction using its many unsafeguarded 
facilities. South Africa had made no secret of its ultimate purpose - to 
possess nuclear weapons for use in defence of its so-called "supreme national 
interests". Nobody knew what those interests were, but highly placed 
officials of the racist regime had said many times that they would defend 
apartheid by any means at their disposal. It could easily be imagined what a 
threat that posed to the African continent, in particular to the "front-line 
[1] See document GC(XXX)/785, Annex 2, page 10, para. 78. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 8 


States". The nuclear threat from South Africa had consistently frustrated the 
decision by the OAU in 1964 to denuclearize Africa, a decision which had been 
reiterated each year in resolutions of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations, the latest one being resolution 40/89A. 


13. The situation was rendered even more complex by the fact that South 
Africa had been emboldened in its recalcitrance and defiance by the support it 
enjoyed from a group of countries, many of them prominent Members of the 
Agency. Those countries engaged in double-talk. In one breath they spoke of 
their abhorrence of apartheid and in the next they defended the membership of 
a country that practised a policy akin to Nazism and which violated a basic 
principle of the United Nations Charter. They proclaimed the rights of man 
and human dignity, while at the same time supplying arms, equipment and 
sensitive technologies to the racist regime, thus making possible the 
continuation of apartheid. Everyone knew who was continually providing South 
Africa with a range of strategic items for nuclear weapons, while deluding 
themselves by using phrases such as "dual-purpose". The fuel for the reactors 
of one of the South African facilities would be provided until 1992 by a major 
world power, and the supply of pressurized-water reactors was undertaken by a 
consortium of three important Member States of the Agency. That was why the 
United Nations General Assembly, in its resolutions 40/415 and 40/57, drew 
attention to the continuing assistance rendered to the South African racist 
regime in the military and nuclear fields by certain Western and other 
countries. That continued collaboration had encouraged South Africa 
consistently to disregard the Agency's resolutions. South Africa had not 
complied with resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/442 by the Agency's General Conference, 
it had refused to submit all its nuclear installations to Agency safeguards, 
and neither had it halted its illegal mining, utilization, exploitation and 
sale of Namibian uranium. 
14. For the Nigerian delegation, the decision which the General Conference 
should take in the matter was quite clear. South Africa should be suspended 
forthwith from the exercise of its rights and privileges as a Member. It had 
conducted itself in a manner incompatible with the Charter of the United 
Nations, upon which the Statute of the Agency was based. Furthermore, it had 
repeatedly disregarded the Agency's resolutions. Consequently, the Nigerian 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 9 


delegation was convinced that South Africa should be suspended from membership 
until it complied with the various General Conference resolutions and 
conducted itself in accordance with the principles and purposes of the 
Agency's Statute. 


15. Before concluding, he wished to say a few words on another issue of 
importance to his delegation - the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute. The representation of the areas of Africa and of Middle East and 
South Asia on the Board of Governors was inequitable in the light of the 
number of countries from those regions which were Members of the Agency. The 
total African membership of the Agency was 27, but only 5 seats were allocated 
to that continent on the Board, and out of those 5 seats only one was 
designated. In contrast, Western Europe, which had a total membership of 23, 
nevertheless held 8 seats on the Board. That arrangement was blatantly 
unfair. For nine years the Nigerian delegation had been attempting to redress 
that imbalance, but all its efforts had been frustrated. As long ago as 1977 
Nigeria had proposed three additional seats for Africa and two for Middle East 
and South Asia. That had not been acceptable to a certain group. Nigeria had 
therefore proposed that two additional seats should go to Africa, one to Asia 
and one to Latin America. That proposal had likewise not met with general 
acceptance. It was high time for the General Conference to find a solution 
for that problem pursuant to resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/454. The Nigerian 
delegation was aware of the proposal put forward by a number of countries to 
improve the situation by reviewing Article VI as a whole. His delegation 
would study the proposal closely in an appropriate forum, and he would for the 
moment merely observe that, for his delegation, it was the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 which had priority. 
16. Mr. DHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) said that he endorsed the 
President's contention that matters which did not contribute to science and 
technology should not take up the time of delegates to the General 
Conference. The Agency's functions should retain their specialized and 
scientific character, and extraneous issues liable to spread dissension should 
be avoided. However, legitimate political concerns connected with the use of 
nuclear energy by Member States should be meaningfully and rationally dealt 
with in the present forum. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 10 


17. The present year had seen the need to perform an essential function 
connected with nuclear safety which would not have been possible if the Agency 
had not existed. The Sri Lankan delegation wished to express its sympathy to 
those who had suffered as a consequence of the unfortunate accident at 
Chernobyl. It trusted that there would never be another similar accident. 
Nevertheless, the Agency together with the international community should seek 
ways and means of preventing any spread of harmful radiation, whatever its 
origin, including the wilful destruction of nuclear facilities. The essential 
need for the Agency had been proved by the role which it had played after the 
accident in question. His delegation greatly admired the work accomplished by 
the Director General, the Secretariat and experts from several countries in 
preparing the two conventions which had been approved the previous week, with 
a view to strengthening international co-operation in nuclear safety and 
radiological protection. The Sri Lankan Government hoped to become party to 
those conventions after the necessary legal procedures had been completed in 
Colombo. 
18. There was no doubt that nuclear energy would remain an important source 
of power for many Member States of the Agency, particularly those which were 
inadequately endowed with other energy resources. The only locally available 
source in Sri Lanka was hydro power. Soon, the demand for electricity would 
exceed the total hydro capacity of the country, which would thereafter depend 
on imported oil, coal or uranium. 
19. The uses of nuclear energy in Sri Lanka were at present limited to the 
applications of radioisotopes and radiations in agriculture, medicine, 
industry and hydrology. In the area of radiation technology, Sri Lanka was 
now producing rubber made by pre-vulcanization of latex, which would 
subsequently make it possible to transform the manufacture of some rubber 
articles from a factory industry into a cottage industry. Rubber products 
made by that method were safer, as no chemicals were added. During the past 
year Sri Lanka had held a national seminar for executive management and a 
national course on non-destructive testing with the assistance of Agency 
experts. In the following month Sri Lanka would be hosting a regional 
workshop on tissue banking. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 11 


20. Regional co-operation in nuclear energy was a very important Agency 
activity in his part of the world. The Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) 
in the area of Asia and the Pacific was going to be extended during the 
present year for the third time, and Sri Lanka would sign in due course the 
renewal of the Agreement which in the following year would have been in 
existence for 15 years. The RCA working group had decided to hold its next 
meeting in Sri Lanka in 1987. His Government was planning to host that 
anniversary meeting in March 1987 in such a manner as to celebrate the success 
of the RCA project during the preceding 15 years. The second phase of the 
UNDP-IAEA industial project under the RCA would receive the strongest support 
from the Sri Lankan Government. 
21. As in the past, Sri Lanka would pay its voluntary contribution to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
22. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico) said that his Government welcomed the 
positive results obtained during the special session of the General 
Conference, which had manifested a strong overall will to reinforce 
international co-operation. The Mexican Government was convinced that the 
decisions to be taken - together with the Agency's future programme on nuclear 
safety and radiological protection - would take due account of the interests 
and the particular requirements of the developing countries. He wished to 
restate his belief that the expansion of Agency activities in that sphere 
should not involve a reduction in other specific projects designed to meet 
what were regarded as priority needs by the countries of the Group of 77. 
23. The justified concern of governments and of world public opinion 
regarding nuclear safety and radiation protection was intimately linked with 
the Agency's essential purposes. That was how the matter had been understood 
by the Heads of State or of government of various countries - Argentina, 
Greece, India, Sweden and Mexico - and the Prime Minister of Tanzania who had 
met a short time before at Ixtapa in Mexico, where they had proclaimed the 
right of mankind to peace and reaffirmed their intention to protect that right 
in order to make possible the survival of the human race. They had likewise 
stressed how fragile was safety based only on a complex technology, and how 
vividly the recent accident had shown up the terrible consequences which the 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 12 


use of even a small part of the nuclear arsenals existing in the world would 
have. The Mexican delegation proclaimed its belief that the protection of the 
planet was incumbent upon all nations and that it was unacceptable that a few 


countries alone should decide the fate of the entire world. It similarly 
reiterated its appeal for the immediate suspension of nuclear tests as a 
preliminary measure to a treaty on the general prohibition of such tests, that 
measure being in its turn a first step towards general and complete 
disarmament. The Mexican delegation was dwelling on those peaceful themes 
because it considered that the special objectives and responsibilities of the 
Agency should remain closely linked with those matters of world concern. 


24. As the Director General had pointed out in his statement, one such 
immediate task concerned the efforts to reach an international agreement on 
the prohibition of attacks on nuclear installations. It had been stated by 
some that that matter was one for the Committee on Disarmament, but the 
Mexican delegation believed that, thanks to its technical aspects, the matter 
fell within the Agency's terms of reference. It wished to point out how 
different would be the attitude of Member States if, in connection with the 
construction of a nuclear power station, they had to take into consideration 
its defensive capacity. It was essential that in that field mankind should be 
free to develop without being obliged to think of the sword of Damocles which 
hung over so many of its other activities. In nuclear energy, direct 
responsibility rested with the International Atomic Energy Agency, which was 
called upon to play an important role in identifying the demarches necessary 
to protect safeguarded nuclear installations against armed attacks. The 
Mexican delegation was favourable to the idea of the Agency drafting a 
convention on the subject, as had been proposed by the Group of 77. 
25. Similarly, the Mexican Government hoped for the success of the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) which was to take place in 1987, 
and trusted that that conference would yield acceptable results, taking due 
account of the role of nuclear energy in the economic and social development 
of States, particularly the developing countries. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 13 


26. Reviewing the principal items on the agenda of the General Conference, 
he said that his delegation was not satisfied that the portion of the budget 
allocated to the safeguards programme was every year greater than the 
resources earmarked for technical co-operation and assistance. It wished to 
stress the need to find a way of financing technical co-operation from the 
Agency's Regular Budget, rather than through voluntary contributions. While 
recognizing that on a provisional basis the procedure of indicative planning 
figures represented an acceptable compromise solution, his delegation 
considered that the tendency which had emerged during the preceding years was 
genuinely alarming. The situation was characterized by the following 
features: policy of budgetary zero growth, constant reduction in the rate of 
growth in funds available for multilateral technical co-operation, including 
UNDP resources, use of extrabudgetary funds for financing certain footnote-a/ 
projects, and assessment of the importance of those projects in a bilateral 
context, instead of an objective evaluation based on a multilateral approach 
to international co-operation. In order to counter that negative tendency, 
the Mexican delegation urged that the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund should be integrated into the Agency's Regular Budget. 
27. He then indicated his wish to turn to a problem which, for more than a 
quarter of a century past, had been a subject of concern to the developing 
countries without their having been able to satisfy their justified 
aspirations. The problem was how to make up for the delay in introducing the 
nuclear option to meet the growing demand for electric power. As nuclear 
techniques were perfected, investment expenditure increased substantially. 
Furthermore, the majority of developing countries did not possess electric 
power grids sufficiently large to accommodate nuclear power units of the size 
supplied at present. In addition, various obstacles associated with the 
severe economic crisis which weighed particularly heavily on the developing 
countries had rendered access to other sources of energy more difficult and 
more costly. To the initial expenditure on equipment there had to be added 
the rapid development of a technology which rendered equipment obsolete almost 
as soon as it had been purchased, and the fact that installations were 
expensive and complex. Countries such as Mexico were faced with the dilemma 
of continuing an obsolete project so as not to lose their substantial earlier 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 14 


earlier investments or of starting again from scratch without taking account 
of those investments, in so doing ignoring the fact that the danger due to the 
rate of change in technology remained the same. 


28. Nuclear electric power was in a position to meet increasing energy 
needs on less expensive, more stable and safer conditions. That was why 
Mexico was particularly interested in small and medium power reactors, on 
grounds of their specific features, their total cost, their efficiency and the 
fact that their design and fabrication were well planned. Such reactors would 
be well suited to the special requirements of the developing countries. In 
that connection the Director General had referred to the establishment of a 
group of experts to advise the Agency on the procedures necessary to assist 
developing countries in promoting and financing their nuclear power 
programmes. His delegation also considered that some limitations could be 
removed, at least in part, if the countries concerned had available medium 
power reactors, of a simpler design, and endowed with greater inherent safety 
and greater reliability. The fundamental problem remaining to be solved was 
how the developing countries were to acquire that type of reactor. 
29. In view of the meagre results obtained during the preceding 27 years, 
one solution might be to establish an international undertaking, formally and 
operationally associated with the Agency. Designed as an independent body, it 
would have available technical and financial resources adequate to conduct a 
long-term programme on the design and construction of small and medium power 
reactors. It would be desirable that, as a the preliminary step, the 
Secretariat should conduct a feasibility study on such matters as the 
following: structure and formal links of the new body with the Agency, 
sources of financing, for example assessed contributions of States, special 
contributions of countries which might be potential purchasers, voluntary 
contributions and loans or other forms of international financing, and 
production policies guaranteeing that the project would be profitable, would 
meet the requirements of the developing countries and would adequately protect 
the interests of other producers. In putting forward that proposal his 
delegation was not attempting to meet an urgent requirement of the Mexican 
Government, since Mexico's immediate nuclear electric power programme had 
adopted a different approach and was on the point of entering the production 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 15 


phase. The Mexican delegation was rather trying to help solve a problem, 
namely access to nuclear power in order to meet the energy requirements of the 
developing countries, a problem which had remained unsolved since the 1960s. 


30. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh) said that at the special session held the 
preceding week the question which had engaged the attention of the majority of 
delegations was not whether the peaceful use of nuclear energy should continue 
but whether all countries were capable of contemplating measures, developing 
systems and making determined efforts to ensure that such peaceful use was 
also risk-free. The success of the special session had proved that the 
international community was unhesitatingly taking a very constructive stand in 
that regard. The Bangladesh delegation was in favour of entrusting to the 
Agency an ever-more important role in co-ordinating and strengthening all 
international efforts in the domain of safety. In that task the Agency would 
enjoy Bangladesh's full support. The fact must be stressed that 
responsibility for nuclear safety, by the very nature of things, lay primarily 
with national authorities, but effective nuclear safety regimes also called 
for meaningful and sustained international co-operation. In that context 
Bangladesh would be prepared to support any proposal to establish regional 
environmental monitoring, reporting and rescue centres under the auspices of 
the Agency. Such centres would make it possible to take quick and appropriate 
action in times of nuclear emergency. Furthermore, it might be appropriate to 
consider launching co-ordinated research and development programmes to prepare 
effective methods for reducing exposure to radiations and for treatment of 
irradiated persons, and on methods for arresting the passage into the soil of 
radioisotopes, particularly long-lived fission products. Bangladesh would be 
extremely happy to use its modest nuclear research facilities for such work. 
31. Concern for nuclear safety was at present in the forefront of people's 
minds, but the problem of a balanced growth in nuclear power generation in 
Member States was regarded as equally important by his Government. The trends 
noted in the annual report showed the undiminished importance of nuclear 
energy as one of the principal sources of power at present. In that 
connection, the Bangladesh delegation appreciated the Agency's efforts to help 
strengthen, in various ways, nuclear power planning in developing Member 
countries. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 16 


32. The progress of the Agency's technical co-operation activities likewise 
appeared positive and encouraging to his delegation, which wished to take the 
opportunity to inform the General Conference of certain very important 
developments in the Bangladesh National Nuclear Research Programme. On 
14 September 1986 the first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction had been 
effected in Bangladesh in the TRIGA 3 MW research reactor operated by the 
Bangladesh Atomic Energy Research Establishment. The total cost of the 
reactor and of its facilities had been borne by the Bangladesh Government. 
The contract was not of the turnkey type, which had made it possible to 
maximize local participation, an important factor in the transfer of 
technology in Bangladesh. The reactor had been supplied and installed by the 
United States General Electric Company, but the design and construction of the 
reactor building together with various related services had been entirely 
performed by Bangladesh scientists and engineers. The assistance supplied by 
the Agency in training had been extremely valuable, and his delegation was 
grateful for it. The reactor in question, which possessed great inherent 
safety, would generate neutrons and gamma rays, which had a broad field of use 
in isotope production and applied research. In addition, it would contribute 
to establishing a scientific and technological base vital to preparing 
Bangladesh for its nuclear power programme. 
33. In fact, given the acute shortage of primary energy resources in 
Bangladesh, it would certainly be necessary to incorporate into the national 
power grid a nuclear power plant of an appropriate size in order to meet the 
country's rapidly growing energy needs. Unfortunately, the efforts to 
implement the first nuclear power project in Bangladesh had not thus far been 
successful owing to a number of unfavourable factors, including the question 
of finance. The recent initiatives taken by the Agency to examine the 
feasibility of the planning and installation of small and medium power 
reactors in developing countries might constitute a pragmatic approach to that 
highly complex problem. His delegation therefore fully endorsed those 
initiatives. It was happy to note that during the first phase of the study 
new and valuable insights had been obtained. However, the matter should not 
rest there, and a second phase of study on the subject should be undertaken 
in 1986 with particular emphasis on country-specific research aimed at 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 17 


providing more accurate information on the constraints and economics of 


introducing small and medium power reactors in developing countries. The 
Bangladesh delegation was of the opinion that, if the implementation of 


suitably-sized projects in developing countries was being hampered by lack of 
adequate financial resources alone and not by doubts regarding the overall 
economic viability of such projects, the Agency should widen the scope of its 
action and address the problem urgently, if necessary with the co-operation of 
potential investors, prospective donors and international agencies such as the 
World Bank. 


34. As in previous years, the present session of the General Conference 
afforded an opportunity for examining the progress achieved by various 
programmes under the Asian Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA). 
Bangladesh actively supported those programmes and had benefited from them in 
various ways. His delegation thanked the Agency and UNDP for the assistance 
provided to Member States in the region. It trusted that that assistance 
would be continued, and that the scope of projects would be widened in 
conformity with the requirements of the receiving countries. In that 
connection he recalled that at a meeting held in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) 
Bangladesh had proposed the establishment, in one of the RCA countries, of a 
Regional Centre for Research, Development and Application of Nuclear Science 
and Technology, to enable researchers to effect a fruitful exchange of ideas 
within a proper institutional framework. Bangladesh had also submitted, in 
the same spirit, a project on an Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology 
for Asia (INSTA). However, no action had been taken on that proposal, and the 
Bangladesh delegation was looking for action by the Agency on the subject. 
35. The General Conference met every year in order objectively to analyse 
whether the Agency had discharged its prime responsibility of effectively 
contributing to the promotion of international co-operation in the field of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In a few months' time, the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) would convene at Geneva in order 
to discuss, in a broader context, whether the international community as a 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 18 


whole had been successful in that task. Bangladesh had supported the idea of 
holding that conference, and trusted that it would once again highlight the 
need for equitable sharing of the fruits of progress in peaceful nuclear 
applications between developed and developing countries, in a framework of 


international co-operation without any type of discrimination. 


36. Mr. TETENYI (Hungary) remarked that the recent months had shown 
how important the Agency was for all its Member States. It had also been 
confirmed that the Agency was capable of meeting their expectations when 
circumstances called for a rapid shift of emphasis and pace of work without, 
however, forgetting its routine functions. The Hungarian delegation believed 
that the Agency's three main functional domains would remain, as before, the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, safety and safeguards. The 
Agency was coping very well with all those tasks, and Hungary therefore 
recommended approval of the annual report for 1985. It also unreservedly 
supported the Agency's programme and budget for 1987. Finally, in order to 
underscore its support for the technical assistance programme, his Government 
wished to announce a voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund equivalent to $76 611 in national currency, which was 6% 
above the amount corresponding to Hungary's share of the target figure for 
contributions to the Fund. 
37. Hungary was committed to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. For more than 30 years past it had been applying various nuclear 
techniques, which had always proved useful and in many cases irreplaceable. 
The third Hungarian nuclear power reactor had been connected to the power grid 
a few days previously. Another unit should go into operation the following 
year, and in the coming ten years Hungary intended to commission two further 
units of 1000 MW each. As to safety, it devoted exceptional attention to 
equipment, which comprised multi-layer safety hardware, to the recruitment of 
highly qualified personnel, and to "danger awareness" on the part of operators 
and all plant personnel. Hungary highly appreciated the Agency's safety 
activities, which had been useful to it in various ways. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 19 


38. In return, Hungary was making an active contribution to the Agency's 
programmes. It organized or received on the average three or four study 
groups each year. It also offered fellowships to trainees from numerous 
countries all over the world, ranging from Latin America to South East Asia. 
That spirit of co-operation prevailed not only in government departments and 
research institutions but also among facility operators. Thus, it had 
recently been possible to test at the Hungarian nuclear power plant Paks an 
Austrian surveillance system developed for Agency safeguards use. 
39. The Hungarian Government had repeatedly indicated that it strongly 
supported NPT and the Agency's safeguards system. During the current year it 
had issued new regulations governing nuclear exports, intended to ensure that 
nuclear materials, equipment or know-how from Hungary would not be misused for 
military purposes contravening the aims of NPT. It was indeed extremely 
important to prevent scientific and technical progress from serving the ends 
of war and destruction. It was clear that the denunciation and complete 
abandonment of nuclear weapons constituted a major task which would require 
much time, but for that very reason the Hungarian Government specifically 
welcomed every step in that direction, such as the Soviet moratorium on 
nuclear weapons tests which had already been extended several times. The 
arguments advanced against a world-wide formal moratorium by the other side 
might be intended to soothe people's nerves - but in reality they created 
unprecedented anxiety. 
40. The Hungarian delegation believed that the General Conference should do 
everything in its power to influence events in the direction of genuine 
peaceful solutions. Fortunately, there were signs that that could be done. 
In the preceding November, a Soviet-United States meeting held at Geneva had 
led to a common statement concerning the desirability of international 
co-operation on the development of nuclear fusion for peaceful purposes. In 
June 1986, two initiatives which fell within the competence of the Agency had 
originated in the Hungarian capital. By one of them, the leaders of the 
States members of the Warsaw Pact voiced the opinion that the role of 
international organizations such as the Agency and the United Nations with its 
specialized agencies should be strengthened for the purpose of establishing an 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 20 


international nuclear energy safety development system. At another meeting in 
Budapest, the General Secretary of the USSR Commuist Party Mr. Gorbachev, had 
publicly stated that it would be useful to organize, within the framework of 
the Agency, international co-operation with the aim of developing a new, 


intrinsically safe design of economically viable reactor. 


41. The events of the recent months were a salutary reminder of the joint 
responsibilities of States regarding the future of the planet Earth. It was 
possible to contribute to its preservation by using nuclear power to replace 
other energy sources which in the long run were much more harmful to the 
environment - but only by doing everything to ensure that nuclear energy 
remained safe and to prevent and suppress any possibility of its military 
application. 
42. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) said that the Agency's General 
Conference could not remain indifferent to the seriousness of the 
international situation. It constituted a suitable forum in which to stress 
how important it was to maintain peace and prevent the dangers of a nuclear 
confrontation which would be fatal for all countries of the world. Since the 
beginning of the century mankind had suffered two world wars, thanks to the 
philosophy of pillage and partition of the planet which were the aim of 
certain forces. The Cuban President had spoken on that matter at the eighth 
summit of the movement of non-aligned countries which had been held at 
Harare. According to him it was that philosophy which was at the root of the 
enormous accumulation of nuclear arsenals and of imperialist military bases 
throughout the world. It was also the reason for the wild desire to deliver 
weapons even into extra-terrestrial space, so that one day man would be unable 
to look at the stars without his vision being darkened by the thought of a 
murderous, ubiquitously lurking arsenal, to such an extent that no country on 
earth could feel itself in safety. Faced with the awesome choice between war 
or peace, death or life, emminent statesmen in a number of countries had 
launched an appeal to sanity, for the cessation of the armaments race, 
particularly the nuclear arms race and its extension to extra-terrestrial 
space. In that connection he wished to stress the proposals for nuclear 
disarmament and general disarmament by the year 2000 put forward by the Soviet 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 21 


Union, and also the constructive posture adopted by that country regarding 
suspension of nuclear tests, since the unilateral moratorium declared on 
6 June 1985 and extended until 1 January 1987. Those were attitudes and 
gestures which wise and peace-loving men were glad to approve, in the hope 
that mankind would not have to face a third and final world conflagration. 


43. But the issues confronting the present world were not confined to war 
and peace. Countries which were essentially exporters of raw materials were 
now obliged to pay much more for manufactured goods which they purchased from 
the advanced countries, and they found themselves face to face with one of the 
most serious economic crises which the world had ever known. The foreign debt 
of those countries, which they had been unable to service for several years 
past, had in 1985 reached the incredible figure of $950 thousand million. The 
fall in the price of basic commodities had obliged certain countries to pay, 
in 1985, 25% more than in 1980 for the same volume of imports. Those figures 
were explained by the resources necessary to finance a colossal armaments 
race, star wars, the gigantic budgetary and trade balance deficits and the 
other ills which rendered unbearable the life of the least developed peoples 
of the modern world. That was why peace, disarmament, the elimination of the 
foreign debt and the new international economic order were indissolubly linked. 
44. The present international situation and the economic crisis had a 
direct bearing on the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Nuclear energy was one of the most important and safest sources of power 
available to mankind for the future, in spite of the unfortunate accident 
which had occurred at Chernobyl. The body of measures to establish an 
international regime governing nuclear safety should guarantee the truth of 
that statement. For many countries of the Third World, nuclear energy 
represented practically the only option for the development of electricity 
generation in the absence of other sources of energy on their territories. 
However, it was disquieting to note that in 1985 the nuclear option 
represented only 2.4% of the electrical energy generated in the countries of 
the Third World, and that hopes of increasing that percentage were slender 
because the economic crisis made it impossible for those countries to develop 
their nuclear programmes on a regular basis. The available statistical data 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 22 


showed that the growth of nuclear power in the Third World would remain 
confined, between the present time and the end of the century, to the dozen or 
so countries which had already crossed the threshold. It was impossible to 
ignore the full starkness of those facts when conducting analyses and 
discussions in the General Conference. 


45. Cuba enthusiastically supported the increase in the resources available 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF), which should make it 
possible to meet the growing requests of the developing countries for 
assistance in implementing their nuclear programmes, and also welcomed the 
fact that the resources of the Fund would increase by 12% per year for the 
three coming years. However, for that decision to be put into effect and for 
it to guarantee a real increase in the resources of the Fund, it was essential 
for Member States to undertake to pay their share of the voluntary 
contributions promptly and in full. It was intolerable that in 1985 some 
countries, particularly industrialized countries, had not kept their promise 
to pay their voluntary contributions to the TACF. 
46. The Agency's budget for 1987 showed a real increase of more than 2%, 
which represented a departure from the policy of budgetary zero growth. The 
Cuban delegation naturally welcomed the increase, for it had always been 
opposed to that policy. Despite the financial burden which it implied, it 
also supported the revised expanded nuclear safety and radiation protection 
programme. 
47. The matter of changing the present arrangements for financing 
safeguards was before the General Conference. In that connection the position 
of his delegation was that any new arrangements to be applied in the future 
should, like the present formula, ensure preferential treatment for the 
developing countries. 
48. Another item which had been under discussion for many years was the 
modification of the composition of the Board of Governors. A group of 
countries had submitted in that connection a new proposal for review of 
Article VI of the Statute as a Whole. The well-known position of his 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 23 


delegation was that it was prepared to examine any objective and soundly based 
proposal which took account of the interests of all the geographical regions 
concerned and which did not appreciably reduce the present representation of 
the area of Latin America. 


49. Along with other States Members of the Agency, Cuba had taken part in 
the preparations for the United Nations Conference for Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE), which was to be held the following year. The success of that 
important conference would be partly linked with that of the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply (CAS), where agreement on the principles of international 
co-operation had encountered difficulties for five years past. The Cuban 
delegation considered that the necessary effort should be made to arrive at a 
consensus on that matter. 
50. At its present session the General Conference was to consider the 
implementation of resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/442 on South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities. That country was defying the world by its obstinate refusal to 
conform to the resolutions of the General Assembly of the United Nations or of 
the General Conference of the Agency, by maintaining and consolidating the 
apartheid regime and its occupation of Namibia and by organizing bands of 
mercenaries for the purpose of destabilizing neighbouring States and launching 
surprise attacks against them. It was quite possible that the racist 
apartheid regime had access to nuclear weapons, with the covert support of 
certain Western countries, and that it thus possessed a means of political 
blackmail which was fraught with danger. It was regrettable that the 
negotiations which the Secretariat had opened with the South African 
Government on a draft safeguards agreement relating to the semicommercial 
enrichment plant had failed, the South African Government having put forward 
proposals described by the Secretariat as unacceptable. For those reasons the 
Cuban delegation condemned the policy pursued by South Africa, believed that 
that policy was at variance with resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/442, and considered 
that the spirit and the letter of that resolution should be most energetically 
reaffirmed. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 24 


51. The General Conference had before it another equally critical matter, 
under the item of the agenda entitled "The Israeli nuclear threat". Since the 
policy and attitude of the Israeli Government towards its neighbours were well 
known, the Cuban delegation expected that the General Conference would give 
all the necessary attention to the matter and adopt effective measures to 
force Israel to change its attitude. 
52. Cuba was continuing to implement, at an increasingly rapid pace, its 
programme to harness nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The construction 
of the first Cuban nuclear power station was proceeding according to plan, and 
the most careful attention was being accorded to safety, whether regarding 
design, construction, assembly, the future operation of the station, or the 
strict and well-planned training of the staff who would be directly 
responsible for that operation. The Cuban delegation could thus reaffirm what 
it had had occasion to state at the special session of the General Conference, 
namely that none of Cuba's neighbours need feel concern or anxiety as to the 
safety of Cuban reactors. Conscious of its duty towards the Cuban population 
and the international community, Cuba was respecting and would respect, in a 
responsible manner, the established regulations and would work to perfect the 
international nuclear safety regime. The fact that it had promptly signed the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on 
Assistance in Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency was 
tangible proof thereof. 
53. The preparations for establishment of a nuclear research centre which 
would constitute, together with the first nuclear power station, the 
cornerstone of nuclear power development in Cuba, were continuing. At the 
same time progress was being made in the application of nuclear techniques in 
medicine, agriculture and industry. During the present year there would be 
inaugurated the Food Irradiation Centre, the first of its kind in Latin 
America and established with the Agency's technical assistance. That would 
initially be a semi-industrial centre, where economic studies would be 
undertaken whose results would subsequently be used in the application of the 
food irradiation technique on an industrial scale. The organization of 
radiological protection and monitoring services was continuing, and hundreds 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 25 


of scientists, engineers, and technicians continued to be trained in order to 
meet the requirements of the Cuban nuclear programme. Cuba owed much in that 


field to the valuable collaboration of the Soviet Union and other States 
members of CMRA, which were its principal partners in economic, scientific and 


technical co-operation, and also to the governments of friendly countries in 


the Third World, to the Agency and to other United Nations bodies. The 


implementation of the Cuban nuclear programme showed what a people could do 
when a more just social system, effective international collaboration and 
political and economic independence all combined to guarantee a better future. 


54. On the eve of the Agency's thirtieth anniversary, it was appropriate to 
stress the importance of the role which it played. The Agency symbolized the 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, the only uses which should exist 
in a world free from colonial ambition, hegemony and tension. The work 
performed by the Agency on behalf of peace and the development of nuclear 
energy was fertile with results. Numerous peoples in the Third World had 
benefited from it. Every effort must be made to ensure that the present 
session of the General Conference saw the triumph of reason, peace, and the 
concept that nuclear energy would always be a factor promoting the welfare and 
the development of all the peoples of the world. 
55


 Mr. SUCRE FIGARELLA (Venezuela) said that the thirtieth regular 
session of the General Conference was taking place at a time of particular 
importance for the future work of the Agency, whose credibility had been put 
to the test during recent months. It was satisfactory that the Agency had 
been able to rise to the occasion, thus proving its effectiveness and 
seriousness of purpose. There was no doubt that international co-operation 
had emerged in strengthened guise. It would, however, be mistaken to 
associate all the Agency's objectives with the exceptional circumstances which 
it had had to face. However important and valuable the lessons learnt had 
been, it was necessary that at its present session the General Conference 
should deal with the routine functions of the Agency. The Venezuelan 
delegation noted with interest that the Agency had continued more than ever to 
discharge its functions by striving to enhance the positive contribution of 
the atom. Although it was true that the risk of a nuclear cataclysm remained 



GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 26 


very real, in view of the antagonism between the super powers, it was not less 
true that the peaceful use of nuclear energy had become a symbol of the action 
which should be taken to improve the life of mankind. It was readily apparent 
from the annual report for 1985 that the policy of "putting one's money" on 
the atom had paid off. In Venezuela people had spoken of the need to "put 
one's money" on oil, to convert that valuable raw material into a tool for 
creating a diversified and modern society, and for making an effective 
civilizing force out of human stock-in-trade. That was also true of the atom, 
that other great force. Such was the sincere belief of Venezuela, a belief 
which had induced it to support the way in which the Agency operated in the 
service of peace and co-operation. 


56. There were aspects of the Agency's activity which were not entirely 
new, but which on the contrary kept all their topicality and called for 
decisions on which the Venezuelan delegation wished to state its position. 
The first question was that of financing technical co-operation. His 
delegation believed that the controversy whether technical co-operation should 
be charged to the Regular Budget or financed by extrabudgetary resources could 
easily be settled if one agreed on certain principles. The first principle 
concerned the importance of technical co-operation as such. No delegation was 
opposed to the technical assistance programme. All were in agreement on the 
aims, there only remained the question of means, i.e. financial resources. 
Those resources could not be obtained by magic, by luck, or by generosity. 
Reliance could be placed only on the actual contributions of each Member 
State, paid promptly and regularly, and fixed in an appropriate manner. 
Furthermore, in order to meet programming requirements, those resources had to 
be predictable and assured; there was no short-term programming, and long-term 
forecasts, covering several fiscal periods, were inevitable. Those were, he 
believed, the considerations motivating the General Conference when it had 
adopted, in 1981, resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388, requesting the Board of 
Governors to arrange for an increase in the resources devoted to technical 
assistance, and to take the measures necessary to ensure that technical 
assistance was financed from the Regular Budget or from other comparable, 
predictable and assured sources. It had then been a matter of deciding by how 
much those resources should be increased, and on the basis of what criteria. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 27 


The matter had been settled in 1985, when an agreement had been reached on 
indicative planning figures for the years 1987, 1988 and 1989, involving an 
annual increase of 12%. The Agency could, therefore, when planning its 
technical assistance and co-operation activities, rely for three years on 
assured and predictable resources. That being so, it was of scant importance 
whether those resources came under the Regular Budget or not. In any case, 
there was no point in evolving financing procedures if Member States were not 
prepared to pay their contributions regularly. On those regular contributions 
there depended the very operation of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund (TACF). 


57. In that context the Venezuelan delegation wished to express its concern 
at the fact that during the past year Latin America had benefited less, in 
percentage terms, from the programmes financed by the TACF. According to the 
annual report, the resources of the Fund had increased by $38.1 million in 
1985, in other words 3.5% in comparison with the previous year, whereas the 
share of Latin America had fallen from 24.7% in 1984 to 22.6% in 1985. 
Similarly, his delegation was alarmed at the decrease in the number of fellows 
in 1985 by comparison with the preceding years. 
58. Still in the realm of technical co-operation, the Venezuelan delegation 
wished to stress the importance which it attached to regional activities. In 
agreement with other States members of the Andean Pact, Venezuela had been an 
originator of one of the most successful programmes in that area, the ARCAL 
programme (Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America), in which other Latin American 
countries also participated. Venezuela, supporting the effort to promote the 
Agency's objectives, had hosted and would continue to host numerous regional 
seminars and courses on such subjects as nuclear instrumentation, 
instrumentation and control for research reactors, the treatment of persons 
exposed to radiation or the use of radioisotopes in animal breeding. In a 
general way, agriculture was a priority sector for the Venezuelan Government, 
and an institute of nuclear agriculture was under construction, which should 
make it possible to improve breeding techniques, product quality, seed 
varieties, land fertilization and melioration and so on. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 28 


59. Regarding the control of the peaceful use of nuclear energy, he said 
that it was clear that the Agency's safeguards system occupied a dominant 
place in the policy of nuclear safety. All countries, whether large or small, 
were becoming ever more aware of its importance. There was no such thing as a 
safe world without control of the atom. It was encouraging that almost all 
nuclear-weapon States had agreed to accept a degree of control of their 
peaceful nuclear facilities. But there was still a long way to go, and the 
most recent events had shown that no one could be certain of his own nuclear 
potential. Thus far it had been possible to avoid the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, or at least their horizontal proliferation. However, the 
outlook was not very promising. The Third NPT Review Conference, held 
in 1985, had not yielded substantial results. Undoubtedly the international 
political climate was not very favourable. One could only hope that the great 
Powers would revert to the spirit of the 1960s, which had led to the signature 
of the Partial Test-Ban Treaty, the first step on the long road to the total 
prohibition of tests and the ultimate abolition of nuclear weapons. It was 
desirable that that first step should be followed by many others, 15 years 
later. Latin America, on its side, had not delayed before signing, quite a 
long time previously, the Tlatelolco Treaty for the prohibition of nuclear 
weapons in the region. 


60. Turning to the political aspect of financing the safeguards system, he 
said that there was no basic obstacle to agreement, but that no solution had 
yet been found for the deadlock which had arisen by reason of the unfavourable 
international economic situation. The importance of the safeguards system was 
recognized by all, but for the time being it was extremely difficult for the 
developing countries to shoulder fresh financial burdens for financing the 
system. Venezuela had honoured its international engagements. It had always 
punctually paid its contributions to United Nations bodies, and it had in 
addition financed numerous programmes of emergency assistance to a total value 
of several hundred million dollars - and that in spite of the impact of the 
oil crisis which had been reflected in a reduction in per capita income, a 
reduction in gross domestic product and a reduction in real income. Venezuela 
had paid its 1986 contributions to the Agency and other similar 
organizations. But, in view of the financial difficulties, it was impossible 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 29 


for it to accept new fiscal commitments, particularly an increase in its share 
of financing the safeguards system. That was why, considering that the share 
of each country should be directly proportional to its technical development 
and to the use which it made of safeguards, Venezuela had submitted a draft 
resolution with the support of the Group of 77 and of the Latin American 
Group. His delegation had no wish to make a discordant issue of the matter. 
It was necessary to find a solution, but he believed that the time was not yet 
ripe, and that the criteria which had led to the proposed increase in 
assessment should be re-examined. The best approach, with the aim of 
achieving a consensus, would therefore be to defer for some time the adoption 
of a final resolution, and in the meantime to authorize the President to take 
whatever action he considered necessary. 


61. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) said that nuclear energy was the most recent 
of the great sources of energy, and that it would continue to play a major 
role in spite of the fears to which its various uses might give rise, the 
risks of nuclear accidents and the danger of its use for non-peaceful 
purposes. The Agency's annual report indicated that the number of power 
reactors at present in service in the world had increased, that nuclear power 
was now contributing about 15% of world electricity generation and that in 
certain industrialized countries that percentage would even exceed 50%. It 
was to be expected that that increase would be accompanied by an expansion of 
international co-operation, and in particular by a reinforcement of the 
central role played by the International Atomic Energy Agency, in connection 
with the establishment of a world non-proliferation regime. It was also 
necessary to enhance co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
to assist developing Member States, the majority of which were poor in 
conventional energy sources such as oil and coal, to adapt themselves to the 
changes which had occurred. 
62. Regarding nuclear safety and radiation protection, recent events had 
shown that the general approach to those matters should be revised. The first 
special session of the General Conference had revealed a capacity for quick 
reaction on the part of Member States, which had been able to adopt by 
consensus various measures intended to improve nuclear safety and radiation 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 30 


protection. The Moroccan delegation warmly welcomed the substantial results 
which had been obtained, and trusted that the General Conference, and also the 
Agency's other principal organs, would ensure the necessary follow-up and 
implementation of the resolutions and recommendations adopted at the special 
session. Morocco was convinced that the Agency would discharge the tasks 
entrusted to it with success. 


63. His delegation noted with satisfaction the developments which had 
occurred or which were planned regarding expansion of the area of application 
of safeguards, particularly in the nuclear-weapon States. The decision of the 
Soviet Union to submit some of its nuclear installations to Agency safeguards, 
the wish expressed by the Chinese delegate at the preceding session of the 
General Conference, and the safeguards agreement concluded with Albania would 
contribute to reinforcing and rendering more universal the safeguards regime, 
and thereby the very principle of non-proliferation. In that context, 
however, the Moroccan delegation deeply deplored that the regimes in Israel 
and South Africa still refused to submit to the safeguards regime and to place 
their nuclear installations under Agency control. 
64. The present year had witnessed important activities regarding the 
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in Morocco. The first 
phase of the preliminary studies for construction of the first Moroccan 
nuclear power station had led to the selection of two sites, one of which 
would shortly be chosen for erection of the power station in question. 
Similarly, Morocco had established a national centre for energy and nuclear 
science and technology, which would make an essential contribution to the 
optimum development of nuclear applications in Morocco, and would be equipped 
with a research reactor for that purpose. In addition, the Moroccan 
authorities had launched an important national radiation protection programme 
intended to strengthen existing facilities in that field and to develop safety 
and radiation protection activities in accordance with the guidelines 
contained in Agency documentation and with the principles adopted by the 
International Commission on Radiological Protection. Conscious of the 
important role of regulations in nuclear affairs, Morocco had acceded to the 
various international agreements adopted under the Agency's auspices and had 
undertaken, with the assistance of specialist services from the Secretariat, 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 31 


the drafting of the basic texts for a national regulatory system governing all 
nuclear activities in Morocco. In that connection his delegation wished, on 
behalf of his Government, to say how much it appreciated the fruitful 
co-operation between the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Moroccan 
authorities concerned. It expressed to the Agency its gratitude for the 
valuable aid which the latter had accorded the Kingdom of Morocco in the 
development of its nuclear programmes, particularly in the form of fellowships 
and of experts to assist the Moroccan national authorities. 


65. In a general way, he wished to stress the importance of the training 
activities conducted by the Agency and covering all the subjects connected 
with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Moroccan delegation was in 
favour of the idea of organizing, with the assistance of the authorities in 
the host countries, courses in developing countries, believing that that would 
be a way of enhancing the effectiveness and soundness of training. Morocco 
had already hosted a number of courses of that type, and in the following year 
would host a regional course on energy planning in the developing countries. 
66. His delegation welcomed the formation of a team of experts to examine 
the possibilities of promoting and financing nuclear electricity generation 
programmes in the developing countries. It trusted that that team, which had 
begun to analyse the existing difficulties and constraints and to propose 
solutions, would continue its work and would achieve the objectives laid down 
in its terms of reference. 
67. However, while recognizing the extent of the work done, the Moroccan 
delegation considered that the volume of technical assistance still fell short 
of the requirements of the developing countries. The present system of 
financing assistance, in spite of the effectiveness of the indicative planning 
figures arrangement, still did not meet the requirements of General Conference 
resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388 because it continued to be based on the principle 
of voluntary contributions, which was contrary to the philosophy of that 
resolution. 
68. Although it had joined the general consensus on the Agency's budget for 
1987, the Moroccan delegation regretted that the budget remained subject to 
the rule of zero real growth, in spite of the special nature of the Agency's 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 32 


activites, of the new situation which had arisen since the Chernobyl accident 
and of the clear improvement in the economic situation of contributing 
countries. 


69. He greeted the Agency's efforts to increase the percentage of 
Secretariat officials recruited from developing countries, in accordance with 
General Conference resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, which had been unanimously 
adopted, but thought that that percentage was still much too low. He noted 
that some developing countries, including Morocco, had so far not been able to 
obtain posts in the Agency Secretariat, although Morocco had sponsored 
numerous candidates with that aim in view, and in the hope of being able to 
contribute, along with other States, to implementation of the Agency's 
programmes. The Moroccan Government therefore requested that due attention be 
devoted to the matter and that efforts to secure better implementation of the 
resolution in question should be redoubled. 
70. Mr. POZO (Ecuador) said that his country believed ever more firmly 
in the Agency's role of supervising nuclear science and technology. That was 
a historical challenge, and a challenge that must be taken up. The statements 
made at the present session of the General Conference should not be allowed to 
fall into oblivion. Much had been said on the international consequences and 
the effects on international public opinion of the Chernobyl tragedy, which 
constituted a most serious warning and which should make it possible to avoid 
other nuclear catastrophies and their transboundary effects in the future. 
All Member States were under an obligation to strengthen the multilateral 
aspects of nuclear safety and resolutely to support the Agency's objectives. 
The time had come for the latter to redouble its efforts to prevent the 
uncontrolled and irresponsible utilization of nuclear facilities. In order to 
re-establish confidence in nuclear power, there must be universal adherence to 
the strictest standards of safety and to the principle of mutual assistance. 


71. Ecuador believed that nuclear safety was an obligation which was 
required just as much of countries possessing nuclear installations as of 
those which had no such facilities, and that consequently all States should 
make joint efforts to achieve ongoing mastery of safety procedures. That 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 33 


presupposed the acceptance of nuclear safety and radiation protection 
standards based on a continuous exchange of information at international 


level, and the putting forth of a financial effort by all States. It followed 
that nuclear safety and radiation protection programmes should be priority 
matters both for the Agency and for the national authorities of Member States. 


72. Two conventions, on early notification of an accident and on assistance 
to countries where an accident had occurred, had been adopted at the special 
session. In that connection, Ecuadorian experts were in favour of 
establishing a network of detection facilities throughout the world and of 
systematically measuring the levels of natural radiation and radioactivity 
present at each point of the globe. The data thus obtained should be promptly 
interpreted and disseminated throughout the world. But that isolated action 
would not, in his delegation's view, be sufficient. Preventive measures were 
more important. The two conventions adopted were essential and enjoyed the 
support of the Ecuadorian delegation, but those documents dealt with only one 
part of the problem in that they concerned the consequences of accidents. His 
delegation therefore drew the attention of States Members of the Agency to the 
priority matter of preparing conventions of a preventive character. 
73. The technical assistance programme was one of the cornerstones of the 
Agency, for it was of direct benefit to the countries which had greatest need 
thereof and favoured their development. The Agency should do everything it 
could to continue to furnish that kind of assistance, and the funds allocated 
to technical assistance should be included in the Agency's Regular Budget. In 
general, the Ecuadorian delegation welcomed the progress made in Latin America 
during the past year thanks to work undertaken in the framework of the 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and 
Technology in Latin America (ARCAL). Ecuador supported that programme and was 
placing the facilities of the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission at the 
disposal of projects undertaken thereunder. 
74. Ecuador believed that the Agency should continue its efforts to become 
a centre of world inspiration in the field of nuclear science and technology, 
guiding Member States in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and 
advising them on the unparalleled possibilities which it offered as a source 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 34 


of power. At the same time, Ecuador invited the Director General to ensure 
that the Agency remained in the vanguard of the development of safety 
mechanisms and programmes which would buttress the confidence of world public 
opinion in nuclear electric power. Everything should be done to ensure that 


in the years to come the Agency would implement programmes vital to the 
maintenance of peace in the world, with the effective support of Member States. 


75. Mr. FERREIRA (Portugal), reviewing the main areas of Agency 
activity - technical assistance and co-operation, safeguards and the safe and 
secure development of nuclear energy - said that his delegation regarded the 
Agency's role in technical assistance and co-operation as positive and 
important. On the subject of safeguards, Portugal, which was committed to a 
policy of nuclear non-proliferation and was a signatory of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, welcomed the efforts made by the Agency 
to promote the universal character of the Treaty. He was happy to read in the 
annual report that in 1985, as in previous years, "the Secretariat, in 
carrying out the safeguards obligations of the Agency, did not detect any 
anomaly which would indicate the diversion of a significant amount of 
safeguarded nuclear material". On the subject of the development of nuclear 
power, he said that the Agency's role in safety matters had been highlighted 
by the work it had done after the Chernobyl accident, work which included the 
drafting of the two conventions adopted at the special session of the General 
Conference - the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and 
the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency - which numerous States, including Portugal, had already signed. 
76. Conscious like all other countries of that disquieting aspect of 
nuclear energy, Portugal believed that the two conventions were extremely 
valuable, while at the same time considering that they in fact only 
represented the first stage of a process of improvement regarding certain 
matters, which the Portuguese delegate had already had occasion to mention 
during the special session, particularly the strengthening of international 
co-operation between neighbouring States. 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 35 


77. Turning to Portugal's nuclear activities, he said that there was no 
noteworthy event to report since the preceding session of the General 
Conference. His delegation nevertheless wished to mention that Portugal was 
continuing its activities in prospecting for and mining uranium, the annual 
production of which amounted to about 130 tonnes of uranium concentrate and 
which it was intended to increase. Among the research and development 
activities carried out in Portugal, reference should be made to those in the 
fields of medicine, agriculture, radiation protection and safety, 
radioecological studies on the environment, including marine radioecology, and 
the use of the research reactor for production of radioisotopes and the 
application of nuclear techniques. In all those spheres Portugal was 
extremely grateful for the co-operation, now of many years standing, with the 
Agency. 
78. Mr. ABBADI (Sudan) wished, on behalf of his delegation, to 
congratulate Zimbabwe on becoming a Member of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency. 
79. He hoped that the thirtieth regular session of the Agency's General 
Conference would be crowned with the same success as that which had rewarded 
the special session. The climate of constructive criticism which had imbued 
the work of the special session, together with the interest which it had 
aroused in the world, showed that in the matter of nuclear safety the 
destinies of countries were closely linked. The results of the special 
session represented an important step forward, which Sudan hoped would be 
followed by other action to reinforce nuclear safety to the maximum. It 
supported the expanded nuclear safety programme, trusting that that programme 
would be subsequently subjected to thorough examination and perhaps submitted 
to government experts for their opinion. 
80. Nuclear safety should not be envisaged in isolation, and account should 
be taken of its regional implications. In that connection the Sudanese 
delegation wished to express its grave concern at the message contained in 
document GG(XXX)/785. The report submitted to the General Conference 
described the negative results of the consultations which the Director General 
of the Agency had had with South Africa on the subject of the submission of 

GC(XXX)/OR.28 7 
page 36 


the latter's nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards, in accordance with a 
resolution passed by the twenty-ninth regular session of the General 
Conference. There was nothing surprising in that negative result when one 
thought of the nature of the South African racist regime. It showed that 
Pretoria had nothing but contempt for the resolutions of the Agency's General 
Conference. The present session should adopt the measures necessary to ensure 
that all Member States fully complied with the resolutions in question. 


81. The threat which weighed upon nuclear safety in the region where Sudan 
was situated originated not only from South Africa but also from the Middle 
East. He believed that that was a problem which should receive close 
attention. It was essential that States should accept the safeguards regime, 
and should specifically commit themselves not to launch armed attacks against 
nuclear installations in countries of the region, as had happened in the 
past. 
82. The South African and Israeli regimes, which co-operated closely in 
nuclear matters, constituted a grave threat to the Middle East and Africa. 
The danger was all the greater in the light of the declared policy of those 
countries, which were, as was well known, not parties to WPT. The Sudanese 
delegation therefore believed that the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in 
the Middle East, in application of the relevant resolutions of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, would make a substantial contribution to 
safety and security in the region where Sudan was situated. 
83. On the whole, Sudan endorsed the Agency's programme and budget 
for 1987. In that connection his delegation had associated itself with the 
general consensus which had emerged in the Board of Governors. However, while 
fully appreciating the conditions which had prevailed during the preparation 
of the budget, his delegation found it difficult to accept retention of the 
principle of zero budgetary growth. That reservation applied in particular to 
the Agency's promotional activities and to priority programmes in favour of 
the developing countries. 
84. While fully understanding that recent events had induced the Agency's 
Secretariat to place emphasis on the extremely important area of nuclear 
safety, the Sudanese delegation was concerned by the fact that the budget 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 37 


accorded too much prominence to that sector, at the expense of other equally 


important Agency activities. It believed that the programmes on nuclear 
applications and the use of radioisotopes in agriculture, stockbreeding, 
medicine and research, together with training activities to strengthen 
existing infrastructures, were a vital necessity for the development of the 
Sudan and the satisfaction of its enormous requirements in terms of food and 
health. He trusted that the budgetary estimates for 1988 would be subjected 
to thorough discussion, and that account would then duly be taken of the 
remarks made by the Sudanese and other delegations on that subject. 


85. Regarding the financing of technical assistance, he welcomed the 
consensus achieved in the Board of Governors concerning an annual increase 
of 12% in the resources of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
(TACK). The Sudan hoped that the pledged contributions would be paid promptly 
and would thus permit the actual achievement of the objectives set. At the 
same time it continued to hope that the financing of the TACF would be based 
on regular sources of income in addition to voluntary contributions, or 
alternatively on voluntary contributions whose predictable and assured 
character had been guaranteed. 
86. The Sudanese delegation noted with interest the Director General's 
statement on co-operation between developing countries, and particularly 
south-south co-operation between Asia and Latin America. It hoped that the 
African countries would not be forgotten in that connection. The activities 
of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, which were a 
positive example of north-south co-operation, proved that the strengthening of 
international solidarity was possible when circumstances were favourable. 
87. He proposed to conclude his remarks on technical co-operation by taking 
up a matter with which various United Nations bodies had been dealing and to 
which his delegation and those of numerous other African countries accorded 
particular importance, namely measures to combat drought and the encroachment 
of the desert in Africa. The ideal solution for that problem would be 
recourse to modern techniques for prospecting and tapping of underground water 
reserves in Africa. He therefore urged all the parties concerned, the 
international organizations and friendly countries to work on preparing a 

GC(XXX)/OR.287 
page 38 


complete programme of prospecting for water resources, accompanied by 
practical scientific methods capable of radically solving that grave problem 
with which Africa was faced. The Sudanese delegation hoped that the Agency 
would take action in that sphere. In that connection it greeted the 
assistance accorded to Sudan by the Agency, particularly with regard to 
implementation of a project to study the specific nature of underground waters 
in certain regions of the Sudan. 


88. He wished to make a brief remark on the matter of the representation of 
the areas "Africa" and "Middle East and South Asia" on the Board of 
Governors. That unsolved problem, which had regularly appeared on the agenda 
of the General Conference for the past eight years and had been the subject of 
lengthy discussions and exchanges of views, was nevertheless quite simple. It 
was just a matter of granting those two areas a representation on the Board of 
Governors appropriate to their growing interest in the Agency's work. 
89. In conclusion, the Sudanese delegation wished to thank the 
International Atomic Energy Agency for its efforts to promote the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and for the technical assistance it had accorded to the 
developing countries in the transfer of nuclear technology. His delegation 
reiterated its support for the Agency's activities in the fields of nuclear 
safety and safeguards, activities which bore witness to the Agency's effective 
role in promoting the safe and peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the 
world. 
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m. 



GC(XXX)/OR.288 
April 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 1 October 1986, at 3.20 p.m. 


Vice-Pres ident: Mr. SEMENOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) 
later: Mr. WILKINSON (United States of America) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annual report 
for 1985 (continued) 116 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Belgium 1 - 17 
Denmark 18 - 27 
Kenya 28 - 33 
Jordan 34 - 45 
Namibia 46 - 73 
Zaire 74 - 80 
Greece 81 - 89 
Korea 90 - 92 
Thailand 93 - 98 
Colombia 99 - 103 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 104 - 116 

[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 21 October 1986, 


[**] GC(XXX)/789. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/238/Rev.4. 


87-1256 
1018e/0123e 



GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1985 (GC(XXX)/775) (continued) 


1. Mr. de la BARRE d'ERQUELINNES (Belgium) said that his country was 
resolutely pursuing its nuclear power plant construction programme and 
gradually attaining its objective with regard to the share of nuclear power in 
total electricity production. The consumption of electricity in Belgium had 
been growing steadily since 1983 at an annual rate of 4.2%, and nuclear power 
plants had provided a remarkable 60% of the total electricity generated 
in 1985. The increased share of nuclear power was due largely to the 
commissioning in 1985 of two 1000-MW plants, Doel 4 and Tihange 3, which had 
raised the total installed capacity to 5135 MW(e). The forecasts for 1986 
currently showed a further significant increase in nuclear power's share. 
With respect to future programmes, Belgium would participate in two French 
plants, Chooz Bl and B2, each with a power of 1430 MW, which were to come into 
service in 1992 and 1994, respectively, and in the longer term, the 
construction of a 1260-MW power reactor was planned for a time which would 
depend on future increases in demand for electricity. 
2. Through its Nuclear Energy Research Centre at Mol and other 
institutions, Belgium was participating in several international programmes on 
fuel performance improvement, sodium-cooled fast reactors, fusion and so on. 
3. In the fuel cycle, several important activities had been pursued. 
Between 1974 and the end of 1985, almost 4000 t of low-enriched uranium had 
been treated by the Dessel fabrication plant and made into pellets for more 
than 7500 assemblies delivered to Belgian and French power reactors. Various 
measures had needed to be applied in order to deal with that large output, 
which was now highly standardized in the form of 17 x 17 rod assemblies for 
900-MW and 1300-MW pressurized-water reactors (PWRs). In addition, the new 
"advanced fuel assembly" would play an increasingly important role within the 
programme of fuel fabrication for Belgian and French reactors. 
4. The Belgonucleaire mixed-oxide fuel fabrication plant was one of only 
three facilities producing that type of fuel for the world market. The 
cumulative production up to the end of 1985 amounted to 8 t (344 assemblies) 
for thermal-neutron reactors and 6 t (91 assemblies) for fast reactors. 
In 1984, the French and Belgian companies COGEMA and Belgonucleaire had 
decided to co-ordinate their fabrication capacities by establishing a new 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 3 


company called Commox. As a result, the production capacity of the 
Belgonucleaire plant was increasing regularly, and would soon reach the 
equivalent of 30 t per year of PWR- type fuel (17 x 17 rods), which was due in 
particular to a decision by Electricite de France for the industrial recycling 
of plutonium within its PWR system. 


5. With regard to the resumption of spent fuel reprocessing activities, 
the Belgoprocess company was prepared to invest in adapting and extending the 
old Eurochemic plant. Part of the capacity was already reserved for Belgian 
electricity producers, but possibilities would remain for foreign customers to 
have their fuel reprocessed there. The decision whether to dismantle the 
plant or to continue activities, which was to have been taken at the end 
of 1985, had been deferred to allow for further negotiations with possible 
partners. 
6. A country like Belgium could not embark on a nuclear power programme 
without having reliable techniques for waste treatment and disposal. Research 
in that field by the Mol Nuclear Energy Research Centre was being supported by 
the Belgian authorities, the nuclear industry, and the national body dealing 
with radioactive wastes and fissile materials, as well as by international 
bodies, in particular the European Community and the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
7. In the field of radioisotope production, the National Radioisotopes 
Institute had continued its very diverse activities, which included the 
conditioning of radioisotopes from reactors and cyclotrons, the preparation of 
radiopharmaceuticals and of kits for biomedical analyses, and the development 
of industrial applications. The Institute was also working on food 
irradiation in the hope of contributing towards solving the world's nutrition 
problems. 
8. Turning to the topical question of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, he quoted his country's Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Tindemans, 
who had said during the recent United Nations General Assembly that the 
Chernobyl accident had raised great emotions in public opinion and had 
directly affected the life and health of the plant workers, contaminated the 
population of the area and caused negative effects over a large portion of the 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 4 


European continent. In Mr. Tindemans's view, it seemed essential that 
international mechanisms should be established to respond to the serious 
concerns raised by the increasing use of nuclear power and to arrive at a 
common conception of safety. The work of the Agency and, on the regional 
level, of OECD and the European Communities had done much to strengthen 
knowledge of nuclear safety; nevertheless, the actual decisions regarding the 
design of a nuclear power plant must always remain the responsibility of 
national authorities. International co-operation must obviously be 
intensified: in the first stage, a common approach to evaluating the safety 
of nuclear facilities and the probability of serious accidents should be 
worked out. In that endeavour, the role assigned to the Agency was extremely 
important. Furthermore, Mr. Tindemans had cautioned, care must be taken to 
avoid a situation where each country would hold its own truth regarding 
acceptable levels of radioactivity in agricultural produce, water and soils. 
That attitude had already damaged the credibility of governments with their 
own populations. It was important to have joint standards and units of 
measurement for all countries world-wide. The Agency and the other competent 
organizations should work rapidly to find a solution to that question. The 
Chernobyl accident had also made it obvious that the process of distributing 
information must be improved. In that peculiarly important area, great 
efforts must be made on the national level (where adequate operational 
structures must be established), on the regional level, and on the 
international level (e.g. within the Agency) by establishing a centralized 
system for redistributing national data. In that connection, Mr. Tindemans 
had welcomed the prompt adoption of the Convention on Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident. A particular difficulty had arisen over the question 
whether or not that convention should cover accidents caused by nuclear 
weapons or nuclear tests. An optional solution had been found which allowed 
the nuclear-weapon States to notify, on a voluntary basis, those accidents 
which were not covered by Article 1 of the convention. Most of those States 
had already announced that they would make a declaration of intent in that 
respect. Belgium attached the highest importance to that question and 


therefore thanked all the nuclear-weapon States for their declarations of 
intent, which alone could guarantee to the world's population that the 



GC(XXX)/0R.288 
page 5 


appropriate measures would be taken, whatever the nature of a nuclear accident 
causing radioactive fallout on their territory. Finally, Mr. Tindemans had 
stressed the need for international solidarity in the event of a nuclear 
disaster and had congratulated the Agency on its swift action in establishing 
an international Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency. 


9. While on the subject of safety, it seemed worth recalling that all of 
Belgium's power reactors were Westinghouse PWRs. The Belgian authorities had 
consequently decided to adopt the regulations of the United States Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission as a guide for safety, and deviations from those 
regulations were accepted only after technical justification. Moreover, 
Belgian reactors had to be protected against aircraft crashes, gas explosions, 
serious fires and similar phenomena. Those requirements had led to a safety 
conception where the prevention and minimization of accident consequences were 
of primary importance, the notion of "defence in depth" being effectively 
applied from the very design of the reactors. In addition, all power 
programmes, whether nuclear or not, were obliged to undergo regular adaptation 
and re-evaluation at least every ten years. 
10. The accident at Three Mile Island had shown that such events did not 
always follow the predicted scenarios, and after Three Mile Island the 
authorities had been obliged to take action with regard to all the Belgian 
reactors, in particular to improve the emergency procedures. In order to 
complete their continuous training, operators were instructed on compact 
simulators; in addition, large simulators including all protection levels had 
been requested. Two such large simulators were being designed and would be 
operational as of 1988. Meanwhile, the operators were being trained on large 
simulators in France, and strict qualification and requalification procedures 
for operators and technicians had been introduced as well. In 1979, the 
Institute of Nuclear Power Operation (INPO) had been established in order to 
observe the conditions under which nuclear power plants were operating and to 
collect and analyse incidents with a view to determining their initial 
causes. On INPO's initiative, an international symposium on human behaviour 
in the nuclear industry had been held in Lyons, France, only the previous week. 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 6 


11. The Chernobyl accident had greatly affected the Agency's activities 
during the past month. The Agency had done excellent work: in particular, the 
report by the International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) to the Board 
of Governors had rigorously analysed the Chernobyl accident and its 
aftermath. That report, and the recommendations it contained, would need to 
be studied very carefully before all the points in it affecting future plans 
for the Agency and its nuclear safety programmes could be appreciated; 
however, some preliminary comments could be made at the present time. First, 
the Chernobyl accident had occurred in a particular type of reactor; the 
accident analysis could therefore not simply be transferred to other types of 
power plant with significantly different safety characteristics. Secondly, in 
reviewing the present international standards (NUSS), the experience of the 
past decade should not be neglected; rather, it was necessary to make those 
standards more precise and more comprehensive in the light of the new 
information received. Thirdly, with regard to the man-machine interface, the 
Agency should not lose sight of the work that had already been done in that 
field, both nationally and internationally. Fourthly, it would be advisable 
to review the level of knowledge in each of the fields chosen by the Agency 
for its attention in order to avoid duplication and repetition. 
12. While recognizing that the Agency would henceforth be playing a further 
enhanced role in promoting the use of nuclear energy under optimum safety 
conditions, Belgium considered it feasible to achieve that without departing 
from the important principle of. zero real growth in the Agency's budget. By 
redeploying the resources available to the Agency, for instance by stretching 
some less urgent or more routine activities over, time, it should be possible 
to accommodate the new activities within the original budgetary provisions. 
The number of symposia and other meetings would have to be reduced in any case 
if the participation of experts of the highest standing and quality was to be 
secured, and the Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) missions requested by 
industrially developed countries should be paid for entirely by those 
countries. 
13. Finally, on the question of safety, he wished to associate himself 
entirely with the dual conviction expressed during the special session by the 
representative of the Commission of the European Communities, namely that the 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 7 


continued use of atomic energy would be acceptable only under optimum 
conditions of safety and protection of health and the environment, and that 
the European Community would be exposed to serious economic and political 
risks if that source of energy were to become unavailable. 


14. Recent events had underlined the Agency's essential role as an 
instrument for the exchange of experience, the elaboration of common 
regulations, the transfer of knowledge and technology, and the harmonization 
of activities. Nuclear development concerned all countries of the world. 
That was why his country was in favour of a revision of Article VI of the 
Statute as a whole, which would bring more equitable representation, within 
the Agency, of certain developing countries and of certain European countries 
which were very advanced in the nuclear field. 
15. Turning to the system of international safeguards, he noted with 
satisfaction that the Agency had again detected no anomaly indicating the 
diversion of a significant quantity of nuclear material for the manufacture of 
a nuclear explosive device. However, it was important to bear in mind both 
the political dimension and the voluntary nature of safeguards, the burden of 
which should be commensurate with that political dimension. In order to 
reduce the burden and to alleviate the constraints imposed on operators in 
Belgium, his country was co-operating with the Agency in perfecting the 
methods used for safeguards through its support programme and by other means, 
for example training courses for participants from developing countries. 
Moreover, Belgium was gratified to learn that the Soviet Union and China had 
joined other nuclear-weapon States which had accepted the principle of Agency 
safeguards being placed on certain of their civil nuclear facilities. That 
was of course only a symbolic gesture, but it constituted a step towards 
reducing the discrimination embodied in Article III, paragraph 1 of the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). However, the ultimate aim 
must be to apply safeguards to all civil nuclear activities world-wide, 
including those in non-nuclear-weapon States not parties to NPT and in 
nuclear-weapon States; the Agency's safeguards system could not be fully 
effective unless that condition were fulfilled. For the nuclear-weapon 
States, accepting safeguards on all their civil nuclear facilities would have 
a certain exemplary value, and meanwhile they should bear a larger proportion 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 8 


of safeguards costs. Finally, it was important to ensure that the same 
regulations for safeguards were applied to all commercial transactions, 
whatever the nuclear status of the countries involved. 


16. Turning to the subject of technical co-operation, he said that the 
general slowing-down of nuclear energy programmes throughout the world was due 
to the crisis affecting the economies of many countries, both developed and 
developing. However, in spite of that serious handicap, bilateral and 
multilateral co-operation efforts had been continued on a broad basis, as the 
nuclear co-operation agreements signed in recent years and the exchanges of 
scientists and trainees organized by the Agency with individual States' 
support showed. Belgium had participated in such co-operation to the best of 
its abilities and would continue to do so. 
17. The assistance offered to developing countries could easily be 
increased if the principle were accepted that those countries should be the 
main beneficiaries of the Agency's technical assistance. It was simply not 
fair that over 20% of the funds donated by States for technical assistance had 
in the past years been deployed for the benefit of countries which were not 
developing countries. 
18. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) said that the vital importance of the Agency's 
work had been emphasized following the tragic accident at Chernobyl. In that 
connection, Denmark strongly supported efforts made to establish internationally 
acceptable and binding rules on safety at nuclear installations in all 
Member States. Such rules should cover siting, design, construction, 
operation, decommissioning and radioactive waste treatment, and should be 
subject to verification by international safety authorities. 
19. He hoped that the forthcoming expert working group on nuclear safety 
would be successful in formulating additional measures to improve co-operation 
on nuclear safety and in identifying ways to refine nuclear safety standards 
to an even higher degree. 
20. The Agency's work in the field of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection was of importance both to countries with a nuclear power programme 
and to those not using nuclear power. His delegation was willing to accept 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 9 


the budgetary increase for 1987 resulting from the strengthening of the 
nuclear safety programmes. In coming years, however, the Agency should pursue 
a policy of zero real growth. 


21. Denmark agreed with the view that any country's energy policy should 
take account of its possible effects on the health and environment of other 
countries. In that regard, the siting of nuclear power plants, and 
particularly their distance from national borders or densely populated areas, 
was of major significance. In all such matters, there was a need for close 
co-operation between neighbouring States. 
22. Turning to safeguards activities, he noted with satisfaction that they 
had continued unabated. In principle, all nuclear facilities without 
exception should be subject to Agency safeguards, but his Government had noted 
with grave concern that there were five non-nuclear-weapon States, not party 
either to the Non-Proliferation Treaty or the Tlatelolco Treaty, in which 
unsafeguarded facilities of safeguards significance were known to be in 
operation or under construction. 
23. As to the financing of safeguards, Denmark held that all Member States 
should contribute, since safeguards were a collective responsibility of 
benefit to all countries. 
24. Denmark accorded great importance to the Agency's technical assistance 
activities, and accepted the target of US $34 million for voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1987, to 
which it had pledged its full share. 
25. In the spring of 1985 the Danish Parliament had requested the 
Government to organize public energy planning on the precondition that nuclear 
power would not be used in Denmark. It was therefore necessary to find other 
means of meeting the electricity demand. Approximately 97% of Denmark's 
electricity generation was based on coal in dual-fired or triple-fired power 
plants. In order to save energy, combined heat and power was used as 
extensively as possible, while desulphurization equipment was being introduced 
in power plants to protect the environment. Increased importance was to be 
given to indigenous energy resources, including natural gas and biomass. 

GC(XXX)/0R.288 
page 10 


Denmark also intended to step up its work in the area of energy conservation 
and energy efficiency and to pay more attention to the possibilities of 
renewable energy resources. 


26. In his statement during the special session, the Director General had 
mentioned Denmark's work with wind power. The 100 MW(e) which the electricity 
companies were planning to connect to the grid represented a significant 
increase in the use of wind power and a step toward a more complex energy 
mix. Although that initiative could not match the output of a nuclear power 
plant, it nevertheless contributed to the country's energy supply, and Denmark 
was confident that its experience in that field would turn out to its 
advantage when the world found itself once again confronted by a tight energy 
market. 
27. In conclusion, it was clear that safety and environmental problems 
related to nuclear power would demand a major part of the Agency's efforts in 
the years to come. In that connection, he was confident that the Agency would 
continue to make a brilliant contribution to international co-operation. 
28. Mr. 0MW0NY (Kenya) said that his Government intended to study 
carefully the two conventions on early notification and assistance adopted by 
the special session with a view to joining those Member States which had 
already signed them. The two conventions had been a result of the recent 
unfortunate incident at Chernobyl, and his delegation wished to take the 
present opportunity to extend its sympathy to the people who had been affected. 
29. With regard to the proposed programme and budget, he welcomed the 
increase in funds for technical assistance to developing countries. Kenya had 
received valuable assistance from the Agency, notably in the areas of 
agriculture, health and science. It had programmes on animal reproductive 
behaviour and on the sterile-insect technique, and was particularly grateful 
to the Governments of Sweden and Belgium for their assistance with the tsetsefly 
control programme. It had co-operated with the Agency in the fields of 
cancer treatment, nuclear medicine and radiation protection, and was now able 
to monitor more than 3000 radiological personnel. Moreover, the Kenyan 
Government had recently enacted into law the radiological standards which the 
Agency had assisted in formulating. The nuclear science laboratory also had 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 11 


continued to receive assistance from the Agency and had been able to provide 
valuable manpower for Kenya's nuclear needs. Finally, there had also been 
successful collaboration with the Agency in the fields of industrial 
technology and nuclear instrumentation. 


30. The Agency had always followed the recommendations made by the General 
Conference with regard to technology transfer in the nuclear field. In 
particular, seminars and training courses continued to be held in developing 
countries, and Kenya had been honoured to host seminars on analytical 
chemistry, radioisotopes and nuclear instrumentation. 
31. The Agency could not carry out its excellent work unless Member States 
met their financial commitments. His country had always remitted its assessed 
contribution, and would continue to do so in subsequent years. With regard to 
the vexed question of representation on the Board of Governors and Article VI 
of the Statute, Kenya hoped that the African Group's proposal for a modest 
increase by one in the number of designated Members for the region would be 
put into effect, since there had been general agreement that the region was 
underrepresented. 
32. Turning to the thorny issue of South Africa's nuclear capabilities, he 
said that developing nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes 
meant using them to improve human welfare. At the General Conference's 
request, the Agency had conducted negotiations with South Africa aimed at 
applying safeguards to that country's nuclear activities. However, the draft 
safeguards agreement which the Agency had presented to South Africa had not 
been accepted. Instead, that country's minority regime had diluted the 
Agency's draft to its own advantage, with the result that the Director General 
had now informed the Conference that he saw no useful purpose in pursuing the 
discussions with South Africa any further. Thus, South Africa had virtually 
refused to place its facilities under Agency safeguards, and it was difficult 
not to suspect that sinister motives might be behind that country's nuclear 
development. In the light of that refusal, therefore, he now called upon the 
Director General and Member States to make operative the full contents of 
General Conference resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/442. 

GC(XXX)/0R.288 
page 12 


33. The people of South Africa, black or white, had the same needs. His 
own country had experienced similar racial imbalance problems to those in 
South Africa, but had been able to overcome them, and so the people of Kenya 
could now work and enjoy life and the pursuit of happiness together. Under 
the policy of apartheid, however, the indigenous population of South Africa 
was being oppressed. That, in his country's view, was a misguided policy 
which could not bring peace to the world. Humanity must rise against racial 
barriers. There could be no human rights in South Africa without equality, 
there could be no equality without peace, and there could be no peace without 
love for human life. It was for those reasons that his delegation supported 
the draft resolution submitted by the African Group and urged all friendly 
nations also to support that resolution for the protection of humanity. 
34. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) said that the thirtieth regular session of the 
General Conference had followed the first special session, which had been held 
to discuss programmes that could be adopted to enhance international nuclear 
safety in the aftermath of the Chernobyl accident. The special session had 
ended successfully with the signing of two conventions - on early notification 
and on assistance in the case of nuclear accidents. 
35. The international community was following the present sessions with 
special interest and hope in view of the increasing importance of 
international nuclear safety and also in view of the adverse impact on public 
opinion of the accident, which had in fact led to a situation in which the 
acceptability of nuclear energy as a whole had become a matter of global 
controversy. 
36. Jordan considered nuclear safety to be a single integrated sphere of 
action with its own interlinked political, legal and technical parameters. 
International nuclear safety would therefore require measures related to 
technical and engineering procedures within the actual nuclear facility as 
well as a set of international conventions prohibiting attacks on nuclear 
facilities and ensuring an adequate flow of safety-related information at 
reasonable cost. 
37. The negotiated conventions on early notification and assistance in the 
case of a nuclear accident did not really represent an effective course of 
action to minimize incidents or eliminate the possibility of them as far as 

GC(XXX)/0R.288 
page 13 


accidents with transboundary consequences were concerned, but related more to 
procedures to be applied in accident management and control after the 
accidents had occurred. Hence they did not come up to the expectations of the 
international community. 


38. His delegation believed that the following points were more important 
in terms of nuclear safety and should accordingly be brought to the attention 
of the Conference: there was need for, first, the preparation and signing of 
international conventions prohibiting military attacks on peaceful nuclear 
facilities; second, the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones, with the 
Middle East receiving top priority; third, the application of international 
safeguards to the nuclear facilities of Member States behaving aggressively 
towards their neighbours - the latter point affected, in particular, Israel 
and South Africa, each of which had become a threat to neighbouring peaceful 
nuclear facilities as a result of their military potential, and both of which 
had refused to place their reactors under safeguards; fourth, a commitment by 
governments directly or indirectly exporting nuclear equipment and technology 
to non-nuclear countries that they would facilitate the flow of safety- related 
information throughout the life of any project, provided the flow of 
information was not an economic burden; fifth, participation by developing 
countries in international safety programmes and opportunities for their 
nationals to be trained and gain experience not only in managing nuclear 
facilities during normal operation, but also during emergencies; and sixth, a 
legal mechanism offering compensation in the event of nuclear accidents, based 
on the Conventions of Paris (1962), Brussels (1965) and Vienna (1970). 
39. It had been argued by some Member States that Geneva was the proper 
place for negotiating a convention prohibiting attacks on nuclear facilities, 
and not Vienna. His delegation's view was that the Geneva talks concerned 
matters of disarmament (mainly nuclear) and that countries other than the 
Superpowers had no access to such talks, even if they had nuclear reactors; 
that the final result of those talks, if successful, would have a direct 
bearing only on nuclear armament and had nothing to do with peaceful nuclear 
reactors; that the total destruction of a nuclear reactor, irrespective of 
the way in which it was destroyed, would turn it into a highly dangerous 
radioactive source, which was tantamount in practice to a nuclear weapon. In 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 14 


such an event, the safeguarded nuclear facility would be involved in an 
accident requiring assistance from the Agency and other States in conformity 
with the two conventions just agreed on. 


40. It might be wondered, in that connection, whether the Agency would have 
refrained from providing assistance or advice if the Iraqi nuclear reactor had 
been in operation at the time when it had been bombarded and destroyed by 
Israeli military action, on the basis of the argument that such was a matter 
for the disarmament talks? It was true, however, that the Agency was not 
expected to intervene in the event of war. In any case, it was clear that the 
matter of prohibiting attacks on peaceful nuclear facilities directly involved 
the Agency and its Member States, especially in the wake of the new 
conventions. 
41. The Director General's efforts to ensure a proper response to the 
General Conference resolutions calling for the nuclear facilities of Israel 
and South Africa to be placed under safeguards had not been successful. That 
fact was very much to be regretted. The Jordanian Government appealed to the 
General Conference to adopt the appropriate resolutions that would ensure that 
the nuclear facilities of those two States were subject to Agency safeguards, 
since the matter was one obviously related to international nuclear safety. 
42. His delegation wished to voice its concern with regard to the question 
of amending Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, now in its tenth year. The purpose 
of the amendment was not to enlarge the membership of the Board of Governors, 
but rather to rectify an unfair situation in which two large geographical 
areas - Africa and the Middle East and South Asia - were unfairly 
underrepresented. The modest change accepted by those two areas was for one 
additional Member for Africa and two more for the Middle East and South Asia. 
The proposal to amend Article VI as a whole would serve no useful purpose; it 
would in fact add to the difficulties already encountered. Jordan appealed to 
the General Conference to accept the amendment of Article VI.A.2, rather than 
the whole of Article VI. 
43. His country was quite satisfied with the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme and welcomed its expanded programme on nuclear safety. 
Technical assistance to developing countries had now started to show good 
results. During the seminar on that subject held during the present 

GC(XXX)/0R.288 
page 15 


Conference, Jordan had indicated the need to further develop the philosophy of 
technical assistance and the mechanisms by which it was applied with the 
object of improving the technological know-how and experience of the 
developing countries receiving it. It was hoped that programme would cover 
the training of staff, the improvement of regional co-operation and the 
creation of regional centres, in addition to a system for realistic evaluation 
and monitoring of projects so that they fitted into national nuclear plans on 
the basis of adequate finance and infrastructure in the recipient State. 


44. His delegation approved the Agency's Annual Report and Accounts 
for 1985, as well as the programme and budget for 198 7 and 1988, although it 
believed at the same time that the principle of zero growth could be a 
hindrance to its work and should therefore be discontinued. 
45. The developing countries were expecting positive results from the 
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCP1CPUNK), scheduled to take place 
in 1987. It was hoped it would result in the signing of a number of 
international agreements. His delegation believed that it was in the fields 
of power generation, industry, medicine, agriculture, geology and hydrology 
that nuclear technology could contribute the most to human progress. Progress 
of that kind could only be achieved through co-operation at all levelsbilateral, 
regional and international - and the Agency had in that respect a 
great deal of work ahead of it. The coming United Nations Conference would 
help to overcome some of the technical and legal obstacles standing in the way 
of progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
46. Mr. MESLOUB (United Nations Council for Namibia) said that the 
word "Namibia" summed up the image of a heroic fight against foreign 
domination and exploitation of humanity. The programme of action in the final 
document of the International Conference for the Immediate Independence of 
Namibia, held exactly two and a half months before, had opened with that 
affirmation by the international community. 
47. The Conference, inaugurated by the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations, had been attended by 121 governments as well as representatives from 
the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Movement of 
Non-Aligned Countries, and many others. The document adopted in July had 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 16 


further declared that the achievement of Namibia's independence had been 
frustrated by the intransigence of the apartheid regime as well as by the 
duplicity of certain members of the international community. Twenty years had 
passed since the United Nations had terminated South Africa's mandate over 
Namibia, but in spite of that long lapse of time racist South Africa had 
persisted in its illegal occupation of the country in violation of the 
relevant United Nations resolutions. 


48. The Secretary-General of the United Nations had stated in his current 
report that the most urgent outstanding problem of decolonization was that of 
Namibia. A week and a half earlier the General Assembly had concluded a 
four-day special session on the Namibian question, requested by the 
United Nations Council for Namibia, which was deeply concerned at the 
inordinate delay in the attainment of independence for Namibia. 
49. Being responsible for Namibia and also considering the evolution which 
had taken place with respect to Chapter XI of the United Nations Charter on 
non-self-governing territories, the Council was particularly disturbed by that 
delay in view of the fact that when, in 1966, the General Assembly had assumed 
responsibility for the territory, it was asserting the fundamental right of 
the people of Namibia to self-determination and independence. 
50. In its advisory opinion of 1971, the International Court of Justice had 
also endorsed the action taken by the General Assembly, declaring at the same 
time that States were under an obligation to recognize the illegality of 
South Africa's continuing presence in the territory and the invalidity of its 
acts on behalf of or concerning Namibia. The case against South Africa's 
occupation of Namibia and for the accession of the people of that territory to 
independence therefore rested on unassailable legal grounds. It had been 
confirmed by three major organs of the United Nations, each acting 
independently - the General Assembly, the Security Council and the 
International Court of Justice. 
51. In the efforts of the United Nations during subsequent years, 1978 was 
an important point of reference. After several years of intransigence on the 
part of South Africa, five Western members of the Security Council presented a 
set of proposals to it, designed to engage South Africa in a process of 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 17 


negotiation for its withdrawal from Namibia, thereby enabling the territory to 
accede to independence after free and fair elections. Those ideas were 
embodied in resolution 435 (1978), adopted by the Security Council on 
29 September 19 78. 


52. The Council for Namibia, like the South-West Africa People's 
Organization (SWAPO), had been doubtful about South Africa's intention to 
negotiate in good faith. Nevertheless, the Security Council's initiative was 
supported and it was expected that the five countries would exert all 
necessary pressure to force South Africa's co-operation in implementing the 
resolution and that, should South Africa not do so, they would not stand in 
the way of punitive action by the Security Council. 
53. In April 1981, the Security Council had met to consider the situation 
created by South Africa's continuing intransigence in respect of Security 
Council resolution 435 (1978). The Council had been asked to adopt a draft 
resolution imposing selective sanctions on South Africa for its defiance of 
resolution 435, but the draft resolution had been vetoed by three Western 
members of the Council. South Africa's persistent efforts to subvert 
negotiations aimed at implementation of resolution 435 and Western 
permissiveness regarding that intransigence had led to the convening of a 
special session of the General Assembly in September 1981. On that occasion 
the General Assembly had demanded the unconditional implementation of that 
resolution, it had also called upon all States to impose comprehensive 
mandatory sanctions against South Africa. 
54. Through the remarkable endurance and diplomatic skill of the 
Secretary-General, all outstanding issues pertaining to the implementation of 
the United Nations plan had at last been resolved, yet efforts to bring about 
the implementation of resolution 435 had again foundered on an issue that had 
first been raised by the United States: that of the prior withdrawal of Cuban 
troops from Angola, i.e. the concept of linkage. That was the pretext now 
being used by South Africa for maintaining the status quo in Namibia. Both 
the General Assembly and the Security Council had resolutely rejected the 
1inkage. 



GC(XXX)/0R.288 
page 18 


55. In the light of South Africa's demonstrated unwillingness to co-operate 
in the implementation of resolution 435, the debate on sanctions had grown in 
intensity over the years. The General Assembly, at the request of the 
United Nations Council for Namibia, had consistently called on the Security 
Council to impose mandatory sanctions against South Africa. There were two 
permanent members of the Security Council who had been preventing that body 
from responding. As recently as November 1985, those two States had used 
their vetoes to protect South Africa from the justified wrath of the 
international community expressed at that time merely in the form of a request 
for selective sanctions. 
56. Meanwhile, pending the implementation of mandatory sanctions, the 
Assembly had urged States to cease all political, military, economic or other 
assistance which they had been extending to the Pretoria regime. Many States 
which had continued to maintain relations with South Africa had demonstrated 
their willingness to exert increased pressure through legislative and 
executive action, including in one case a total trade boycott of South Africa. 
The Council for Namibia sincerely appreciated those efforts. 
57. However, while at the popular level there had been a categorical 
rejection on both sides of the Atlantic of the apartheid policies of the 
Pretoria regime, and while there had been enthusiastic support for sanctions 
at that level, South Africa's principal trading partners were still condemning 
apartheid while continuing to do business with the regime that practised it. 
58. Prime Minister Botha's efforts in that direction had been unmistakably 
clear. In June 1983, he had installed the so-called "interim government" 
which was an ad hoc alliance of conflicting political groupings whose only 
common factor was their opposition to SWAPO. Their high rhetoric 
notwithstanding, after one year in office they had made no move to abolish 
Proclamation AGS, the South African edict which formed the basis for the 
segregation of the territory's ethnic groupings. The racist regime, which had 
established so-called Namibia information offices in France, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
and the United States of America, had aimed at legitimizing its puppet 
institutions in Namibia; yet it had been condemned by the Security Council and 
the international community, which had demanded the immediate closure of those 
offices. 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 19 


59. To reinforce its position, the apartheid regime had also attempted to 
inject aspects of great power rivalry and elements of East-West confrontation 
into the Namibian independence struggle. The ideological dimension had been 
deployed to conceal the fundamental decolonization issue that was in reality 
involved. To bolster those pseudo-theories and misinformation use was made of 
ruthless force, internally within Namibia, and externally against independent 
States in the region of southern Africa. To hold down a population of 
1.5 million, the racist regime had deployed over 100 000 troops in the 
territory. The militarization of Namibia had served not only to suppress the 
majority of people within the territory but also as a launching pad for acts 
of aggression, subversion and cross-border terrorism against neighbouring 
States. The South African regime had used Namibian territory to provide 
logistic and other support to dissident groups in Angola to destabilize that 
sovereign nation. 
60. As a practical means of exercising its direct responsibility for the 
territory, the General Assembly had created the United Nations Council for 
Namibia to take over administration of the territory and prepare it for 
independence. The South African authorities had physically prevented the 
Council from entering the territory, but had not been able to impede political 
action in support of the struggle of the Namibian people. 
61. Through an extensive information programme, people in North America and 
Western Europe in particular had been made more aware of the struggle being 
waged for the liberation of Namibia, of the effects of South Africa's 
continuing illegal occupation of the territory, and of the manner in which 
those governments which were still co-operating with the Pretoria regime had 
contributed to the prolongation of that illegal occupation. 
62. In addition to mobilizing international pressure for South Africa's 
withdrawal from Namibia, the Council had financed and organized, through the 
United Nations Fund for Namibia, a large number of agricultural, health and 
educational projects for Namibian refugees which were carried out in close 
co-operation with SWAPO. The United Nations Institute for Namibia in Lusaka 
had continued to grow, had trained skilled manpower and conducted research 
into the policy-making and administrative needs of an independent Namibia. 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 20 


The assistance programmes had directly served the needs of thousands of 
Namibians who had fled their country and were struggling to cope with the 
material and psychological hardships of exile and statelessness. In addition, 
those programmes also equipped the future leaders and administrators of 
Namibia with the skills they would need to build up an equitable and 
productive society after independence. 


63. But all such efforts were essentially in support of those being exerted 
by the people of Namibia themselves under the leadership of SWAPO. Only 
recently a delegation of the Council had visited SWAPO settlements in Zambia 
following a similar visit to the camps in Angola the previous year. The 
community of action and purpose witnessed in those settlements personified the 
future society of a free Namibia. A systematic, synthesized development of 
all aspects of the human being - educational, vocational, cultural and 
spiritual - could be discerned in those settlements. 
64. In Cuanza Sul, in Angola, SWAPO administered a settlement providing 
shelter, food, education and vocational training for some 45 000 Namibian 
refugees. In Nyango, in Zambia, 5000-6000 Namibians had developed a similar 
community. Both Cuanza Sul and Nyango were equipped with schools, nurseries, 
day-care centres, clinics and hospitals. Both locations boasted agricultural 
and livestock projects providing a variety of foods for consumption by the two 
communities. Namibians were also engaged in weaving their own fabric and 
sewing clothes for the community. 
65. The group of eminent persons participating in the Vienna International 
Conference had issued a special appeal at that conference, the conclusion of 
which he wished to quote: 
"Our final remarks are addressed to the Namibian people who have made 
great sacrifices in their struggle against injustice and oppression. 
We appeal to them not to lose hope, but rather to summon new reserves 
of strength in the face of adversity. It would be comforting to 
believe that a good cause can triumph by dint of its inherent justice. 
That, however, would be illusory: history has shown that only 
sustained human effort can guarantee victory. If we redouble our 
determination, it cannot be long before the Namibian people finally win 
the freedom and independence for which they have struggled for over a 
century." 



GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 21 


66. What the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group had concluded earlier 
in 1986 regarding the apartheid regime in South Africa was equally valid in 
respect of that regime's attitude to Namibia. It concluded that South Africa 
was "not yet prepared to negotiate fundamental change, nor to countenance the 
creation of general democratic structures, nor to face the prospects of the 
end of white domination and white power in the foreseeable future". 
67. The final documents of the International Conference for the Immediate 
Independence of Namibia, held in Vienna from 7 to 11 July, the twenty-second 
regular session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the 
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the eighth conference of Heads of State 
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, and the fourteenth special session of 
the General Assembly on the question of Namibia, had all reiterated the call 
that comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the United Nations 
Charter were the most effective peaceful measures to ensure the compliance of 
racist South Africa with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations 
on the question of Namibia. 
68. The Council wished to see resolute action taken by the international 
community and appealed to the General Conference for the exertion of maximum 
pressure to force the Pretoria regime and its collaborators to cease their 
obstruction of progress towards Namibia's independence. 
69. The United Nations Council for Namibia wished to take the opportunity 
of thanking the Agency and its Member States who had supported the efforts of 
the Council in the discharge of its responsibilities. The Council also wished 
to reiterate its call to the Agency and its Member States to take all 
necessary measures to strengthen the co-operation between the Agency and the 
people of Namibia. In that connection he wished to stress the importance of 
the Agency in promoting and developing technical assistance projects prior to 
independence, during the transition period, and after the independence of 
Namibia. 
70. One of the main areas where the Agency should make an increased 
contribution was in training activities, which ought to be planned in a 
consolidated and comprehensive assistance programme, specifically designed to 
meet the needs of the Namibian people. 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 22 


71. The Council commended the efforts made by the Agency to assist the 
Namibian people through the Council's Nationhood Programme. What the Agency 
had done marked only the beginning and it was hoped that the programme would 
be substantially enlarged to meet the growing demands. In so doing the Agency 
would act in full accordance with the objectives contained in Article II of 
its Statute. 
72. Commending the efforts which the Director General had made over the 
last few years to increase the representation of developing countries in the 
Secretariat, his delegation wished to reiterate the interest of the 
United Nations Council for Namibia in seeing one or more Namibians recruited 
for employment by the Agency. At the moment the Council was reviewing 
potential candidates who would meet the requirements. 
73. In conclusion, he repeated the request addressed by the General 
Assembly to all specialized agencies that a waiver of assessment be granted to 
Namibia during the period in which it was represented by the United Nations 
Council for Namibia. He also hoped that the draft resolution to be submitted 
to the General Conference by the African Group regarding the situation in 
South Africa would be unanimously adopted. 
74. Mr. MWENDA (Zaire) said that the history of nuclear power now 
comprised two eras, i.e. pre Chernobyl and post-Chernobyl. It would 
henceforth be necessary to develop and market new, intrinsically safe types of 
reactor, incorporating passive safety measures on a huge scale. Indeed, in 
order to restore public confidence in nuclear power it had become essential to 
emphasize the qualitative aspect of nuclear safety, rather than remaining 
content with the quantitative aspects which were currently in fashion, in 
which connection he referred to probabilistic risk analysis (PRA). In other 
words, the philosophy of nuclear reactor construction based on "in-depth 
protection" should now give way to the notion of "inherent safety", which the 
public could better understand. 
75. Whereas in the pre-Chernobyl era safety was not a determining factor in 
the economic cost of nuclear power, it had now risen considerably in 
significance. It was no longer a question of constructing power reactors 

GC(XXX)/OK.288 
page 23 


which were economical while being reasonably safe, but rather of constructing 
reactors which were safe while also reasonably economical. That was the only 
way to ensure a credible future for nuclear power. 


76. His delegation hoped that the new spirit of international co-operation 
which had emerged since the accident would override that of confrontation 
which had characterized the Agency's debates on such matters as zero growth, 
the financing of technical assistance and the amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute. He appealed to all those concerned to take steps in that direction. 
77. Turning to his country's nuclear activities, he said that they had, on 
the whole, progressed satisfactorily in the traditional areas of research 
involving the use of radioisotopes as tracers and radiation sources. That was 
largely thanks to technical assistance received from the Agency, and he 
thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for their help and 
understanding. Ore prospection had suffered a halt in 1985, but it was hoped 
to recommence work in the near future. 
78. In conclusion, he wished to make three suggestions. First, given that 
the two conventions adopted by the special session clearly made it necessary 
for Member States either to initiate or otherwise step up monitoring of their 
environments, the Agency should, within the framework of its technical 
assistance programme, accord high priority to requests related to radiological 
monitoring of the environment. 
79. Second, the terms of reference of the small- and medium-sized reactor 
programme should be modified to include inherent safety aspects. It would 
thus become known as the "intrinsically safe small- and medium-sized reactor 
programme". That type of reactor represented the only chance of giving 
nuclear power a foothold in the majority of developing countries. 
80. Third, it would be highly beneficial if African countries receiving 
technical assistance and also severely affected by the current economic crisis 
could be freed from the requirement that 8% of the total amount received by a 
Member State be reimbursed to the Agency in the form of a contribution to 
local expenses. While Zaire appreciated the reasonableness of that 
requirement, which had been formulated in more prosperous times, it was now 
highly desirable that the often embryonic nuclear programmes of African States 
should not be further handicapped. 

GC(XXX)/0R.288 
page 24 


81. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece) said that the present session of the General 
Conference was taking place in the aftermath of the Chernobyl accident, which 
had been the most serious accident connected with the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Although the radiological impact of the accident in Greece was of 
relatively small significance owing to its distance from the reactor site, the 
economic and psychological impact on the Greek population could not be 
ignored. His Government was aware that, if such an accident were to happen 
within Greece or near its borders, the impact would be catastrophic for the 
country, which was relatively small. That indicated that the decision to 
exclude nuclear power from the Greek energy programme had been the right one. 
82. It was of course true that nuclear power now accounted for 15% of the 
world's electricity generation, and its contribution to technological progress 
was unquestionable. The time had perhaps come to start to investigate safer 
alternatives to meet Greece's energy needs in greater detail. 
83. Independently of the impact that the Chernobyl accident would have on 
the future of nuclear power, the safe operation of any existing nuclear power 
plant was of major concern to the population, even to those living outside the 
national borders of countries having such plants. 
84. Countries that had decided not to have nuclear power - and, 
consequently, had not developed programmes to cope with accidents - believed 
that the establishment of a minimum permissible distance for nuclear power 
plants from their borders was an urgent requirement. 
85. The Chernobyl accident underlined the need for increasing international 
co-operation on nuclear safety and on the mitigation of the consequences of 
accidents with power plants in operation. The role of the Agency in that 
connection should be expanded. 
86. The Chernobyl accident, with its radiological impact, had to some 
extent contributed to an understanding being gained of the gravity of the 
consequences of a nuclear catastrophe. The continuous efforts of the Greek 
Government, both independently and within the framework of a movement of six 
States, with a view to nuclear non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and 
peace in general are well known. 

GC(XXX)/0R.288 
page 25 


87. The Agency's safeguards role was its most significant activity, and its 
contribution to non-proliferation was a substantial one. He welcomed 
Albania's initiative in concluding a safeguards agreement with the Agency and 
also the conclusion of the agreement with the Soviet Union, under which it 
would place some of its peaceful nuclear installations under Agency 
safeguards. The conclusion of a voluntary-offer safeguards agreement with the 
People's Republic of China, the fifth nuclear-weapon State to sign such an 
agreement, was also important. However, it was a matter of grave concern that 
two Member States, Israel and South Africa, had not yet placed all their 
nuclear activities under international safeguards. 
88. Greece was both a donor and a recipient of technical assistance, and 
greatly appreciated the Agency's assistance with uranium exploration, research 
reactor safety and radiological protection, the development of radiopharmaceuticals 
and many other activities. 
89. In conclusion, he stressed his Government's wish to continue to support 
the Agency. Thus, Greece had already pledged in full its assessed share of 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1986. 
90. Mr. CHO (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) commended the 
Agency on its successful efforts in the past year to promote the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. His delegation attached particular importance to the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities, which had directly contributed to 
the solution of problems in the nuclear field in developing countries. The 
Agency's safeguards system, an effective tool in preventing the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, continued to make a positive contribution to man's 
struggle for peace. In view of the importance of that system, the Secretariat 
should make every effort to improve its effectiveness further. His delegation 
welcomed the statement in the Safeguards Implementation Report that in 1985 
the Agency had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the diversion of 
a significant amount of safeguarded material. 
91. The development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy could only take 
place under peaceful conditions. Having signed the Treaty on the 
Won-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, his country was endeavouring to 
transform the Korean Peninsula into a peaceful, nuclear-free zone. A 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 26 


statement to that effect had been made by his Government on 23 June 1986. 
Many national delegations, international organizations and eminent 
personalities that took part in an international conference on that subject 
held at the beginning of September in Pyongyang had actively supported his 
country's position and efforts in that direction. 


92. In order to satisfy growing demand for electricity, his country was 
currently undertaking preparatory work for the construction of a nuclear power 
plant. Consideration was being given to technical co-operation with the 
Agency and bilateral co-operation with other countries in that connection. 
93. Mr. CHUTHASMIT (Thailand) said that over the past year his 
Government and the Agency had enjoyed a good co-operative relationship. 
Thailand, which had been both contributor and recipient, had actively 
participated in many of the Agency's programmes through technical assistance 
projects, research contracts, seminars, meetings and study tours. He 
acknowledged with gratitude the recent decision by the Board of Governors to 
supply approximately 49 kg of enriched uranium for Thailand's research reactor 
from the special nuclear material donated by the United States of America. 
94. With Agency assistance, nuclear techniques had been successfully 
applied in a number of sectors, including agriculture, health, industry and 
research. His Government had, furthermore, recently taken a major step toward 
the commercialization of food irradiation by authorizing the Office of Atomic 
Energy for Peace to construct a pilot-scale irradiation plant for food and 
60 


agricultural products. The plant would have an initial loading of Co at 
100 kCi, and was due to be commissioned by early 1988. In the meantime, the 
Ministry of Health was, on the basis of the CODEX Alimentarius recommendations, 
revising rules and regulations to facilitate commercialization of 
food irradiation in the future. In addition, the Thai Atomic Energy 
Commission for Peace and the ASEAN (Association of the South East Asian 
Nations) Food Handling Bureau had jointly organized a successful workshop on 
food irradiation in November 1985. 


95. Turning to the Chernobyl accident, he extended his country's heartfelt 
condolences to the Soviet people on their irreparable losses. The prompt and 
timely actions taken by the Agency following the accident were very much 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 27 


appreciated, and he noted that nuclear power could only ensure health and 
prosperity to the world when it was used and controlled within the Agency's 
safety standards. 


96. Another of the Agency's functions was to ensure that the assistance 
provided by it or at its request or under its supervision and control was not 
used in such a way as to further any military purpose. In that regard, the 
Agency had accomplished a great deal. Since the entry into force of the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), not one State Party had been found to have 
used nuclear energy for other than peaceful purposes. As a peace- loving 
country and a State Party to the NPT, Thailand strongly supported all efforts 
by the Agency to increase the effectiveness of safeguards. 
97. With regard to the financing of safeguards, which had been the subject 
of debate and discussion for many years, if the present General Conference was 
unable to reach a consensus on that matter then Thailand felt that the present 
arrangement should be maintained for a further three or four years. 
Regardless of who should shoulder the lion's share of its cost, everyone 
agreed that the safeguards system must continue to exist if the climate of 
international confidence was not to be seriously impaired. 
98. In conclusion, Thailand would continue to value and support the 
Agency's purposes and would make every endeavour to assist it in putting them 
into practice. On behalf of his Government, he pledged a voluntary 
contribution of US $30 600 to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
99. Mr. ORDUZ (Colombia) said that the Conference was meeting in a 
climate of renewed optimism following the success of the previous week's 
special session. The unfortunate accident at Chernobyl had brought home the 
fact that countries must help each other and that the exploitation of the atom 
was a matter which concerned all mankind and not just countries possessing 
nuclear facilities. 
100. He was pleased to note that, in the Agency, attention was focused on 
the objective discussion of scientific and technical aspects of nuclear 
energy. His country had always defended the principle that the specialized 
international agencies should remain non-political in nature. Other fora 
existed where the international community could examine political issues. 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 28 


101. His delegation respected and supported the statement made in support of 
nuclear science and technology by the delegation of Japan, the only country 
which had suffered the horrors of nuclear explosions. 
102. Although Colombia had no nuclear power plants, it was not unfamiliar 
with the development of nuclear technology and, through the Institute of 
Nuclear Affairs, studied and kept abreast of progress in that field. Together 
with Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela, his country had initiated an Andean 
regional programme and had requested Agency assistance in 1981 for the 
introduction of nuclear techniques. Those countries had met in Bogota in 1983 
to set up projects on radiation protection, nuclear instrumentation, the use 
of radioimmunoassay techniques in animal health and production, and research 
reactor utilization. Subsequently, with the participation of other 
South American States, the ARCAL programme had been established. He requested 
the countries most advanced in those areas to lend all possible support to 
that programme. His delegation expressed its gratitude to the Agency for the 
major role it had played in those efforts. 
103. Finally, mention should be made of the International Physics Centre 
which was being set up in Colombia. The Centre, which was modelled on the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, would undoubtedly be 
of great benefit for all of Latin America. He urged the Agency and its Member 
States to give increasing financial and technical support for that initiative. 
104. Mr. VYLKOV (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance) said that a 
major step toward the further development of co-operation and economic 
integration among the CMEA member countries had been the adoption of a 
co-ordinated programme, lasting until the year 2000, aimed at scientific and 
technical progress in five priority areas, namely, electronics, integrated 
automation, nuclear power, new materials and technologies and biotechnology. 
The programme included scientific, technical and economic assistance by 
European CMEA member countries to Viet Nam, Cuba and Mongolia. The CMEA 
member countries were convinced that international co-operation must be 
directed only to peaceful ends and must be global in nature. The new 
programme fulfilled those peace-loving aims. 

GC(XXX)/OK.288 
page 29 


105. One of the main aims of the programme was the rapid development of 
nuclear power, which was now the most dynamically developing branch of the 
fuel-energy sector in the majority of CMKA member countries. Multilateral 
co-operation in that field had been considerably enhanced by a programme for 
co-operation on nuclear power stations and nuclear heat supplying stations to 
the year 2000, and also by specialization and co-operation on equipment 
manufacture and the joint study of a range of problems relating to the fuel 
cycle and environmental protection. Successful co-operation was favoured by 
the fact that in the majority of CMKA member countries the development of 
nuclear power was based on WWER (water- cooled and -moderated) reactors of a 
uniform design with capacities of 440 and 1000 MW. 
106. In 1985 a total of 26 WWER-440 units had been in operation in CMKA 
member countries, and by 1990 a further 20 units would be commissioned. 
Operating experience with those reactors had shown them to be more reliable 
and economical than plants using fossil fuels. The next stage of nuclear 
power development in CMEA member countries involved the wide scale 
construction of plants using WWER- 1000 reactors. Such plants were under 
construction both in the Soviet Union and in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and the 
German Democratic Republic. 
107. In 1984-1985 nuclear power plants with a combined capacity of 9900 MW 
had been commissioned in CMKA member countries. It had further been 
calculated that in a number of countries the share of electricity produced by 
nuclear power would by 1990 exceed 30%, while the total output of nuclear 
power plants in CMKA member countries would exceed 80 000 MW. 
108. Nuclear power also had a strategic role to play in the production of 
heat energy, which now accounted for approximately 40% of fossil fuel 
consumption. It was planned to introduce in the near future nuclear power 
stations incorporating limited heat output and also single-purpose nuclear 
district heating plants of 500 and 300 MW(t). 
109. On the basis of a joint programme for the rapid development of nuclear 
engineering, CMKA member countries had radically updated equipment production 
technologies, developed new materials and introduced improved quality control 
techniques, while production of over 140 items of main equipment for plants 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 


page 30 


with WWKR-440 and WWKR-1000 reactors was being carried out under a 
multilateral agreement on specialization, co-operative production and 
reciprocal deliveries. Thus, different CMEA member countries produced 
different parts and systems, with the Soviet Union producing practically all 


items of nuclear power plant equipment and exporting to member countries more 
than 50% of main equipment requirements. Practically every nuclear power 
plant now under construction in CMEA member countries stemmed from that 
agreement. 


110. CMEA countries had considerably strengthened their joint research and 
development efforts aimed at improving reactor safety and reliability, 
formulating promising reactor designs and furthering controlled thermonuclear 
fusion. They had also co-operated on the development and introduction into 
the economies of CMEA member countries of different aspects of nuclear 
technology. 
111. Particular attention was being paid by CMKA member countries to nuclear 
power plant safety. Computer techniques were foreseen for analysing accident 
sequences, while various member countries were studying hypothetical accidents 
and conducting research into burnout as applied to new types of fuel 
assembly. An experimental facility for modelling maximum possible accidents 
at nuclear power plants was now under construction. 
112. A programme had been prepared for co-operation on in-core diagnosis, 
including noise analysis, acoustic monitoring and other non-destructive 
techniques for determining the condition of material in equipment. 
113. With regard to environmental protection, CMKA member countries had 
developed a range of technologies for the processing and final disposal of 
radioactive wastes and for keeping radioactive releases into the atmosphere to 
a minimum. 
114. Given the ever- increasing levels of international nuclear co-operation 
and trade, and also the risks inherent in the use of nuclear power, it was 
vital that comprehensive technical standards be set up and observed. In that 
respect the Agency had a major role to play. Using Agency material, CMEA 
member countries had jointly drawn up over 40 normative documents regulating 
the construction and operation of power plants incorporating WWER-440 and 

GC(XXX)/OR.288 
page 31 


WWER-1000 reactors. That work was continuing with a view to covering all 
possible aspects of the use of nuclear power establishments, particularly in 
relation to the manufacture and quality control of equipment, the modelling of 
accident sequences and activities to localize and eliminate their effects on 
the environment. In that connection, CMEA member countries were working on a 
detailed study of the effect of nuclear power plants on the major ecological 
systems, part of which involved scientific expeditions to study levels of 
radioactivity in the River Danube and the Baltic Sea. Work was also being 
done on checking dosimetry equipment, unifying dosimetric techniques and 


strengthening the administrative and legal bases for monitoring the safe 
operation of nuclear power plants. 


115. In 1986 the CMEA member countries had proposed an increase in 
co-operation among all States on setting up an international regime for the 
safe development of nuclear power. In that regard, they advocated an enhanced 
role for the Agency, the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and were 
ready to make their contribution. He noted that the two conventions recently 
adopted by the special session of the General Conference formed part of the 
legal basis for the above international regime. 
116. Nuclear safety was inseparably linked with an end to material 
preparations for nuclear war. A major step in that direction would be to put 
an end to nuclear-weapon tests, while a radical solution to the problem would 
be the implementation of a programme for the full and general elimination of 
nuclear and other mass-annihilation weaponry by the end of the present 
century, as proposed by the Soviet Union in early 1986 and unanimously 
supported by the Warsaw Pact countries. 
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m. 



GC(XXX)/OR.289 
March 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 


on Thursday, 2 October 1986, at 10.20 a.m. 
President: Mr. RAMANNA (India) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


6 General debate and annual report 
for 1985 (continued) 1-69 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Ghana 
United Republic 
Spain 
Tunisia 
Philippines 
Paraguay 
Romania 
Cyprus 
Uruguay 
of Tanzania 
1-6 
7-15 
16 - 25 
26 - 35 
36 - 44 
45 - 51 
52 - 58 
59 - 62 
63 69 
8 Election of Members to the Board 
of Governors 70 76 
6 General debate and annual report 
for 1985 (resumed) 77-99 
Statements by the delegates of: 
YugoslaviaCommission of the European 
Communities 
77-86 
87 - 99 

[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 18 December 1986. 


[**] GC(XXX)/789. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/238/Rev.4. 
87-1244 
1103e/0110e 



GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1985 (GC(XXX)/7 75 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. AHAFIA (Ghana) said that the Agency had witnessed a historic 
event, which had highlighted the important role that it was called upon to 
play in a world where the inherent dangers of nuclear energy were very real, 
whatever the social and economic advantages of that source of energy. The 
work accomplished by the group of government experts which had drawn up the 
two international agreements adopted recently was remarkable. Even if, in 
some respects, they were not completely satisfactory, the two conventions had 
been signed by more than 50 States, which was an important step forward for 
nuclear safety. It was to be hoped that, in view of their evident 
shortcomings, the two conventions would be subsequently re-examined and 
modified to meet the legitimate concerns of many States - the problems of 
nuclear safety knew no boundaries. 
2. Ghana was continuing its programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. In food irradiation, the research stage had now been completed. The 
Agency had promised to supply a cobalt-60 irradiator for the pilot stage, 
while his Government would finance the building which was to house that 
equipment. A plant mutation breeding project was also under way, the main aim 
of which was to obtain new varieties of cocoa with better resistance to 
disease. Soil science studies were being conducted in an attempt to improve 
irrigation methods and the use of fertilizers. Efforts were likewise being 
made to eradicate riverine tsetse flies using the sterile insect technique. 
Mass rearing would make it possible to release flies in selected areas in the 
near future. Finally, projects relating to nuclear analytical techniques and 
nuclear medicine were being implemented and radiation protection services had 
been set up in the country's hospitals. 
3. Reports drawn up by the Secretariat indicated that nuclear power plants 
had produced about 15% of the world's electricity in 1985 and that that 
proportion was increasing. His delegation supported the Agency's activities 
in that area, particularly its nuclear power planning missions and training 
courses. It fully supported the recommendation that the Agency widen the 
scope of its assistance to developing countries by promoting additional 
studies likely to lead to improvements in the evaluation of planned nuclear 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 3 


power projects: developing countries needed to improve their specialized 
knowledge in order to develop their peaceful nuclear energy programmes. 


4. The question of the development of South Africa's nuclear capability 
should be taken very seriously by the General Conference which, at its 
previous sessions, had repeatedly referred to that potential threat. The 
Pretoria regime had ignored both the call to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in Africa and repeated demands that it should place its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. The safeguards system, although it could only be 
applied with the agreement of States, had raised many hopes and had helped to 
establish confidence with regard to disarmament problems; it was all the more 
regrettable that the Pretoria regime had rejected the recent overtures by the 
Agency relating to safeguards. In that respect, it should be recalled that 
that regime was maintained by certain Powers which encouraged it to defy 
General Conference resolutions. It was with the help of those allies that 
South Africa could pursue its policies, and, in particular, could continue its 
illegal exploitation of Namibian uranium. Ghana would actively support the 
proposals made pursuant to General Conference resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/442. 
5. The Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme was one of 
the most reliable means of promoting the Agency's activities in developing 
countries. It was satisfying to note that, although the growth rates had 
decreased, technical co-operation resources and disbursements had increased 
in 1985. Without wishing to prejudice the interests of other regions, Ghana 
would like to see an increase in the proportion of resources made available 
for Africa. As a demonstration of its support for the Agency's technical 
assistance programme, his country was pledging the equivalent of US $6000 in 
local currency to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
6. In conclusion, he stressed the importance of nuclear energy for 
developing countries wishing to ensure their social and economic development: 
that was why it was so important to strengthen the Agency's activities in that 
area. 
7. Mr. LYIMO (United Republic of Tanzania) said that the measures 
taken by the Agency following the Chernobyl accident and the speed with which 

GC(XXX)/0R.289 
page 4 


it had tackled the problems that had arisen had once again demonstrated the 
efficiency of the Secretariat and the co-ordinating role which the Agency 
could play in such circumstances. 


8. His delegation shared the view held by almost all Member States that 
nuclear power was indispensable for many countries, that each country should 
endeavour to attain the highest possible level of safety and that 
international co-operation in nuclear safety should be strengthened. 
9. His delegation believed that the two recently adopted conventions were 
very relevant to his country and to Africa in general in view of the presence 
of unsafeguarded nuclear facilities in a hostile neighbouring country, South 
Africa, and of the ignorance and under-development in the nuclear field of the 
States surrounding that country. 
10. The adoption in 1983 of the Protection from Radiation Act by the 
Tanzanian Parliament showed that his Government recognized the role of nuclear 
technology in the country's social and economic development and the importance 
of nuclear safety. His delegation thanked the Agency for having provided 
effective assistance to the National Radiation Commission in setting up a 
radiation protection service which was now monitoring the exposure of 
individuals to external radiation. Moreover, the Agency had helped to draft a 
code of good practice for radiation users. The Commission was now attempting 
to extend the service to the monitoring of internal exposure and the 
environment, an area to which the Tanzanian Government attached great 
importance following the Chernobyl accident. As a result of world tension and 
apprehension over the transboundary effects of nuclear accidents, Tanzania had 
turned to the Commission for guidance and advice, despite its immaturity. His 
Government therefore wished to receive additional assistance from the Agency 
and other international organizations in order to strengthen the role of the 
Commission so as to make it an effective governmental body with responsibility 
for safety. 
11. His delegation noted that the question whether the technical assistance 
and co-operation programme, which was essential to the social and economic 
advancement of developing countries, should be financed from the Regular 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 5 


Budget or from other comparable and assured resources, had not been settled. 
However, it welcomed the consensus which had emerged on an increase of 12% in 
the target for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund. Moreover, his country was following with interest the 
Agency's efforts to optimize its technical assistance programme. In that 
connection, the organization of a seminar on technical co-operation during the 
current session of the Conference demonstrated the Agency's desire to find the 
most cost-effective means of providing assistance to developing countries in a 
period of zero budgetary growth. 


12. The establishment in recipient countries of an official body with 
responsibility for managing Agency technical assistance projects was a 
prerequisite for the successful implementation of technical assistance. 
Developing countries should therefore be encouraged to adopt the necessary 
laws and to establish the relevant statutory bodies. 
13. His delegation noted with satisfaction the efforts made by the Agency 
to increase the number of courses, fellowships and short-term expert missions 
as well as the quantity of equipment supplied. It also welcomed projects 
aimed at strengthening regional co-operation. 
14. His country, which was at present experiencing a period of economic 
recovery, welcomed the support provided by the Agency for national research 
activities in the areas of agriculture, stockbreeding, health and hydrology 
and also for the nuclear physics unit of the Physics Department at the 
University of Dar es Salaam. Those activities would be increasingly 
successful with the expansion of the National Radiation Commission's services 
for radiation protection and the monitoring of internal exposure and the 
environment. 
15. With regard to safeguards, his delegation wished to reiterate its 
concern at the large number of advanced nuclear States which had not placed 
the majority of their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. That 
applied particularly to South Africa, which continued to receive technical 
support from other Agency Member States despite international pressure. As a 
result of that collaboration, it had acquired a nuclear capability over the 

GC(XXX)/0R.289 
page 6 


years. That situation could have serious consequences not only for 
neighbouring countries which had no nuclear technology and were not even 
Members of the Agency, but also for all of Africa and the entire world. In 


that context, his delegation welcomed the fact that Zimbabwe had joined the 
Agency and hoped that other countries would follow its example. The 
geographical position of Tanzania made it all the more urgent for the two 


conventions adopted recently to be implemented and for nuclear safety 
programmes to be expanded. In conclusion, his delegation was very concerned 
about safety in Africa in view of South Africa's refusal to discuss the 


application of full-scope safeguards on its territory and the rapid 


development of its nuclear capability. 


16. Mr. SUAREZ de PUGA (Spain) believed that the present session would 
mark a positive stage in the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy; the Agency had enhanced its reputation following the Chernobyl 
accident and had shown that it could play an important role within the 
international community. Spain, which would be a Member of the Board of 
Governors for three years, intended to make its mark in the following areas of 
the Agency's future activities, which it considered to be essential: the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while preventing the 
proliferation of non-peaceful activities; technical assistance to regions of 
the world which needed nuclear energy for their development and which lacked 
the necessary resources and technology; expansion of work on nuclear safety by 
strengthening the programmes and activities currently being implemented; and 
finally, the promotion of nuclear applications in the fields of medicine, 
agriculture, industry and research in order to further the health and 
well-being of humanity and to ensure the rational utilization of mankind's 
resources. He believed those four areas of activity fully justified the 
Agency's existence. As a Member of the Board, Spain would monitor with the 
greatest care the way in which the programmes in those areas were implemented 
for the benefit of all Member States. 
17. With regard to the Agency's technical co-operation programme, his 
delegation noted with satisfaction the progress achieved in training graduates 
from developing countries. The expansion and improvement of those programmes 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 7 


were essential and fully justified the efforts of the Division of Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation. 


18. The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was a prime concern of the 
Spanish Government. It believed that the Agency's work in that area was vital 
and would therefore always support the Agency's activities in that field. 
19. In the area of nuclear safety, his delegation had already stressed, 
during the special session, that the continuous improvement of plant safety 
was essential; the recent adoption of the two conventions, which Spain had 
actively promoted, thus constituted an important landmark in international 
co-operation in the nuclear field. He wished to reiterate his Government's 
view that prompt notification should be given for all nuclear accidents, 
whatever their origin. Nuclear safety should in future be given the 
importance which it deserved within the Agency and particularly in the Board 
of Governors, and the relevant programmes should be implemented in accordance 
with the new requirements. For its part, Spain would continue, mainly through 
its Nuclear Safety Council, to do everything possible to improve the safety of 
its nuclear facilities and to co-operate actively at international level. 
20. With regard to the Spanish programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, he noted that, in the nuclear power sector, the second unit of the 
Asco nuclear power plant (Tarragona), had been commissioned and connected to 
the national grid and had been operating at full power since March 1986; that 
power plant consisted of two PWR units each of 930 MW. In 1985, the newly 
installed capacity in Spain had reached 2584 MW, so that the total national 
installed capacity amounted to 41 486 MW by the end of the year: 
hydroelectric power accounted for 35.4% of that capacity, conventional thermal 
power for 50.6% and nuclear power for 14%. 
21. The construction of two new units, Vandellos II and Trillo I, was 
continuing and it was planned to commission them in a few years time. 
Electricity production had reached some 120 000 GWh in 1985, an increase of 
3.1% over 1984. Nuclear power was the area whose share of total electricity 
generation had increased the most rapidly, rising to 23.47o. Electricity 
demand had increased by 3.3% to reach 110 698 GWh, which was in line with the 

GC(XXX)/0R.289 
page 8 


forecasts of the national energy plan. Moreover, in 1985, improvement and 
refitting work had been satisfactorily carried out on two first generation 
nuclear power plants, Zorita and Santa Maria de Garofia. 


22. With regard to the nuclear fuel cycle, he noted that proven uranium 
reserves in Spain amounted to 31 500 tonnes of U 0 as of 
3 8 
31 December 1985, and production of U 0 had reached 237 tonnes in that 
3 8 


year. Furthermore, the fuel fabrication plant at Juzbado had commenced 


operation. 


23. Under the provisions of the Law on the Co-ordination and Promotion of 
Scientific Research, the Spanish Nuclear Energy Board (JEN) would henceforth 
be called the "Research Centre for Energy, the Environment and Technology" 
(C1MAT) and would continue its work on, inter alia, nuclear technology and 
radiation protection. As far as radioactive waste was concerned, the Waste 
Management Plan was almost ready and was due to be approved by the Government 
in the near future. 
24. An important event during the past year was the entry of Spain into the 
European Communities. A tripartite agreement was being prepared in order to 
establish a legal framework for safeguards. Spain had always considered that 
international co-operation was the best means of promoting the development of 
nations and mutual understanding and harmony among them. It would therefore 
continue to offer to co-operate with other countries as far as it was able in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Thus, in 1985, it had continued its 
technical co-operation activities by providing technical and scientific 
training for fellows and by providing expert services at the request of the 
Agency. It had also participated actively in the organization of Agency 
courses: one example was the international course on safety inspection during 
nuclear power plant operation held at JEN headquarters in Madrid in October 
and November 1985. 
25. In conclusion, it was essential for the Board of Governors to have a 
suitable composition if the Agency was to be fully effective, and the 
necessary modifications to the Statute should therefore be made. 
26. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) noted that the thirtieth session of the 
General Conference was taking place at a difficult time for international 

GC(XXX)/0R.289 
page 9 


political and economic relations and foe the development of nuclear power in 
the world. His country was keeping a careful watch on the development of the 
world energy situation and the prospects for using renewable energy sources. 


27. The economic crisis and its implications remained a major cause of 
concern to developing countries. The growing importance of nuclear power in 
world electricity production (6% in 1975 and 157. in 1985) could not hide the 
realities of different regions or the questions raised by the Chernobyl 
accident. The development of nuclear power remained very uneven in different 
parts of the world and only a small number of countries were operating power 
reactors. The economic crisis had seriously affected growth in energy demand 
and had thereby widened the gap between developing and industrialized 
countries. It was true, especially in Africa, that the obstacles which 
continued to hamper the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were 
associated not only with the cost of facilities, the organizational structure 
and restrictions in technology transfer, but also with a lack of the necessary 
qualified staff to ensure better management and greater nuclear safety. 
28. His Government had continued its efforts to introduce nuclear 
techniques in several vital areas, notably agriculture, industry, medicine, 
geology, hydrology and scientific research. Emphasis had also been placed on 
manpower training and on safety and radiation protection for all applications 
of nuclear techniques in the above sectors. With the Agency's assistance, 
regulations for the protection of workers against ionizing radiation would 
soon be promulgated. Finally, in the area of nuclear power planning, Tunisia 
had found the Agency's assistance very valuable and was grateful to the 
Secretariat for the quality of the assistance provided in 1985. 
29. Despite the positive results, for which the Agency should be commended, 
further efforts were required to meet the ever-growing needs of developing 
countries. It was true that constraints still hampered the development of the 
Agency's activities, but it was regrettable that in the area of technical 
assistance many projects submitted by States had not found the necessary 
financing. 
30. His delegation attached great importance to the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute and noted with regret that Africa 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 10 


remained the most unfairly represented region on the Board of Governors. In 
that connection, the African group was disappointed that the Board had still 
not recommended a solution to that problem, despite the fact that various 


informal proposals had been submitted since 197 7. Until a solution had been 
found, Africa would denounce an inequality which harmed its interests and 
encroached upon its rights. His delegation understood very well the 
aspirations of the group of western countries which had submitted a draft 
amendment to Article VI as a whole, and was in favour of the Hispano-Italian 
proposal[1] which aimed to correct the representation of the African region. 
Since it was essential to continue negotiations on that subject, his 
delegation, like others, requested the Board to set up a working group open to 
all Member States, without financial implications, in order to recommend to 
the General Conference at its next session a solution to the problem of the 


revision of Article VI as a whole. 


31. Tunisia, which was a party to NPT, considered the Agency's safeguards 
system to be an instrument which could promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Like all members of the international community, his country was 
concerned at Israel's disregard for the safeguards system, the credibility of 
which had already been seriously brought into question by that country's 
attack on the Iraqi nuclear reactor. With every day that passed, Israel's 
acquisition of a nuclear capability heightened the risk of nuclear weapons 
proliferation, and threatened not only the safety of all States in the region 
but also international peace and security. 
32. As far as the apartheid regime was concerned, it continued to defy all 
General Conference resolutions and to violate constantly the basic provisions 
of the Statute. South Africa continued to pillage uranium resources from 
Namibia - which it was illegally occupying - and had taken it upon itself to 
disrupt completely the negotiations conducted by the Director General. 
33. The attitude of Israel and South Africa gave Member States no choice 
but to reaffirm their determination to abide by the resolutions of the 
General Conference and to monitor their implementation. It was for the 
[1] Contained in the Annex to document GC(XXX)/780. 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 11 


Conference to decide what measures should be taken against South Africa under 
the Statute. 


34. The Agency's activities were appreciated by all Member States and it 
had an excellent reputation within the United Nations system. Both within the 
Agency and in other bodies such as the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy (UNCPICPUNE), 1987 would be characterized by the search for new 
political trends likely to promote further the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
for the social and economic development of the Third World. Tunisia would 
take part in those discussions, which it hoped would be fruitful. 
35. His delegation hoped that the Agency would remain a meeting place for 
the forces of good (the use of the atom in the service of science, progress 
and the well-being of humanity) against the forces of evil (the use of the 
atom for the fabrication of weapons of death and destruction). By means of 
genetic engineering, biologists had been able to transform microbes, bacteria 
and other fungi which were sources of disease into agents for the production 
of vaccines, enzymes and natural hormones for the good of humanity. In the 
same way, physicists had used the atomic nucleus in the service of progress 
and peace, and would continue to do so to an even greater extent in the future. 
36. Mr. LAVINA (Philippines) said that his country continued to attach 
importance to the Agency's work despite his Government's decision to halt its 
nuclear power programme. Chernobyl had confirmed the persistent fears about 
the dangers associated with the operation of nuclear power plants. His 
delegation shared the common concern for the adoption of effective safety 
measures through greater international co-operation. 
37. For that reason, the results of the first special session were 
encouraging. Two conventions had been drawn up in record time and signed by 
more than 50 delegations. Others had been unable to sign because their 
Governments had not had enough time to consider all the implications. His 
delegation had had to defer the signing of those conventions because, in 
addition to the lack of time, it had been decided to reconsider the operation 
of the country's only nuclear power plant and a constitutional commission was 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 12 


at present carrying out an in-depth analysis of the implications of other 
installations in the Philippines. However, once the doubts had been 
clarified, his country would be happy to become a party to the two conventions. 


38. In his speech, the Director General had indicated that one of the 
conventions would enter into force in the near future since three States had 
expressed their consent to be bound by it. While most delegations welcomed 
that development, his country believed that it might have been better to have 
adopted a more realistic formula for the number of States whose consent was 
necessary so that the number would be more representative of the international 
community and would include both nuclear and non-nuclear States. His 
delegation had joined the consensus on the final document and on the 
resolution concerning the follow-up to the conclusions of the special session, 
and urged all other delegations to consider seriously the problems contained 
in that resolution. 
39. His delegation approved the general direction of the expanded nuclear 
safety programme and was in favour of greater emphasis being placed on 
preventive rather than corrective measures. However, the financial 
implications of the programme should be examined further and an order of 
priority established for the activities in order to avoid having to spread the 
resources too thinly. His delegation particularly supported the expansion of 
the data bank of the power reactor information system which would enable the 
Agency to meet the information needs of Member States regarding facilities 
where problems might have occurred. Furthermore, the radiation dosimetry 
activities planned would help his country to provide accurate information on 
environmental monitoring. His country was also very interested in the efforts 
made jointly by the Agency, WHO, UNSCEAR, WMO and FAO and national health 
authorities to provide a set of reference methods for measuring key 
radioactive contaminants in environmental samples. It hoped that those 
organizations would be able to recommend, among other things, a set of 
international standards on intervention levels for various foodstuffs. 
Furthermore, since the Philippines continued to operate a research and 
training reactor, it would like to benefit from OSART and RAPAT missions and 
reiterated its interest in the promotion of probabilistic safety assessment. 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 13 


40. Much attention had been concentrated on activities relating to the 
operation of nuclear power plants, but other activities involving the transfer 
of nuclear technology were just as important: the applications of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, medicine, biology and health-related environmental 
research, for example, since those techniques had demonstrated that they could 
make a substantial contribution to the social and economic well-being of 
countries. Since the Philippines new national development policy gave 
priority to agriculture and to small- and medium-scale industries, the 
Agency's activities in those areas were of great interest. 
41. As far as the technical assistance and co-operation programme was 
concerned, the fact that 96.9% of the target fixed for 1985 for the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund had been reached and that the Fund's 
resources had increased by 13% over the previous year clearly demonstrated the 
value which Member States attached to the programme. For its part, the 
Philippines was very grateful for the generous support it had received since 
1959 under that programme. In that connection it also wished to thank the 
Government of the United Kingdom for the assistance it had provided to the 
Philippines in support of the latter's neutron activation analysis project. 
Furthermore, his delegation noted that net expenditure on the provision of 
technical assistance had increased slightly in 1985 as compared to 1984, even 
though aggregate net expenditure in 1985 had been slightly lower than 
in 1984. In that connection, it welcomed the Secretariat's efforts to 
evaluate the programme so as to make better utilization of the resources and 
to rationalize programme implementation. 
42. As a member of the Group of 77, the Philippines fully supported 
technical co-operation between developing countries under the Caracas 
Programme of Action. It welcomed the contribution to the implementation of 
that programme made by the Agency through its technical co-operation 
activities, particularly in the prevention of food losses, the development of 
high-yield varieties and pest control, as well as the support given to 
regional co-operation, as illustrated by the regional co-operation agreement 
for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) and the regional co-operative arrangements for 
Latin America (ARCAL). 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 14 


43. With regard to the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1985, his 
delegation noted with satisfaction that, as in previous years, the Secretariat 
had not detected any diversion or misuse of safeguarded nuclear material or 
facilities. As far as the financing of safeguards was concerned, it was 
regrettable that agreement had not yet been reached on a more predictable and 
more stable system. The Philippines believed that safeguards were of interest 
to all Member States and should be strengthened. However, any new system of 
financing would have to take into account the level of development of nuclear 
power programmes in the countries concerned and their financial resources. 
44. As far as the amendment of Article VI of the Statute was concerned, his 
delegation reaffirmed its support for the principle of universality in the 
Agency, which should be reflected in an equitable representation of Member 
States on the Board of Governors. The first task, therefore, was to try to 
remedy the under- representation of the regions of "Africa" and "Middle East 
and South Asia", before examining any proposal to increase the representation 
of other regions. Furthermore, his delegation felt that the developing 
countries should be better represented on the Professional staff, the numbers 
of their nationals being brought into proportion with the number of developing 
States Members of the Agency. 
45. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said that in 1985 the National Atomic Energy 
Commission had continued with its programme, the main objective of which was 
to develop the necessary infrastructures to stimulate the use of nuclear 
techniques in the production and service sectors, in order to contribute to 
the economic and social development of the country, in particular in the areas 
of health, industry, agriculture, stockbreeding and mining of radioactive ores. 
46. In the current difficult times, pressing needs were felt in all 
sectors, and the situation could become irremediable if those needs were not 
met. It was up to the leaders to seek actively, in a calm and responsible 
manner, the most rational way of emerging from crisis and meeting the 
country's development needs. 
47. For its part, during its 20 years' existence, despite a pronounced lack 
of interest in most of the private sector, the National Atomic Energy 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 15 


Commission had accumulated rich and varied experience with that end in mind. 
Regulations relating to the use of radioisotopes and ionizing radiation as 
well as specific radiation safety standards had been adopted. The Commission 
had signed bilateral agreements with the Argentine, Brazilian and Chilean 
authorities and had established institutional links with international 
organizations such as the Agency and the Organization of American States, 
through the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission and the Tlatelolco 
Treaty; it had received substantial technical, scientific and economic 
assistance from those organizations in the form of equipment, fellowships and 
expert services, from which its own departments and centres were endeavouring 
to derive maximum benefit. From the time of its establishment, the Commission 
had subscribed to that form of co-operation because it gave everyone access to 
nuclear science and technology, particularly in the areas of medicine and 
nuclear power, and because it provided a means of propagating and 
strengthening knowledge through the transfer of experience and technology 
under the auspices of the international organizations. 


48. The various departments of the Commission had organized several 
training courses for Paraguayan staff, and a specialized nuclear library 
affiliated with INIS had been set up within the Department of Training and 
Scientific Exchange. The reform currently being carried out in the 
departments should make it possible to regroup their experience within a 
nuclear centre, the plans and justification for which had been submitted to 
the President of the Republic: the centre was expected to be built as soon as 
the economic situation permitted - according to plan in the Chaco, as part of 
the development and promotion of that region. The reform in progress would 
enable the National Atomic Energy Commission to exercise official control over 
all nuclear activities. 
49. The Commission had benefited from its regular participation in the 
meetings of the policy-making organs and the scientific and technical meetings 
of international organizations such as the Agency, the Organization of 
American States and the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission. At regional 
level, the present co-operation procedures marked a considerable improvement 
over the previous system. The Commission had joined the regional co-operative 

GC(XXX)/0R.289 
page 16 


arrangements for the promotion of nuclear science and technology in Latin 
America (ARCAL), in the hope of exchanging experience and scientific and 
technical knowledge with other member countries. Under those arrangements, 
Paraguay had been given the responsibility of holding a very important meeting 
on X-ray fluorescence analysis. Therefore, instead of being dependent, as had 
previously been the case, on the goodwill of friendly countries, the 
Commission was now in a position to exercise the rights and fulfil the 
obligations associated with Paraguay's status as a member country of ARCAL and 
to benefit from the technical assistance offered by that organization in the 
form of equipment, fellowships and expert services - in return for a financial 
contribution by the Paraguayan Government. That was why the Commission aimed, 
above all, to consolidate its gains and to ensure that its statutes were 
observed - for those constituted the only instrument which could guarantee its 
unity and enable it to occupy - with the economic support it deserved - its 
rightful place in society as a depositary of the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy. 


50. During the past year, the Commission had been engaged in intensive 
international co-operation on both the multilateral and bilateral levels. It 
continued to benefit from Agency assistance in the form of equipment, 
fellowships, expert services and scientific visits. Also thanks to the 
Agency, staff from the Commission as well as experts at the National 
University of Asuncion and from private enterprise had received intensive 
training which was expected to enable the country to attain the technical and 
scientific maturity without which it would be unable to develop its nuclear 
applications programme. The Commission had taken an active part in the work 
of regional organizations such as the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission 
and ARCAL, and had enjoyed fruitful bilateral co-operation with the Argentine 
National Atomic Energy Commission leading to concerted action - particularly 
in the granting of fellowships - and to the organization of intensive training 
courses for scientific staff. The Commission's participation in the courses 
and conferences which had taken place in different countries of Latin America 
had also proved to be profitable. Furthermore, it had been represented by its 
Chairman at the twenty-ninth session of the Agency's General Conference, at 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 17 


the joint meeting held by the countries of the Rio de la Plata Basin and 
countries in the Andean region with a view to establishing ARCAL, and at the 
meeting of the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission which had taken place 


in Buenos Aires from 7 to 11 April 1984. 


51. At national level, the Commission had given its support to 
organizations such as the Institute for Research in Health Sciences, the 
Cancer Institute and the Faculties of Chemistry, Agronomy, Veterinary 
Sciences, Physics and Mathematics. On 23 August 1984, the preliminary plan 
for the Chaco Nuclear Centre had been submitted to the executive authorities 
through the Ministry of External Relations, accompanied by several proposals 
relating to its location and a general report on the project, with the request 
for a political decision at the highest level and a firm commitment to 
implement it. The project offered a good example of how efforts could be 
concerted and focused on solving national problems such as the social, 
economic and political development of Chaco. Mention should also be made of 
the co-operation between the Commission and the United Nations Office 
regarding the implementation of projects. The Commission had concluded an 
arrangement with the National Cancer Institute providing for collaboration in 
the training of scientific staff for the new cancer hospital - likewise 
designed to handle patients suffering from burns - which was equipped with a 
gamma camera. Finally, through the intermediary of its Department of 
Biomedical Nuclear Applications, the Commission had, with the Agency's 
assistance, set up several radiation protection and dosimetry laboratories. 
52. Mr. IONESCU (Romania) said that the General Conference was taking 
place at a time when international relations were marked by particularly 
serious tensions, which made it absolutely necessary to halt the arms race, to 
adopt specific disarmament measures, including nuclear disarmament, to 
renounce the use of force and threats in international relations, to rely on 
negotiations for the solution of contentious problems between States, to find 
global solutions to problems of underdevelopment - particularly the problem of 
the foreign debt of developing countries - and to set up a new international 
economic order. The President of the Socialist Republic of Romania had 
recently stressed that Romania was in favour of holding an international 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 18 


conference under the auspices of the United Nations in which all developing 
countries and developed countries would participate on an equal footing, the 
principal aim being to draw up a series of conventions to promote, in 
particular, the advancement of backward countries while ensuring the 
harmonious development of the world economy. 


53. Romania, supporting as it did all efforts to increase the contribution 
of science and technology to the economic and social development of countries, 
wanted the Agency to play a still greater role in strengthening and 
diversifying international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, promoting the unhindered transfer of nuclear technology, and securing 
the safety of facilities and nuclear activities as well as the protection of 
the population, property and the environment against radiation. 
54. His delegation felt that the Agency's programme, and its budget for 
1987 and 1988, could reflect even more clearly than they did the increasing 
role of the Agency and its contribution to the solution of certain essential 
problems which were of particular interest to Member States, such as nuclear 
energy, the strengthening of operational safety at nuclear power plants, the 
increased use of nuclear methods in industry, agriculture and medicine, 
radiation protection, the training of experts in all those areas, and 
technical assistance. 
55. The nuclear safety programme should include studies aimed at the 
development of extremely safe reactors, analysis of the safety of current 
power reactors with a view to improving their operational safety, revision of 
the Agency's safety standards to meet new requirements, the updating of 
standards governing quality assurance and control in the nuclear field, the 
preparation of standards for the decontamination of nuclear facilities 
following a nuclear accident, the preparation and implementation of training 
programmes for different categories of personnel and support for developing 
countries in setting up environmental radioactivity monitoring networks. 
56. With regard to the proposed budget for 1987, his delegation remained in 
favour of strict economy, the most rational utilization of resources and 
personnel possible and the reduction of administrative costs and expenditure 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 19 


on safeguards. For that reason, his delegation believed that the budget for 
the coming year should be lower than that of the current year. 


57. Under its social and economic development policy, Romania was 
implementing programmes related to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy programmes 
designed above all to satisfy the growing energy needs of the 
national economy. Thus, for the construction of the Cernavada power plant the 
country had had to assimilate different manufacturing techniques and had 
itself produced a lot of equipment and materials. A large network of research 
and engineering institutes had provided assistance for those activities in an 
attempt to solve certain essential problems related to the design of nuclear 
facilities and their operational safety. 
58. In conclusion, his delegation welcomed the good relations which existed 
between Romania and the Agency and expressed the conviction that in future the 
Agency would contribute still further to the strengthening of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
59. Mr. PAPADEMAS (Cyprus) said that the way in which the Agency and 
the whole international community had reacted following the tragic accident at 
Chernobyl was praiseworthy, but one might legitimately wonder whether it would 
really have been necessary to wait until such a disaster had occurred before 
taking preventive measures and adopting the conventions on early notification 
and assistance in the event of an accident. It was to be hoped that the 
Chernobyl accident would really serve as a warning to anyone who might be 
cherishing the hope of victory in a nuclear war. Likewise, it was to be hoped 
that the ban on nuclear tests would be definitive and that a treaty on the 
reduction and final elimination of nuclear weapons would become a reality in 
the near future. 
60. The adoption of the two conventions by Member States was a success for 
the Agency which should stimulate yet more resolute and rigorous action to 
promote the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Cyprus would 
sign and ratify those conventions as soon as the necessary domestic 
formalities had been fulfilled. 
61. As in the previous year, his delegation approved the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation programme, which enabled small countries with 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 20 


limited resources to benefit from major technical advances in the areas of 
medicine, agriculture, water conservation and the protection of the 


environment. 


62. In conclusion, his delegation regretted, with regard to the staffing of 
the Secretariat, that the just representation of the developing countries 
within the Secretariat, requested regularly in General Conference resolutions, 
was not coming about as rapidly as had been anticipated. A number of Member 
States were still not represented among the Secretariat staff, although they 
had competent personnel. His delegation hoped that that situation would be 
remedied in the near future. 
63. Mr. COSTANZO (Uruguay) recalled that his delegation attached great 
importance to nuclear energy and that, in order to improve the effectiveness 
of its programme in that sector, it had set up a Directorate of Nuclear 
Technology, which was attached to the Ministry of Industry and Energy. That 
body was responsible for implementing the policies and plans drawn up by the 
National Atomic Energy Commission, which advised the executive authorities and 
co-ordinated relations with the Agency. 
64. His Government hoped to collaborate more and more closely with the 
Agency, particularly in the areas to which all developing countries had to 
give priority if they wished to ensure the well-being of their populations. 
Thus, assistance in agriculture would be particularly welcome because it would 
enable Uruguay to derive the greatest possible benefit from the knowledge 
already acquired. It was also important to develop collaboration between 
countries for the greater benefit of all, and, that being so, the regional 
co-operative arrangements for the promotion of nuclear science and technology 
in Latin America (ARCAL) were fully supported by the competent authorities in 
Uruguay. 
65. Mankind was undoubtedly faced with a dilemma: either it must control 
the elements which its genius had released, or those elements would rapidly 
lead to its destruction. The efforts which it should make in that direction 
could be individual - as in the case of Mahatma Ghandi - or collective, as 
should be the aim of the General Conference. In both cases, a balance should 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 21 


be sought between the two dreams of mankind: the need to know and the desire 
to use. And in that uncertain adventure there could be no actors and 
spectators, masters of technology and passive subjects: the hopes and fears 
were the same for all. 


66. That was why the Agency's universality was a principle which became 
more vital each day - a fact which Uruguay welcomed. Whether one belonged to 
a rich or to a poor country, whether one had technology or not, the principle 
of the sovereign and inalienable equality of all States, of all mankind, must 
not be forgotten; recent events had again demonstrated the validity of that 
principle. The Agency should give priority to everything relating to control, 
safety and safeguards mechanisms, to compensation for damage suffered by 
innocent victims, and his delegation hoped that the Agency's work would be 
increasingly effective so that humanity could make use of the forces of nature 
without running the risk of annihilation. 
67. As a small country, Uruguay fervently hoped that the General Conference 
would conduct its work successfully. Uruguay was determined, for its part, to 
support all positive actions and to oppose anything which might be detrimental 
to peace between peoples of goodwill. 
68. The PRESIDENT proposed that the Conference suspend the general 
debate in order to take up item 8 of the agenda, "Election of Members to the 
Board of Governors". If there were no objections, he would take it that 
consideration of item 6 was suspended and that the Conference was ready to 
proceed with the election of Members to the Board of Governors. 
69. It was so decided. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXX)/790) 


70. The PRESIDENT recalled that, to ensure that the Board would be 
constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute, the General 
Conference was required to elect 11 Members to places on the Board for the 
geographical areas specified in paragraph 2 of document GC(XXX)/790. 
71. Since the seat for the Middle East and South Asia region was the only 
one for which there were several candidates, he proposed that a secret ballot 
be conducted for that seat only and that Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure of 
the General Conference be suspended for the remaining elective places. 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 22 


72. Mr. KHLESTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said his 
country could not support the President's proposal. 
73. The PRESIDENT said that it would therefore be necessary to conduct 
a secret ballot to elect 11 Members to the Board. 
74. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members to the Board of 
Governors. 
75. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Danish delegation 
and a member of the Polish delegation acted as tellers. 
76. The PRESIDENT, noting that the counting of votes would take some 
time, suggested that consideration of item 6 of the agenda be resumed in the 
meantime. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT B'OR 1985 (GC(XXX)/7 75) (resumed) 


77. Mr. KRSTIC (Yugoslavia) said that the General Conference was being 
held at a time when, despite the new opportunities offered by scientific and 
technical development, the economic gap between the developing and developed 
countries continued to widen, thus becoming one of the most glaring 
contradictions of the contemporary world. That was one of the grave concerns 
facing the developing countries, and particularly the non-aligned countries, 
which at their recent eighth summit conference in Harare had considered ways 
of remedying the situation and had expressed their resolve to struggle for 
peace and the democratization of international relations. 
78. In the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the point had been reached 
where there was no longer any question whether nuclear energy should or should 
not continue to be used to meet the energy requirements of many countries, 
since some simply had no choice. Yugoslavia attached great importance to that 
source of energy both for electricity production and for its other 
applications, and was at the same time striving to ensure a very high level of 
safety. It was currently preparing an energy programme which would draw on 
all available energy sources, including nuclear power. 
79. Much had been said about the Chernobyl accident and its overall 
consequences. The public had expressed justified concern not only about the 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 23 


effects of the radioactive fallout produced but also about other uses and the 
future development of nuclear energy in general. There were other 
consequences, too. In its trade with certain countries, Yugoslavia had, for 
example, faced unjustified unilateral restrictions which had caused it 
considerable damage. All of the above highlighted the need for further 
regulation of international relations in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
The two important international conventions which had just been adopted were a 
first step in that direction. The Agency had and would continue to have a 
very important role to play in those efforts, a role which his country 
supported. 


80. His delegation had noted a further improvement in efficiency in many 
of the Agency's activities in the past year. While his delegation in 
principle favoured a zero-growth budget, it was clear that the maintenance of 
the budget at the same level for several years had considerably reduced the 
Agency's room for manoeuvre and that the Agency had now exhausted its internal 
resources. The intensification of international co-operation made the 
Agency's task more complex and its role more important. His delegation had 
always supported that view, particularly in the preparations for the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE). 
81. His country had long maintained that the Agency should perform all its 
duties with the same degree of commitment and efficiency. In that connection, 
it endorsed the Director General's view that placing greater emphasis on a 
particular activity or activities should not be taken as indicating less 
interest in other sectors. 
82. His delegation also wished to express its satisfaction at the 
successful co-operation between Yugoslavia and the Agency in various peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. Each year his country hosted several Agency meetings 
and contributed in many other ways to its activities. It would be the first 
to accept a visit from an Analysis of Safety-Significant Events Team (ASSET) 
towards the end of the year. His country also intended to contribute its full 
share to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1987. In the 
course of 1986, Yugoslavia had ratified the Convention on the Physical 

GC(XXK)/OR.289 
page 24 


Protection of Nuclear Material, which it hoped would soon enter into force, 
and had also joined the Agency's Incident Reporting System. 


83. The aftermath of the Chernobyl accident had shown that the 
intensification of international co-operation was not only necessary - that, 
in fact, had always been so - but also possible, and one might well ask why 
such an accident had to occur before that was realized. The accident simply 
confirmed what many knew already, namely that radiation recognized neither 
international borders nor ideological or political differences. Consequently, 
no nuclear technology, whether it originated in the north, south, east or 
west, could claim to be absolutely accident-proof. Co-operation on safety 
should therefore begin at the stage when technology was being developed. 
84. The special session of the General Conference had successfully rounded 
off the first phase of international activities in the field of nuclear safety 
and had resulted in an abundance of useful proposals, ideas and suggestions 
for future action at national and international levels, what was even more 
important and encouraging, however, was the determination expressed at the 
special session to continue working in the same spirit and atmosphere as had 
prevailed during the drafting of the two conventions. His country supported 
efforts to settle outstanding international issues since those were essential 
to future rational and productive co-operation in the field of nuclear 
energy. The amount of work awaiting the Agency, the Board of Governors and 
the international community as a whole was therefore great, but expectations of 
the public in particular - were perhaps even greater. 
85. He wished to express what he hoped was unjustified disappointment at 
the fact that, throughout the above intense activity aimed at improving and 
strengthening international co-operation, little mention had been made of 
UNCP1CPUNE. That Conference was the largest forum available for studying and 
perhaps implementing one or more important phases of work relating to the 
promotion of international co-operation in many aspects of the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, including safety. The objectives of that Conference and 
the possibilities it offered should not be forgotten, rather the best use 
should be made of the last stage of the preparatory work, which was due to 
begin shortly. 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 25 


86. Finally, he wished on behalf of his Government to thank the United 
States and the Federal Republic of Germany for having provided additional 
resources to finance some of his country's footnote-a/ projects. 
87. Mr. AUDLAND (Commission of European Communities), recalling that 
EURATOM was safeguarding large quantities of nuclear material in about 
600 installations in the twelve countries of the Community, wished to raise 
the question of safeguards co-operation between EURATOM and the Agency and of 
some of the broad safeguards problems facing the two organizations. 
88. The EURATOM safeguards system had, of course, been designed to meet the 
requirements of the Treaty of Rome, under which EURATOM was established, but 
it had been agreed from the start that the principles of the system should be 
compatible with the Agency's Statute which had at that time just been 
approved. The two safeguards systems were indeed compatible. However, at the 
time of the negotiation of the NPT, the Community had to decide whether 
changes to its system were required in view of the fact that its 
characteristics differed from those of the Agency system. Those differences 
arose because the Agency system was a world-wide and not a regional one. It 
was not supranational but was instead based on contractual relationships 
between the Agency and each State concerned. Unlike the EURATOM system, it 
did not extend to ores. Also, it did not include more specific obligations of 
the type contained in the Community's agreements with certain key supplier 
States. Lastly, it had no provision for sanctions. 
89. The Community had decided that it should not rely on the Agency's 
system alone. That would have given rise, inter alia, to problems regarding 
the Community's agreements with supplier States, since the latter had imposed 
safeguards obligations on EURATOM which went beyond those provided for in the 
three agreements with the Agency. That Community decision had made it 
necessary to arrange for the co-existence of the two systems, since their 
unco-ordinated application would have resulted in unacceptable burdens on 
nuclear operators in the Community. It would also have deprived the Agency of 
the advantages of the Community's supranational safeguards system. The two 
organizations had therefore established close working relations which were 
currently governed by three agreements: the agreement between the Community, 

GC(XXK)/0R.289 
page 26 


the Agency and the nine non-nuclear-weapon States, signed in 1973; the 
agreement between the Community, the Agency and the United Kingdom, signed in 
1976; and the agreement between the Community, the Agency and France, signed 
in 1978. As the Director General had mentioned in his statement, the 
Community was now proposing that a fourth agreement be concluded between 
Spain, the Agency and the Community. The agreements were all supplemented by, 
inter alia, subsidiary arrangements and facility attachments. The operation 
of those agreements was monitored on the one hand by the Board of Governors of 
the Agency, and on the other by the Commission. It was monitored in more 
detail through frequent meetings of the EURAT0M/1AEA liaison committees, which 
were supplemented by many other meetings at different levels between the two 
organizations. 


90. The aim of those different arrangements was to ensure that the 
agreements were implemented effectively, an aim which was being achieved. In 
the field of safeguards, EURATOM enjoyed increasingly close and extensive 
co-operation with the Agency, co-operation which could and should be further 
strengthened in the years to come. That co-operation now covered the whole 
gamut of safeguards activities. It started with the development and 
harmonization of safeguards strategies for different types of installation, 
and continued with the development of the necessary instruments, the 
conclusion of arrangements for applying safeguards to particular sites and the 
joint planning of the inspections themselves. In addition, good co-operation 
existed in the actual performance of inspections, which were conducted 
simultaneously and sometimes jointly, thereby limiting any inconvenience to 
operators. Although the inspectors reached their own independent conclusions, 
the close co-operation that existed meant that those would normally be very 
similar. 
91. The first question he had asked himself upon taking up his present 
position was whether the safeguards systems of EURATOM and the Agency were 
succeeding in their allotted tasks, which had much in common. In both cases, 
the most important task was to detect within a defined period of time any 
diversion of nuclear materials from the purpose for which they were intended. 
Like all those with extensive knowledge of that question, he had rapidly 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 27 


concluded that, thanks to a great deal of hard work by many people over many 
years, the two safeguards systems afforded a reasonable degree of assurance on 
that crucial point. 


92. In safeguards, however, one could never rest on one's laurels. New 
challenges were constantly arising. There was first the quantitative 
challenge resulting from the enormous expansion of the use of nuclear energy. 
Within the Community, for example, the amount of plutonium under EURATOM 
safeguards had risen from 18 tonnes at the end of 1975 to 98 tonnes a decade 
later. It should be remembered that the inspectorates must know where every 
gram of plutonium was to be found at any moment. There was also the 
qualitative challenge. The industrial processes to which nuclear materials 
were subjected were becoming more and more complex, thereby complicating the 
work of the inspectors, who had to adapt continuously to technological 
progress. 
93. There was yet another challenge: public opinion, at least within the 
Community, was becoming increasingly demanding with regard to safeguards. 
Formerly, the public had seemed prepared to accept, without asking many 
questions, that safeguards inspectorates were serious and conscientious bodies 
which were fully aware of what was happening, and that all was well if those 
inspectorates felt able to declare, perhaps once a year, that they had not 
detected any anomaly in the use and movement of nuclear materials. In the 
Community, that was no longer so. In discharging its duties, the safeguards 
service increasingly had not only to satisfy itself that safeguards were 
effective, but also to be able to demonstrate to the public in a much more 
specific way than previously that that was indeed the case. 
94. Particularly since 1979 when it was directly elected for the first 
time, the European Parliament had constantly been asking for more and more 
information on safeguards. While in the whole of 1980 only one parliamentary 
written question had been addressed to the Commission on the subject of 
safeguards, as many as 33 had been submitted in the first half of 1986 alone. 
The same trend could be observed in the parliaments of several Community 
Member States. The media were also taking a greater interest in safeguards. 
To meet the increased demand for transparency, the Commission had decided in 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 28 


future to publish an annual report on the operation of the EURA.TOM safeguards 
system in which it would attempt to give a more detailed insight into that 
subject, while of course respecting the confidentiality of specific data which 
was essential for many reasons, in particular to facilitate proper physical 
protection. 


95. On a quite different point, he had been struck by the importance and at 
the same time the difficulty of introducing new instrumentation into 
safeguards activities. Such instrumentation was needed for two reasons: on 
the one hand to improve knowledge, if possible, about flows of nuclear 
materials, and on the other to prevent the number of staff from increasing in 
direct proportion to the expansion of the nuclear industry. Hence there was a 
constant need for new instrumentation, both for the measurement or containment 
of nuclear materials and for the surveillance of the operation of nuclear 
facilities. 
96. Operators - and they were not alone in that respect - were inclined to 
have a split personality regarding safeguards. In principle, they welcomed 
safeguards because they knew that, for nuclear energy to develop, the public 
must have reasonable assurance not only about health and safety matters, which 
had been examined by the General Conference the previous week, but also about 
the safeguarding of nuclear materials and the prevention of the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. But operators were human. Hence their welcome in 
principle was often accompanied by a large number of questions addressed to 
the safeguards authority in order to determine whether particular aspects of 
safeguards operations were really essential. Inspectorates must always be 
ready and willing to explain themselves both to operators and to the public. 
97. Turning to another aspect of safeguards methodology, he noted that, as 
nuclear installations became even more sophisticated, it became increasingly 
important for safeguards requirements to be taken into consideration right at 
the start of the design stage. Only in that way could the inconvenience of 
safeguards to industry be kept to a minimum. That was not easy to bring 
about, however, since safeguards requirements could too easily be overlooked 
or regarded as secondary in relation to other important considerations such as 
operational safety and reliability, ease of maintenance, economy and the 
minimization of the radiation exposure of persons during normal operation. 

GC(XXX)/OR.289 
page 29 


98. One conclusion emerged clearly from those thoughts on the relationship 
between safeguards authorities and the safeguarded operator: the former must 
redouble their efforts to explain themselves directly to the latter. That was 
exactly what EURATOM was doing. 
99. In closing, he wished to pay a tribute to the inspectors, and not only 
to the EURATOM inspectors whom he knew well, but also to those of the Agency 
whose work he held in high regard. Inspectors spent up to half of their 
working life away from home. They travelled to installations which, however 
exciting to visit once or twice as a "nuclear tourist", could prove difficult 
to tolerate in the long term because of differences in language, culture and 
climate. Moreover, by the very nature of their work, inspectors were in a 
state of friction with those with whom they had professional dealings - the 
operators and national authorities. They were thus permanently exercising a 
quasi-diplomatic function and had been doing so in an effective and 
circumspect manner for many years, without compromising the essential 
principles of safeguards. The fact that there had been few serious 
difficulties with those subject to safeguards demonstrated the soundness of 
the procedures used to select, train and motivate that group of men and women, 
but it was above all a tribute to the skill, tact and devotion of the 
inspectors themselves. They had performed and were continuing to perform an 
international service of the highest order, and for that they deserved to be 
thanked. 
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m. 



GC(XXX)/OR.290 
International Atomic Energy Agency May 1987* 
GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 2 October 1986, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. RAMANNA (India) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** Paragraphs 
8 Election of Members to the Board of 
Governors (resumed) 1-17 
7 The Israeli nuclear threat 18 - 60 

[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 15 October 1986, 
[*] GC(XXX)/789. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/233/Rev.4. 


87-1288 
0840e/0128e 



GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 2 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXX)/790) (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of 
the voting. 
2  The result of the election of three Members from the area of Latin 


America was as follows: 
Abstentions: 28 
Valid votes: 257 
Required ma.iority: 43 
Votes obtained: 
Brazil 92 
Chile 71 
Panama 3 
Venezuela 91 

3. Having obtained the required majority, Brazil, Chi le and Venezuela were 
elec ted to the Board. 
4. The result of the e! Lection of two Membe srs from the area of Western 
Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 187 
Required majority: 47 
Votes obtained: 
Ireland 93 
Switzerland 94 


5. Having obtained the required ma.iority, Ireland and Switzerland were 
elected to the Board. 
6. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Eastern 
Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 89 
Required ma.iority: 45 
Votes obtained: 


Bulgaria 89 



GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 3 


7 Having obtained the required majority, Bulgaria was elected to the 
Board. 
8

 The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was 


as follows: 


Abstentions: 10 
Valid votes: 180 
Required majority: 46 
Votes obtained: 


Madagascar 88 


Nigeria 91 


Zambia 1 


9. Having obtained the required majority, Madagascar and Nigeria were 
elected to the Board. 
10. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 21 
Valid votes: 73 
Inval id votes: 1 
Requii red majori tY: 37 
Votes obtained: 


Islamic Republic of Iran 26 
Iraq 47 


11. Having obtained the required majority, Iraq was elected to the Board. 
12. The result of the election of one Member from the area of South East 
Asia and the Pacific was as follows: 
Abstentions: 7 
Valid votes: 87 
Invalid votes: 1 
Required majority: 44 
Votes obtained: 


Thailand 87 



GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 4 


13. Having obtained the required majority, Thailand was elected to the 
Board. 
14. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Africa or of 
the Middle East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific was as 
follows: 
Abstensions: 7 
Valid votes: 88 
Required majority: 45 


Votes obtained: 


Iraq 6 
Saudi Arabia 82 


15. Having obtained the required majority, Saudi Arabia was elected to the 
Board. 
16. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, 
recalled that under Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold office from 
the end of the current session until the end of the thirty-second regular 
session of the General Conference, i.e. for a period of two years. 
17. He thanked the delegations of Denmark and Poland, which had provided 
tellers, the two tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistants. 
THE ISRAELI NUCLEAR THREAT (GC(XXX)778, GC{XXX)/792) 


18. The PRESIDENT informed delegates that there had been many 
difficulties in the course of the consultations among delegations on the item 
under discussion, and reminded them that the Agency had acquired a reputation 
for solving problems in a business-like manner through consultation and 
consensus. Delegates should bear in mind that certain parties would seize any 
opportunity to malign nuclear energy as a force that was evil rather than 
constructive, and delegates should not play into their hands in any way. 
19. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) pointed out that no consultations had taken 
place that might have imparted to the draft resolution (GC(XXX)/792) the 
definitive form required for a decision to be taken on it. 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 5 


20. The PRESIDENT expressed the view that the problem required informal 
consultation, and that formal amendments would at the present be inappropriate. 
21- Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the resolution under 
discussion was new, having nothing to do with the attack on the Baghdad 
reactor or the Israeli threat to peaceful nuclear installations in general. 
Those matters had been debated and had been the subject of a number of 
resolutions. 


22. The resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/792 concerned the military 
nuclear threat posed by Israel's nuclear weapons manufacturing capacity. His 
delegation considered Israel to represent a nuclear threat, among other 
reasons because it was the only Middle East State whose Nuclear Energy 
Commission was attached to its Ministry of Defence; it hid its nuclear weapons 
manufacturing capacity under an innocent-looking disguise. It had to be 
remembered that Israel had accepted no Agency safeguards. Israel had annexed 
the territory of neighbouring countries, had been branded as a racist State by 
the United Nations, and was in continuous conflict with its neighbours. The 
Middle East had been a theatre of war five times in the previous 40 years, and 
there could be no guarantee of peace until Israel had withdrawn from the 
territories it had occupied and annexed. 
23. The wars of 1973 and 1982 had once again focused international 
attention on the Middle East area as one fraught with danger. Israel's 
acquisition of a military nuclear capacity had turned the Middle East into an 
area of nuclear imbalance which might lead to a conflagration in which the use 
of nuclear weapons could not be ruled out. The consequences for the region 
and for the world might be of the utmost gravity. The Syrian delegation 
therefore called upon Member States to do their utmost to avoid such a 
conflagration and while recognizing that the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXX)/792 did not represent an ideal solution, commended it to 
delegates as a step in the right direction. 
24. The first paragraph of the operative part of the draft resolution 
affirmed the necessity of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East; resolutions to establish such zones had been adopted by the 
United Nations in the past, and Syria was in favour of the creation of as many 
as possible. 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 6 


25. The second operative paragraph demanded that Israel submit all its 
nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards; the principle motivating that demand 
was one of service to peace and security in the region and in the world as a 
whole, and had been accepted by the Security Council, the General Assembly of 
the United Nations and the General Conference of the Agency. 
26. The third operative paragraph called upon all States to discontinue 
co-operation with and assistance to Israel in the nuclear field until the 
latter complied with the provisions of the draft resolution; that paragraph 
was designed to prevent Israel's nuclear potential from being reinforced, and, 
as a consequence, to limit Israel's capacity to wage nuclear war. 
27. Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the operative part contained the procedures 
necessary to monitor the situation and to ensure that the resolution was 
implemented, which alone would bring relief from the threat posed by Israel's 
nuclear capability. 
28. The Syrian delegation called upon all delegates to be present at the 
vote on the resolution; by so doing, they would buttress the principle of full 
democracy within the Agency. 
29. Mr. CONSTENLA UMANA (Costa Rica) recalled that the General 
Conference, in its recent debate on measures to strengthen international 
co-operation in nuclear safety, had carried out its work in a spirit of 
collaboration with scarcely a discordant note being heard. Furthermore, the 
discussions had contained nothing which might be considered alien to the 
objectives of the Agency. 
30. The Costa Rican delegation reflected that, in the discussion of draft 
resolution GC(XXX)/792 on the other hand, clear divisions of a political 
nature could be observed. His delegation wished to remind the Conference that 
the International Atomic Energy Agency was intended to be an international 
forum for dealing with the peaceful uses of atomic energy, not with matters of 
a political nature, for which the appropriate venue was the General Assembly 
of the United Nations in New York. 
31. It was, of course, the right of every State to call for the discussion 
of items affecting its vital interests; however, the subject matter of draft 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 7 


resolution GC(XXX)/792 lay outside the competence of the Agency. His 
delegation therefore deplored the fact that an item on which so much time had 
been spent at previous sessions of the General Conference should again appear 
on the agenda, and likewise deplored the resulting diversion of effort which, 
were it directed into its proper channel, might benefit the many millions 
still suffering, at the end of the twentieth century, from hunger and want. 


32. Mr. PKLEG (Israel) also regretted that a number of States should 
have proposed to occupy the limited time of the General Conference by bringing 
up extraneous political matters. The culmination of that manoeuvre was to be 
found in draft resolution GC(XXX)/792, whose irrelevance was already evident 
in its preamble, which relied almost entirely on a series of purely political 
resolutions adopted by various organs of the United Nations and whose subject 
matter did not lie within the mandate of the Agency. He wished to list a 
number of specific aspects of the draft resolution and its contents to which 
his delegation particularly objected. 
33. Firstly, as he had said, the issue was political and did not pertain to 
the functions of the Agency which would be prejudiced if the draft resolution 
were adopted. Second, the issue was being raised again for no cogent reason. 
The Secretary-General of the United Nations had stated in his reports to the 
General Assembly on the subject of "Israeli nuclear armament", contained in 
documents A/38/199 in 1983 and A/39/435 in 1984, that he "has received no new 
information in this regard and consequently has nothing to add to his earlier 
reports to the General Assembly on this subject". Furthermore, the 
Secretary-General's reports A/36/431 in 1981 and A/40/520 in 1985, which were 
cited in the draft resolution under discussion, had not indicated any nuclear 
threat. 
34. Third, Israel was singled out by the draft resolution in an 
unacceptable manner. Some of the sponsors, Saudi Arabia for example, were not 
parties to NPT, while others, Syria and Tunisia for instance, had not 
concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency pursuant thereto. A number of 
the sponsors had also vitiated the legal standards of behaviour recognized by 
the international community; an example was the proven recourse by Iraq to 
chemical warfare, and in that context it was to be noted that Syria was also 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 8 


developing a chemical warfare capability. Libya's search for nuclear weapons 
on the world market should likewise not be forgotten. Those countries, 
therefore, maintained one standard for themselves and advocated another for 
Israel. 


35. Fourth, it was to be feared that the introduction of politically 
motivated items would create a dangerous precedent for the Agency. Many of 
the Agency's Member States were not party to NPT and did not accept full-scope 
safeguards; among them were various countries with proven scientific and 
technological capability. Those States might not at present be the target of 
demands such as those contained in the draft resolution, but that situation 
could easily change to their disadvantage. 
36. Fifth, with reference to preambular paragraph (g) of the draft 
resolution, he wished to emphasize once again that Israel rejected apartheid 
and neither did it co-operate with South Africa in the nuclear field. It was 
the declared policy of the Government of Israel to reject and condemn 
apartheid as a system, whether political, social or economic. 
37. Sixth, membership of the Agency and the acceptance of safeguards had no 
link under the Statute; the Agency had been established on the basis of the 
sovereign equality of all its Members, and the General Conference could not 
require Member States to accept full-scope safeguards which the Statute itself 
did not impose. In addition, States which did not themselves accept 
safeguards could not reasonably demand that others should do so. 
38. Seventh, as provided in Article III.A.5 of the Statute, the conclusion 
of a safeguards agreement was a voluntary act by a State; every Member State 
had the right to decide for itself which safeguards agreements it wished to 
conclude with the Agency. 
39. Eighth, the exhortation contained in operative paragraph 3 of the draft 
resolution, which called upon all States to discontinue co-operating with 
Israel in the nuclear field, was contrary to Article III.A.l of the Statute. 
Once again, the sponsors of the draft resolution were attempting to convert 
the Agency into a weapon of political warfare. 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 9 


40. Ninth, Israel affirmed the necessity of establishing a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the Middle East, along the general lines of the Tlatelolco 
Treaty, and Israel's statements, voting record and initiatives were conclusive 
evidence that that was its genuine desire. Israel regretted that its 
proposals to that end had been rejected by a number of Arab States, most 
significantly by Syria and Iraq. It was his delegation's opinion that the 
international community would better serve the cause of non-proliferation by 
persuading the bellicose Arab States which had sponsored the draft resolution 
to commence direct negotiations on a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
41. It was obvious that the draft resolution was yet another low attempt to 
turn the Agency into an additional instrument of political warfare against 
Israel. The international opposition to previous similar exercises was a 
clear expression of the wish of many Member States to do without manoeuvres of 
that kind, and the adoption of another anti-Israel resolution could not serve 
the cause of peace or any positive purpose. Instead of political 
irrelevances, adoption of full-scope safeguards had a specific role to play in 
a regional non- proliferation regime freely arrived at by the States concerned 
and negotiated by them in good faith. 
42. His delegation called upon the General Conference not to repeat a 
useless and potentially damaging debate on an irrelevant issue, but instead to 
stay within the context of the Agency's Statute. The Chernobyl incident 
presented problems of substance and urgency, and it would be in the interest 
of all countries, and not of Israel alone, for the Agency not to be distracted 
from matters of such importance. The efforts of Member States should be 
directed towards ensuring that no further extraneous issues were raised at 
sessions of the Agency's policy-making organs. The Israeli delegation 
therefore urged all delegations to reject the draft resolution, and requested 
that each operative paragraph be voted on separately. 
43. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that Israel's objection to the draft 
resolution on the grounds of its irrelevance was an attempt to deny facts 
which proved that Israel was violating international law. The threat posed by 
Israel was real, and of that there was more than adequate proof. Statements 
emanating from the highest levels in the Ministry of Defence of that country 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 10 


indicated that Israel had the capacity to, manufacture nuclear weapons, and 
intended to do so. Many sources outside,Israel had even furnished evidence 
that Israel had already .fabricated a substantial .number of such weapons. Yet, 
other sources indicated that Israel had installed medium-range nuclear weapons 
on the Golan Heights and elsewhere, in addition to its substantial capacity in 
terms of launch vehicles. Reports.from the United States and Europe had 
indicated that Israel might be capable of manufacturing,laser devices. 


44. In the face of Israel's proven nuclear potential, the fears of its 
neighbours were quite legitimate. For that reason those neighbours were 
calling upon the States Members of the Agency to protect them, and although 
some States might try to conceal their, real policies by arguing that the 
Agency was, not a political forum, there was in fact no doubt at all about how 
the Agency should proceed. In the light of the above considerations the Iraqi 
delegation called for full support for the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXX)/792 of which it was a sponsor. . 
45. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) regretted the need to speak 
yet again on a subject which had been discussed repeatedly for five years. 
The draft resolution contained in document'GC(XXX)/792 was totally 
unacceptable to the United States delegation and he urged that ,it be 
rejected. It was, contrary to the assertion made,by the delegate of Syria, 
not a new resolution and was no different from previous equally unacceptable 
ones. That that was so could be shown by a glance at the operative 
paragraphs, some of which were identical to those contained in previous draft 
resolutions representing an attempt to press a regional political issue in a 
totally inappropriate international forum. 
46. It was also claimed that the issue was now one of safety, but no 
genuine.safety feature, such as those discussed at the Chernobyl post-accident 
review, was involved in the present case. If Israel represented a military 
threat, then that threat was the same as it had been in previous years. If 
the proposal were really for establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, why 
was it focused on one country only? The proposal would need reshaping so as 
to be of general application and would have to include such highly relevant 

GC(XXX)/0R.290 
page 11 


matters as verification procedures and so on. Finally if what was at stake 
was peace in the region in question, then referral to the Security Council was 


the correct procedure. 


47. His delegation wished to make it quite clear that if the item under 
discussion continued year after year to waste the Conference's time thanks to 
its irrelevance, then the United States would be forced seriously to consider 
changing its long tradition of firm support for the Agency. The draft 
resolution was discriminatory, disruptive and detrimental to the proper work 
and to the image of the Agency, serving only to keep alive a moribund issue. 
48. He accordingly urged all delegations to reject the draft resolution in 
the name of good sense and to avoid damage to the Agency and to the United 
Nations system as a whole. 
49- Mr. THOMPSON (Ireland) said that, although his delegation 
considered the existence of unsafeguarded facilities in a Member State to be 


an appropriate subject for debate by the General Conference - the prevention 
of nuclear proliferation being one of the Agency's principal objectives - and 


could therefore support a summons to Israel to submit all its installations to 


safeguards, his delegation could nevertheless not accept the draft resolution 
under discussion. There were at least five Members of the Agency which 
operated unsafeguarded nuclear facilities and several of those States appeared 
to fall into the category mentioned in preambular paragraph (h) of the draft 
resolution in having the capacity to produce material usable for nuclear 
weapons. Ireland remained deeply committed to the view that all those 
countries could be persuaded, within the framework of their membership of the 
Agency, that their best interests would be served by placing all their 


installations under Agency safeguards. His Government, however, objected to 
one member of that group being singled out for special condemnation in a 
manner least likely to achieve the overall objective of a universal safeguards 
regime. 


50. Mr. HIREMATH (India) recalled that in his opening statement the 
President had urged delegates.to avoid discussions of a purely political 
nature, especially those with no direct bearing on the peaceful uses of 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 12 


nuclear energy. According to its Statute the main purpose of the Agency was 
to increase the contribution of nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. However, it was sometimes necessary to discuss 
political matters since developments of a political nature could hamper the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. That situation was well illustrated by the 
explanatory memorandum on the item under discussion submitted by Syria and 
circulated as document GC(XXX)/778. It was stated therein that, since 
Israel's policies had led to an escalation of tension and had threatened peace 
and security in the region, and since Israel continued to occupy territory 
belonging to other countries and had even launched attacks on sovereign States 
as far away as Iraq and Tunisia, Israel's growing nuclear capability 
constituted a serious threat in proportion as it increased that country's 
capacity to destabilize or dominate the region. 


51. India had in 1947 and 1948 accepted Resolutions 181 and 194 of the 
second and third sessions of the General Assembly of the United Nations, and 
had thus acknowledged the existence of Israel as a State. Nevertheless, 
India's position was that Israel must withdraw from all Arab and Palestinian 
territories occupied by it, including Jerusalem, restore the inalienable 
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to a national State, 
and recognize the PLO as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian 
people. Unless those conditions were met, peace could scarcely be ensured in 
western Asia. India was therefore sympathetic towards the demand made by the 
Arab countries to impose a certain measure of international discipline on 
Israel's nuclear capability, and considered that the draft resolution 
sponsored by the Syrian and other delegations could form a basis for such 
action at international level. 
52. It had been said that it would be invidious to make distinctions 
between Israel and other States in the matter of safeguards, and that if 
safeguards were to be applied to Israel's nuclear facilities, then they should 
also apply to the facilities operated by its neighbours. India accepted that 
principle, and if full-scope safeguards were accepted by everyone, no one 
would be more pleased than his Government. However, such was not the case, 
and with certain Governments pursuing unjust policies either towards some of 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 13 


their own people or towards their neighbours, discrimination in nuclear 
matters could be justified. In that connection he recalled the declaration 
made by the Heads of State or Government at the recent summit meeting at 
Harare, strongly condemning the growing co-operation between the racist 
regimes of South Africa and of Israel and noting the similarity of the 
repressive policies practised by both. The Heads of State or Government had 
therefore called upon all States to refrain from co-operating with the regimes 


in Pretoria and Tel Aviv in the nuclear field, seeing in such co-operation a 
threat to international peace and security; they had also referred to the 
resolutions adopted by the fortieth session of the General Assembly 
recondemning the continuing nuclear collaboration between Israel aned South 
Africa and deploring the grave consequences for international peace and 


security of those two States' collaboration in developing nuclear weapons and 
delivery systems. 


53. In the light of those considerations, the Indian delegation supported 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/792. 
54. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that the establishment of 
nuclear-weapon-free zones - however noble an aim - did not fall within the 
mandate of the Agency. The matter should therefore be discussed in an 
appropriate forum, such as the Committee on Disarmament or the General 
Assembly of the United Nations. 
55. The Netherlands strongly favoured the application of Agency safeguards 
to all nuclear facilities in non-nuclear-weapon States. Israel and certain 
other States had chosen not to accept safeguards; his delegation regretted 
that fact and urged Israel and those other States, including South Africa, to 
accept full-scope safeguards. 
56. His delegation, however, found that the third operative paragraph of 
the draft resolution was discriminatory in that it proposed discontinuation of 
nuclear co-operation with Israel alone, because of Israel's non-acceptance of 
full-scope safeguards; if the proposed action was called for in the case of 
Israel, then it should apply to all States in the same category. 
57. Moreover, the Statute of the Agency, while it advocated the application 
of safeguards, made no provision for enforcing it. For that reason, 

GC(XXX)/OR.290 
page 14 


non-acceptance of safeguards by Israel could not under the Statute be 
considered to be sufficient reason for the sanctions called for in operative 
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution. 


58. The Netherlands deplored the politicization of safeguards and the 
placing of purely political items on the agenda of a technical and 
professional organization which had during the past few days displayed its 
capacity for constructive action in its special field. The Netherlands 
delegation therefore could not support the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXX)/792. 
59. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) said that, given the Agency's primary purpose as 
a non-political organization - of promoting the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy, if a Member State threatened or destroyed the peaceful nuclear 
facilities of another Member, then that constituted sufficient grounds for 
taking some corrective action against that State. That was the present 
situation as regards Israel. 
60. As for repetition, if that were a criterion for removing an item from 
the agenda, then the General Conference would have very little left to 
discuss. The same would apply if political issues were banned. The General 
Conference would, for example, be unable to discuss the matter of 
South Africa, because it had featured repeatedly on the agenda and because it 
was a political issue. His delegation believed that delegates who had 
advocated the application of sanctions against South Africa could not, in all 
conscience, refuse to speak at all on the matter of Israel. The mere fact of 
repetition did not render an issue less vital. Delegates would also recall 
that the revision of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had been under discussion 
for a good 10 years - but that was not held to vitiate the recurring debates 
on the subject. In any case, his Government believed that the solution to the 
problem was to translate words into deeds, and that could be done by ensuring 
compliance with the resolutions of the General Conference. 
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m. 



GC(XXX)/OR.291 
April 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 3 October 1986, at 10.25 a.m. 


President: Mr. RAMANNA (India) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


Organization of work 


Oral report by the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole on the 
following items: 4 - 41 


The Agency's accounts for 1985 20 
The Agency's programme and budget 


for 1987 and 1988 21 - 30 
The financing of safeguards 31 
Scale of assessment of Members' 


contributions for 1987 32 - 33 
The financing of technical assistance 34 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 35 - 37 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 


Statute 38 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute 
as a whole 39 - 41 


The Israeli nuclear threat (resumed) 42 - 94 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 5 December 1986, 


[**] GC(XXX)/789. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/238/Rev.4. 


87-1294 
1083e/0161e 



GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 2 


ORGANIZATION OF WORK 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference had not 
completed its consideration of item 7 of the agenda. However, merely in order 
to facilitate and accelerate the Conference's work, he proposed, before 
resuming discussion of the item in question, to take up the oral report of the 
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, the latter having informed him that he 
was in a position to present his report. 
2. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) was opposed to that 
procedure and wished to resume the debate on the Israeli nuclear threat 
immediately. 
3. The PRESIDENT urged the representative of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran to accept the procedure which he had proposed merely in order to 
facilitate the work of the General Conference; the examination of the report 
of the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole should not in fact take very 
much time and the items with which he would deal - important for the smooth 
operation of the Agency - should not cause any controversy. Then the 
Conference could devote itself to item 7, which was likely to take longer. 
ORAL REPORT OF THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


4. The PRESIDENT invited the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole 
to present his oral report. 
5. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran), raising a point of 
order, said that he could not accept that examination of item 7 should be thus 
postponed without prior notice. 
6. The PRESIDENT pointed out that he had already invited the Chairman 
of the Committee of the Whole to take his place on the rostrum and that it was 
therefore difficult for him to go back on his decision unless a large number 
of delegations requested it. Since that was apparently not the case he would 
give the floor to the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole. 
7. Mr. de la BARRE d'ERQUELINNES (Belgium), Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole, presented the Committee's report on items 9 to 16 of the 
agenda. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 3 


8. Under item 9 (the Agency's accounts for 1985), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution on page I 
of document GC(XXX)/776. 
9. Under item 10 (the Agency's programme and budget for 1987 and 1988), 
the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt draft resolutions 
A, B and C set forth in Annex III to Part I of document GC(XXX)/777. In 
addition, the Committee had adopted the Board of Governors recommendation that 
the General Conference authorize the Board to continue its examination of the 
proposed expanded nuclear-safety-related programme and to make such 
modifications as it considered necessary. 
10. Under the same agenda item, other draft resolutions had been submitted, 
after consideration of which the Committee had drawn the following conclusions. 
11. Firstly, the Committee of the Whole recommended that the General 
Conference adopt draft resolution GC(XXX)/791 on the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material; during the discussions on that 
document the representative of Argentina had expressed reservations about the 
procedure whereby draft resolutions unrelated to any of the items on the 
Conference's agenda were submitted to the Committee of the Whole. The 
Committee of the Whole further recommended that the General Conference request 
the Director General to place on the provisional agenda for the next regular 
session of the Conference an item entitled "Status and implementation of 
conventions for which the Agency is depositary", which would consist of three 
sub-items: (a) Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material; 
(b) Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident; and 
(c) Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency". 
12. Secondly, after having considered a draft resolution submitted by Italy 
and Switzerland relating to the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident, to the intervention dose levels and to the concept of radiological 
safety significance, the Committee had welcomed the initiative taken by Italy 
and Switzerland in that important area. Having noted that the Secretariat was 
preparing a report on intervention dose levels, the Committee recommended that 
the General Conference request the Director General: (a) to ensure that due 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 4 


priority was given to the work currently under way in that area within the 
Secretariat; and (b) to submit a report on that and related matters to the 
Board of Governors in February 1987. 


13. Under item 11 (the financing of safeguards), the Committee recommended 
that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXX)/786. 
14. Under item 12 (scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1987), 
the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/783. 
15. Under item 13 (the financing of technical assistance), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXX)/794. 
16. Under item 14 (staffing of the Agency's Secretariat), the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXX)/793. In addition, the Committee recommended that the 
General Conference request the Director General to transmit the summary 
records of the Committee's discussions on that item to the Board of Governors. 
17. Under item 15 (amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute), the 
Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXX)/798. 
18. Finally, under item 16 (revision of Article VI of the Statute as a 
whole), the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/797. 
19. The PRESIDENT suggested that the draft resolutions relating to the 
agenda items which had been referred to the Committee of the Whole might now 
be considered by the Conference with a view to their adoption. 
The Agency's accounts for 1985 


20. The draft resolution on paae I of document GC(XXX)/776 was adopted. 
The Agency's programme and budget for 1987 and 1988 


21. Draft resolutions A, B and C contained in Annex III to Part I of 
document GC(XXX)/7 77 were adopted. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 5 


22. The PRESIDENT said that if there were no objections he would take 
it that the General Conference authorized the Board of Governors to continue 
examination of the proposed expanded nuclear-safety-related programme and to 
make such modifications thereto as it considered necessary. 
23. It was so decided. 
24. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/791 was adopted. 
25. The PRESIDENT said that if there were no objections he would take 
it that the General Conference wished the Director General to place on the 
provisional agenda for its next regular session an item entitled "Status and 
implementation of conventions for which the Agency is depositary: 
a) Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material; b) Convention 
on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident; and c) Convention on Assistance 
in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency". 
26. It was so decided. 
27. The PRESIDENT said that if there were no objections he would take 
it that the General Conference wished the Director General to ensure that due 
priority was given to the work currently under way within the Secretariat in 
the area of intervention dose levels and to submit a report on that and 
related matters to the Board of Governors in February 1987. 
28. It was so decided. 
29. Ms. MAGLIETTA (Italy) recalled that under item 10 of the agenda 
Italy had submitted two draft resolutions to the Committee of the Whole, 
contained in documents GC(XXX)/COM.5/48 and GC(XXX)/COM.5/45. The first 
resolution requested the Director General to take initiatives, in close 
co-ordination with other organizations concerned, to prepare recommendations 
on the scope of the concept of the radiological safety significance of a 
nuclear accident and to review the existing recommendations on intervention 
dose levels; the second concerned the need to improve the effectiveness of the 
Agency's Incident Reporting System by including additional types of 
safety-signficant events which Member States should communicate to the Agency, 
by enlarging the scope of the present system and by studying and evaluating 
safety-significant events. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 6 


30. Italy was convinced that the ideas and suggestions contained in those 
documents were worth pursuing, and hoped that the Director General would take 
due account of the wishes of a large number of Member States in that area when 
implementing the expanded activities. 
The financing of safeguards 


31. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/786 was adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1987. 


32. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/783 was adopted. 
33. Mr. LAVTNA (Philippines) said that although his delegation was not 
opposed to the adoption of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXX)/783 it wished to clarify its position regarding the United Nations 
scale of assessment of contributions used by the Agency to establish the base 
rates for Member States' contributions to the Regular Budget. At the fortieth 
session of the United Nations General Assembly his country had voted against 
resolution 40/348 on the scale of assessment of contributions, since its base 
rate had increased from 0.09% to 0.10% for the financial period 1986-1988. 
His delegation had on that occasion stated that the assessment for his country 
did not reflect its capacity to pay, in view of the economic crisis which it 
had been facing for the past four years. Until its economic situation had 
improved, the Philippines would not accept any new commitment and would not 
increase its contribution. 
The financing of technical assistance. 


34. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/794 was adopted. 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


35. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/799 was adopted. 
36. The PRESIDENT said that if there were no objections he would take 
it that the General Conference wished the Director General to transmit the 
summary records of the discussions in the Committee of the Whole on that item 
to the Board of Governors. 
37. It was so decided. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 7 


Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. 


38. The draft resolution contained in document GG(XXX)/798 was adopted. 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole. 


39. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/797 was adopted. 
40. Mr. HOE (Italy) said that in a spirit of compromise his country 
had agreed to join the consensus which had emerged on the procedural proposal 
submitted by Tunisia. His delegation therefore withdrew its request for a 
vote on its proposal contained in document GC(XXX)/780, in the hope that its 
spirit of collaboration would promote a rapid solution to a problem which 
Italy considered to be extremely important. 
41. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) thanked the delegations which had supported 
the draft resolution submitted by his country on Article VI of the Statute and 
was grateful to the Italian delegation for its conciliatory attitude; Italy 
could always count on the co-operation of Tunisia in attempting to ensure that 
all worked in the Agency's interests. 
THE ISRAELI NUCLEAR THREAT (GC(XXX)/778, GC(XXX)/792 and Add.1 and 2) (resumed) 


42. Mr. de la BARRE d'ERQUELINNES (Belgium) said that, for various 
reasons, his country was opposed to draft resolution GC(XXX)/792. The idea of 
creating a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East was interesting but the matter 
clearly lay outside the Agency's competence and should be examined by other 
United Nations bodies. 
43. Moreover, Belgium had always been in favour of the application of 
full-scope safeguards to the civilian facilities of all countries, whether or 
not they had nuclear weapons. However, it could not accept that safeguards 
were imposed on a single country and used as a sanction. Until a full-scope 
safeguards system had been established acceptance of safeguards could only be 
the sovereign decision of States. 
44. Finally, his delegation believed that the problem had been solved at 
the previous session of the General Conference, since the assurances provided 
by Israel had been considered to be satisfactory by the Conference. Any 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 8 


attempt to reopen the debate therefore appeared to be a regrettable 
politicization of the Agency's work and a large number of delegations wanted 
an end to such politicization. 


45. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) regretted that his 
delegation had not been consulted on the procedural matter which had been 
raised at the beginning of the meeting; although, in a spirit of co-operation, 
it had not made use of its right to appeal against the President's decision 
under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, it wished 
to make clear that the case should not be regarded as a precedent. 
46. His country believed that the illegal regime of Israel should be 
expelled from all international organizations, including particularly the 
Agency, where its presence was the main cause of tension, intrigue and 
disunity. The fact that Israel was not subject to the Agency's safeguards 
regime was only one example of that entity's disregard for international laws 
and regulations. That attitude had enabled it to develop full nuclear 
capability by means of industrial espionage, piracy and sabotage, all of which 
had been proved on various occasions. 
47. It was therefore obvious that, with regard to the creation of a 
nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, the only country which actually posed a 
potential nuclear threat was Israel. As long as Israel refused full-scope 
Agency safeguards, the creation of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East 
would remain a hypothetical issue and the effectiveness of the international 
safeguards system would be undermined. Many Member States might then think 
that the system did not deserve their support and their financial 
contributions. However, in a spirit of solidarity and co-operation, the 
Islamic Republic of Iran would support the relevant draft resolution. 
48. The Islamic Republic of Iran was naturally one of the sponsors of draft 
resolution GC(XXX)/792. It deeply regretted, however, that the country which 
had committed the most flagrant violations of international law and had 
flouted the very spirit of the Agency's Statute and resolutions, including 
resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/444, namely Iraq, was also included among the sponsors 
of that draft resolution. In a spirit of goodwill, the Islamic Republic of 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 9 


Iran had refrained from mentioning, during the present session of the General 
Conference the military attack carried out by Iraq against the Bushehr nuclear 
power plant on 12 July 1986. However, the Islamic Republic of Iran would soon 
be forced to draw the attention of Member States to the constant violations of 
the resolution in question by the Iraqi regime and to request that measures be 
taken to ensure that the development of nuclear power for peaceful purposes 
was not again jeopardized. That initiative would of course be taken in 
parallel with the energetic action to resolve the Israeli issue in an 
appropriate way. 


49. Finally, if all the nuclear facilities in Israel and South Africa were 
not placed under full-scope safeguards before the following session of the 
General Conference, his country would propose, as a short term solution, that 
the budget of the Department of Safeguards should not be approved, since the 
Department would have demonstrated its ineffectiveness. 
50. Mr. AL-MIHAYES (Kuwait) said that his country was one of the 
sponsors of draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 because it believed that there was a 
constant threat that the Zionist Government would use nuclear energy for 
military purposes, and Kuwait wanted the Agency to monitor Israel's nuclear 
activities. His delegation fully endorsed the point of view expressed the 
previous day by the delegate of India, who considered that there was no 
difference between the Pretoria regime in South Africa and the Zionist 
Government in the occupied territories, because both were carrying out the 
same policy of racial discrimination and posing a serious threat to 
neighbouring States by using nuclear energy for military purposes as they 
thought fit. 
51. It was not surprising that Israel was continuing on that course since 
it was supported and encouraged by a major power, well versed in international 
law and which was secretly promoting the policy of racial discrimination while 
condemning it publicly. 
52. He urged all delegations to support draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 so as 
not to encourage Israel to continue the utilization of nuclear energy for 
military purposes. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 10 


53. Mr. PASHA (Pakistan) recalled that Israel was pursuing an aggressive 
expansionist policy. It had illegally occupied Arab and Palastinian 
territories and had refused to vacate them in defiance of resolutions of the 
United Nations General Assembly and Security Council. Furthermore, it had 
launched military attacks against Iraqi nuclear installations in 1981 and air 
attacks against Tunisia in 1985. The international community therefore had 
every reason to be seriously concerned by the expansion of Israel's arsenals 
and its military nuclear programme. 
54. The experts' report submitted to the thirty-sixth session of the 
General Assembly (A/36/431) indicated that Israel had the technical capability 
to manufacture nuclear weapons and that its reactors would enable it to 
produce considerable quantities of plutonium and to separate plutonium from 
uranium in spent fuel. That report stated that Israel had the necessary 
experts and technical infrastructure to manufacture nuclear weapons. The 
experts concluded therefore that in order to avoid the danger of a nuclear 
arms race in the Middle East, Israel should renounce possession of nuclear 
weapons or any intention to possess them and should place all its nuclear 
facilities and installations under international safeguards. It was in that 
context that the sponsors of the draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 demanded, in 
operative paragraph 2, that Israel submit forthwith all its nuclear facilities 
and installations to Agency safeguards. 
55. Israel's nuclear programme and its well-known capability to manufacture 
nuclear weapons constituted a serious threat to peace and security in the 
region; for that reason, the General Assembly and the Security Council had 
expressed, in a number of resolutions, their anxiety and concern about 
Israel's potential for fabricating nuclear weapons and its refusal to conform 
to the resolutions adopted by the international organizations. The Agency's 
General Conference had also requested, in resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/443 that 
Israel should place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
Unless Israel complied with the demands of the international community, peace 
and security in the Middle East would be threatened. The demilitarization of 
the Israeli nuclear programme was a prerequisite for the creation of a 
nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, the importance of which did not have to 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 11 


be emphasized. It was therefore natural that the draft resolution should 
affirm the necessity of creating such a zone. His delegation consequently 
supported draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 and invited the General Conference to 
adopt it by an overwhelming majority. 


56. Mr. KATTAN (Saudi Arabia) said that draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 
concerned a vital question, since its aim was to prevent all uses of nuclear 
energy for non-peaceful purposes or for purposes not in conformity with the 
Agency's humanitarian objectives, which were to develop and promote the 
utilization of nuclear energy for the economic and social well-being of Member 
States. Although that problem was not a political one, it was nevertheless 
vital for the Agency's credibility. Everyone was well aware that the Middle 
East was constantly threatened by the aggressive expansionist behaviour of 
Israel, which did not respect international resolutions. His delegation 
called for the adoption of measures to ensure nuclear safety and security and 
to support and strengthen the uses of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
Since the General Conference had adopted resolutions on the subject of South 
Africa at its twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth sessions, namely resolutions 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/423 and GC(XXIX)/RES/442, which at that time had not been 
considered to be political in nature, it should adopt draft resolution 
GC(XXX)/792 since Israel was conducting a policy of aggression similar to that 
of South Africa. By adopting that draft resolution, Member States would 
demonstrate a responsible attitude with regard to the Agency's objectives. 
57. Mr. CONSTAMZO (Uruguay) said that his Government, on the basis of 
the principles of universality, of the sovereignty of States and of equality 
between them, was opposed to all forms of discrimination towards a State and 
that therefore his delegation would vote against draft resolution GC(XXX)/792. 
58. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) reaffirmed that his delegation 
wished draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 to be voted on as a whole and the vote to 
be taken by roll-call. 
59. In support of the draft resolution submitted by his delegation, it 
should be pointed out that Damascus was within immediate range of Israeli 
nuclear warheads installed on the Syrian Golan Heights. His delegation was 
convinced that in view of its primary objective to use the atom for peaceful 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 12 


purposes, the Agency, within the framework of its multiple activities, could 
play an essential and constructive role in the creation of a nuclear-free zone 
in the Middle East. The Syrian delegation hoped that the Agency's Secretariat 
would do everything possible in that area, and was ready, for its part, to 
co-operate closely with it during the following year. 


60. His delegation wished to draw attention to the fact that certain false 
statements had been made by the opponents of the draft resolution, and certain 
facts had been deliberately ignored by those opponents in order to evade the 
real issue. 
61. Firstly, opponents of the draft resolution had not denied that Israel 
was the only State in the Middle East capable of manufacturing nuclear 
weapons, or that it was well known for its aggressive, expansionist and racist 
policy. Those two facts were sufficient to explain why the draft resolution 
related only to Israel. 
62. Secondly, in response to the statement made by the delegate of Israel 
stating that the Syrian Arab Republic and the other Arab States would oppose 
the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, his delegation 
wished to stress that the Syrian Arab Republic, like the other Arab countries 
and countries throughout the world, had always requested and supported the 
creation of such a zone, but rejected the Israeli proposal to initiate direct 
negotiations on the subject. Two years previously, on the same platform, his 
delegation had proposed a complete project for a nuclear-free zone providing 
for the setting up of a committee consisting of five to seven members from 
neutral Member States of the Agency, with a mandate to prepare a draft 
convention which the States in the region should discuss and then adopt 
through the intermediary of the Agency's Secretariat. 
63. The United States delegate, when he had said that the General 
Conference had been examining and discussing the matter for five years, was in 
fact referring to a completely different question - that of the armed attack 
against Iraqi nuclear facilities. The present subject of discussion was 
Israel's capability for manufacturing nuclear weapons and the ensuing dangers 
to peace in the region. In interpreting operative paragraph 5 of the draft 
resolution, the United States delegate had thought that the Syrian Arab 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 13 


Republic was requesting the Director General, the Agency and the Board of 
Governors to submit a report on Israel's activities and operations in the 
nuclear field, which was something extremely wide. In fact, the Syrian Arab 
Republic was requesting a report on Israeli nuclear capability, including its 
capability for manufacturing nuclear weapons. 


64. Finally, the opponents of the draft resolution had all stressed that it 
aimed to politicize the Agency and to divert it from its real objectives. 
That argument had been refuted and rejected by the delegate of India. In that 
connection his delegation observed that the United States delegate had taken 
regrettably little note of the Agency documents. He took it upon himself to 
deal with purely political subjects as he thought fit, while denying others 
the right to discuss political questions relating to nuclear safety. In that 
connection, it was worth noting document GC(SPL.I)/17 relating to the 
examination of delegates' credentials at the special session of the General 
Conference. The delegate of the United States had said during a meeting of 
the General Committee that his country remained deeply concerned about the 
situation in Afghanistan. Although he did not intend to raise any explicit 
objections to the credentials of the representatives of Afghanistan, he had 
said that it should not be considered that his delegation approved the armed 
intervention in that country, adding that the regime established and 
maintained in Afghanistan by the Soviet intervention and occupation did not 
represent the Afghan people. The scientific and technical nature of that 
statement was not obvious. 
65. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco), in reply to certain speakers who had pointed 
out that the draft resolution under consideration raised a political problem 
which did not come within the province or competence of the Agency, said that 
the role of the latter itself had political aspects which could sometimes be 
decisive. 
66. The draft resolution under consideration was intended, firstly, to 
create a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East in accordance with the 
recommendations of the United Nations General Assembly. Even if it was 
claimed that the Agency, since it had an autonomous status, did not have to go 
by General Assembly resolutions, it was difficult to believe that it could 
stand above or beyond the principles of law governing the international 
community. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 14 


67. Secondly, the draft resolution requested Israel to submit its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. That request was directed solely at Israel 
because it was the only country with a nuclear arsenal in the Middle East, 
where there reigned a dramatic situation and a latent state of conflict. 
Furthermore, Israel was occupying by force territories belonging to sovereign 
States, had annexed the Holy City of Jerusalem in defiance of the law, justice 
and will of the international community, and was persecuting whole civilian 
populations. Finally, it had uprooted and robbed the Palestinian people of 
its possessions. That subject was cause for indignation, and not a draft 
resolution which only reinforced the Agency's action and brought an element of 
security to a sensitive region subject to most serious threats. Therefore his 
delegation urged all those who were inspired by a spirit of goodwill, justice 
and peace to approve that draft resolution. 
68. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) said that his delegation would vote in favour 
of the draft resolution under consideration for three reasons: firstly, it 
was compatible with Nigerian foreign policy; secondly, Israel had consistently 
refused to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards; and thirdly, 
Israel was collaborating with the racist regime of South Africa. 
69. Mr. PELEG (Israel) regretted that so much time had been taken up 
with consideration of the agenda item under discussion and by mendacious 
attacks against Israel. The statement made by the Iraqi delegation was 
nothing more than the repetition of sensationalist newspaper articles and 
books which, through having been quoted many times in the United Nations, had 
not become any truer than when they had been published. 
70. His delegation had already observed in its previous statements that the 
draft resolution was aimed only at Israel; with remarkable candour the 
delegate of India had admitted as much, and had even attempted to justify that 
discrimination by using arguments which few delegates would find convincing or 
even relevant. In addition, he had made a hostile political attack against 
Israel which was totally out of place in the General Conference. The Israeli 
delegation naturally understood the reasons why India and Pakistan were 
particularly sensitive about that subject and wished simply to point out that 
those who live in glass houses should not throw stones. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 15 


71. The sponsors of the draft resolution had attempted to justify it by 
stating that Israel's activities constituted a real nuclear threat. That 
allegation was unfounded. If they really believed it, they would then be in 
favour of the solution which had long been proposed by Israel, namely the 
initiation of direct negotiations for the establishment of a nuclear-free zone 
for the whole region. The fact that they did not seriously envisage that 
solution showed very clearly the nature of their ruse, which was only a 
further attempt to use a technical organization for the purpose of pursuing 
their vendetta against Israel. His delegation urged all delegations to reject 
that draft resolution decisively. 
72. The PRESIDENT recalled that the delegate of the Syrian Arab 
Republic had requested that a roll-call vote be taken on draft resolution 
GC(XXX)/792 and that the delegate of Israel had requested at the previous 
meeting[1] that each of the operative paragraphs be voted on separately. 
73. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) recalled that Article V.C 
of the Agency's Statute and Rule 70 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference provided that the General Conference could decide that questions 
additional to those explicitly set forth in the Rules of Procedure and the 
Statute should be decided by a two-thirds majority. His delegation proposed, 
under Rule 70, that any decision on draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 entitled "The 
Israeli nuclear threat" should be taken by a two-thirds majority vote. The 
reasons why such a procedure should be adopted were evident. 
74. Firstly, several speakers had stressed the great importance of the 
subject matter of the draft resolution under consideration in connection with 
preventing a nuclear confrontation in the Middle East. The draft resolution 
itself contained repeated statements on the urgency and seriousness of the 
problem and listed a number of resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and 
the Security Council on the subject. Those questions, as his delegation had 
already pointed out, had nothing to do with the role and functions of the 
Agency. Neither were they simple administrative questions of the type with 
[1] See document GC(XXX)/OR.290, paragraph 42. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 16 


which the General Conference usually dealt. His and other delegations had 
pointed out that those questions did not belong in the Agency. Since they had 
an essentially political nature and concerned international security, they 
belonged in other bodies, namely the political organs of the United Nations in 
New York, if they belonged anywhere. It was obvious - as even the sponsors of 
the draft resolution would admit - that in view of the importance of those 
questions it would be inappropriate to subject them to a vote by simple 
majority. 


75. Moreover, the operative paragraphs of the draft resolution had a direct 
and significant bearing on the sovereign rights of a State Member of the 
Agency. It had been agreed that acceptance of Agency safeguards was, in 
accordance with the Statute, a matter of national sovereignty. The draft 
resolution under discussion contained a demand - not a request, or a call, or 
a recommendation - but a demand that a specific Member State accept the 
application of safeguards to its entire nuclear programme. If one were to 
depart from the statutory approach which gave the Government of each Member 
State the right to decide for itself the scope of the safeguards which it 
would accept, that "demand" should surely represent the dominant view of the 
entire Agency membership. It should not therefore be decided by a simple 
majority, possibly by a single vote. 
76. Other provisions of the draft resolution were equally significant for 
the Agency and for its activities. The resolution called upon other States to 
cease co-operation with Israel in the nuclear field - that was not something 
which could be taken lightly. The operative paragraph which requested the 
Secretariat to report on and the Board to examine Israel's nuclear activities 
would also have an impact on the limited resources of the Agency and would 
affect its priorities. If the Secretariat were to adopt that course of action 
and usurp resources which could be used to improve nuclear safety, the 
safeguards system or technical co-operation, one would have to be certain that 
that course had the widest support. The remarks made by the delegate of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran, co-sponsor of the draft resolution, also attached 
great significance to that issue. The draft resolution called for sanctions 
not only against Israel but against the Agency itself. What could be more 
important for the General Conference? 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 17 


77. If a comparison was made with other categories of decision which 
required a two-thirds majority, it was obvious that the decision involved in 
the draft resolution was much more important than merely placing additional 
items on the agenda or suspending the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. It would be a mockery of the Agency's decision-making process to 
decide by simple majority a matter which concerned the Agency's very 
survival. That was not a procedural trick - it concerned the very heart of 
the problem, namely, the way in which decisions had always been taken in the 
Agency, in a spirit of loyalty and understanding and with respect for the 
Agency's integrity. Those decisions had been taken by consensus wherever 
possible, but never by imposing majority views on a significant minority, just 
because the Rules of Procedure allowed it. In fact, a real procedural trick 
would be to take a vote by simple majority on such an important and 
controversial proposal. The General Conference should be aware of its 
responsibilities and take defensible decisions. His delegation urged other 
delegations to support the proposal that a decision on the draft resolution be 
taken by a two-thirds majority vote. 
78. The PRESIDENT understood that certain delegates had asked to take 
the floor. However, he did not consider it desirable to engage in a long 
debate on procedural questions. Rule 70 of the Rules of Procedure indicated 
that decisions taken by the General Conference to determine additional 
questions to be decided by a two-thirds majority had to be made by the 
majority of the Members present and voting. Putting the United States 
proposal to the vote, he recalled that the vote was to decide whether a 
decision on draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 required a two-thirds majority. 
79. The President took a vote by show of hands. 
80. By 43 votes to 37, with 13 abstentions, the United States proposal was 
adopted. 
81. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that he had requested the 
floor before the United States proposal had been put to the vote in order to 
request a roll-call vote, and noted that he had been deprived of his right to 
speak. He requested that the proposal be voted on by roll-call. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 18 


82. Mr AL-KITAL (Iraq) expressed doubts about the procedure adopted. 
With a view to requesting a roll-call vote, he also had asked to take the 
floor before the vote on the United States proposal. 
83. The PRESIDENT said that the results of the vote had clearly shown 
that the majority of the Members of the General Conference wished the decision 
on draft resolution GC(XXX)/792 to be taken by a two-thirds majority. In 
reply to the delegates of the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq he said that he 
had acted in accordance with Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. He now wished to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution 
itself. 
84. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), raising a point of order, recalled first of 
all that he had questioned the legality of the procedure and insisted that 
another vote be taken by roll-call on the United States proposal. 
85. The PRESIDENT replied that he had applied the procedure in as 
correct a manner as possible by giving the floor at the appropriate time to 
anyone who requested it, and urged delegates not to engage in a long 
procedural debate. 
86. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) requested, under Rule 61 of the 
Rules of Procedure, that the meeting be suspended for half an hour. 
87. The PRESIDENT asked whether there were any objections to that 
request. 
88. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) said that he had requested the floor on a 
procedural matter before the proposal to suspend the meeting. He believed 
that during the vote on the United States proposal one delegation had voted 
both for and against it, which was a serious vice of form. It was therefore 
necessary, in order to preserve objectivity and to avoid confusion, and 
likewise in the interests of the Agency itself and -the General Conference, to 
proceed to a new vote, by roll-call, on the proposal in question. 
89. The PRESIDENT, recalling that the vote had taken place with all 
present, said that under Rule 61 of the Rules of Procedure a request for 
suspension of the meeting was now before the General Conference, and wished to 
know whether any delegations were opposed to it. 

GC(XXX)/OR.291 
page 19 


90. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that his delegation was opposed 
to the request. 


91. The PRESIDENT read Rule 61 and concluded that he should put the 
request for suspension of the meeting to the vote. 
<; """" ' 


92. At the request of Mr. Al-Kital (Iraq), a vote was taken by roll-call. 
93. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Votes for: Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Byelorussian Soviet 


Socialist Republic, Cote d'lvoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, 


Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, Gabon, India, Indonesia, 


Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan 


Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, 


Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri 


Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 


Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist 


Republics, United Arab Emirates, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


Votes against: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Cameroon, 


Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, 


German Democratic Republic, Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, 


Guatemala, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Liechtenstein, 


Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, 


Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain 


and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela. 


Abstentions: Bulgaria, China, Ethiopia, Greece, Hungary, Israel, 
Italy, Jamaica, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Mongolia, Peru, Poland. 


94. By 43 votes to 37, with 13 abstentions, the request for suspension of 
the meeting was adopted. 


The meeting was suspended at 12.35 p.m. [2] 


[2] Owing to the lateness of the hour, the meeting was not resumed, and the 
Conference met again at 3.40 p.m. for its 292nd plenary meeting. 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
May 1987* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 29 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1986 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY- SECOND PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 


on Friday, 3 October 1986, at 3.40 p.m. 
President: Mr. RAMANNA (India) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 

agenda** 


7 The Israeli nuclear threat (continued) 1 -2 
17 South Africa's nuclear capabilities 3 - 40 
18 Examination of delegates' credentials 41 -- 48 
19 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension 

Committee 49 - 50 
20 Report on voluntary contributions 


pledged to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund for 1987 51 
Closing of the session 52 - 67 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 16 October 1986, 
[**] GC(XXX)/789. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXX)/INF/238/Rev.4. 


87-1300 
0858e (0131e) 



GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 2 


THE ISRAELI NUCLEAR THREAT (GC(XXX)778, 792 and Add.1 and 2) (continued) 


1. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) moved that the debate on the item under 
discussion be adjourned in accordance with Rule 59 of the Rules of Procedure 
so as to facilitate the work of the General Conference in view of the 
confusion regarding the procedural votes which had taken place in the previous 
meeting. 
2. The debate was accordingly adjourned. 
SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXX)/785, 795 and Mod.!) 


3. The PRESIDENT asked delegates to consider the report by the Board 
of Governors contained in document GC(XXX)/785, which included a report by the 
Director General on his negotiations with the South African authorities 
concerning the application of safeguards to that country's semicommercial 
enrichment plant, and the draft resolution submitted by Tunisia on behalf of 
the African Group which was set out in document GC(XXX)/795; an amended 
version of operative paragraph 12 of that draft resolution was contained in 
document GC(XXX)/795/Mod.1. 
4. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) said that the draft resolution submitted by 
Tunisia constituted an appropriate response to the South African regime's 
intransigent attitude of defiance of the international community and to its 
continued refusal to abandon its apartheid policies and its illegal 
exploitation of Namibia's uranium resources. The South African regime, like 
Israel, had threatened other Agency Member States and had isolated itself 
within the international community. In accordance with Rule 72 of the Rules 
of Procedure, therefore, he requested, on behalf of the African Group, that a 
roll-call vote be taken on the draft resolution without division. 
5. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) welcomed the decision of the United States 
Congress to impose sanctions against South Africa, which he hoped would also 
prompt the European Community to apply stronger sanctions. 
6. Collaboration by some nations with South Africa had encouraged that 
country's continued disregard of the Agency's resolutions. The most 
appropriate action to be taken against South Africa would be the immediate 
suspension of its rights and privileges as a Member of the Agency. However, 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 3 


following consultations, his delegation both accepted the proposed amendment 
of operative paragraph 12 of the draft resolution and supported the request 
for a roll-call vote made by Tunisia. 


7. Mr. SILANGWA (Zambia) said that his country's position with regard 
to South Africa was clear. The actions of the South African regime seriously 
affected the credibility of the Agency, which should therefore take 
appropriate action against that regime. Previous resolutions of the General 
Conference had been designed to make the South African regime conform to the 
Agency's Statute. It had been given ample time to reform, but it had used 
that time to intensify its nuclear programme for military purposes. The draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/795 was an inevitable follow-up to 
resolution GC(XXX)/RES/442 adopted in 1985. He urged all delegations to 
support the draft resolution and to vote in favour of it. 
8. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that the draft resolution 
under discussion was extreme, technically defective and unacceptable. 
Suspension of South Africa's rights and privileges of membership in the Agency 
would eliminate the chance of achieving further safeguards coverage in South 
Africa and would undermine the effectiveness of safeguards that were already 
applied at a number of nuclear facilities in that country. It would also set 
a precedent for suspension of other countries for political reasons and would 
contravene the important principle of universality of membership. 
Furthermore, such action would make it difficult to encourage South Africa to 
adopt vital safety-related measures developed by the Agency following the 
Chernobyl accident and would thereby jeopardize the safety of neighbouring 
States and of South Africa's majority population. 
9. The revised version of operative paragraph 12 was inappropriate, since 
the Board of Governors was asked to make a particular recommendation to the 
General Conference, and it was not proper for the Conference to impose a 
judgement on the Board. In any case, the legal requirements for suspension 
under Article XIX.B of the Statute had not been met, as that Article permitted 
suspension only if a country had persistently violated the provisions of the 
Statute or of any agreement entered into pursuant to the Statute. 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 4 


Article III.B.l, on the other hand, clearly placed an obligation on the 
Agency, not on any individual Member State, and thus provided no grounds for 
suspension of South Africa. 


10. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) proposed amending the revised version of 
operative paragraph 12 contained in.document GC(XXX)/795/Mod.l by substituting 


the words "consider recommending" for the word "recommend" in the first line 


so as to avoid imposing a decision on the Board. 


11. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) declared that it had 
become standard procedure for the United States to speak in support of the 
regimes of Israel and South Africa - as if acting as their guardian. The 
measures adopted by the United States Congress against South Africa were very 
mild and insignificant and had only been taken after years of oppression of 
the South African people by the South African regime under the auspices of the 
United States Government, which was the real cause of unrest all over the 
world. South Africa had the same illegal status as Israel, and the constant 
violation of the Agency's Statute and resolutions by those regimes meant that 
they had no right to co-exist with peaceful countries in the Agency. 
12. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXX)/795 was a very 
moderate one but, in a spirit of solidarity with the African States, his 


delegation was prepared to support it. 


13. However, if by the thirty-first session of the General Conference all 
the nuclear installations of South Africa were not subject to full-scope 
safeguards, his delegation would propose, as a short-term solution, that the 
budget of the Department of Safeguards not be submitted for approval. 
14. Mr. HIREMATH (India) welcomed the efforts made by the sponsors of 
the draft resolution to terminate the discussion of at least one aspect of the 
debate on South Africa, namely that country's continued exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership of the Agency. South Africa had again 
cleverly managed to avoid suspension of its rights and privileges under 
Article XIX.A of the Statute by paying a carefully calculated part of its 
arrears just in time. Nevertheless, South Africa's persistent disregard of 

GC(XXX)/0R.292 
page 5 


Agency resolutions and its continued apartheid policies and aggression 
provided ample justification for suspending it from the exercise of those 
rights and privileges under Article XTX.B. 


15. It was pleasing to note that even countries which had hitherto been 
willing to make allowances were now prepared to impose sanctions against South 
Africa, and he could not see why the amended version of operative paragraph 12 
should create problems for any delegation, since it would merely request the 
Board to "consider recommending" the suspension of South Africa. 
16. Mr. SHASH (Egypt) urged that the draft resolution be adopted. Some 
delegates had expressed concern at what they called politicization of the 
Agency but they must be made to understand that what the African countries 
feared was the development of nuclear weapons by South Africa. That was why 
the African countries, and many others, wanted South Africa to place all its 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. Such a desire was surely not 
"politicization". If no safeguards were applied to that country's nuclear 
activities, it might soon be too late. The draft resolution submitted by 
Tunisia was intended to reconcile the various delegations' divergent views on 
the subject, and he hoped that it would be approved by consensus. Otherwise, 
a roll-call vote would have to be taken on it. 
17. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) regretted that the racist regime in 
South Africa continued increasingly to repress and exploit the indigenous 
population even though the non-aligned countries and the United Nations had 
suggested strong measures to dismantle apartheid. Moreover, the South African 
Government posed a permanent threat to the stability of the neighbouring 
countries, and persisted in its illegal occupation of Namibia, ignoring 
repeated calls from the United Nations, which had condemned the Government of 
South Africa but could apply no effective sanctions against it because of the 
opposition of certain western countries. 
18. Furthermore, the South African Government was operating sensitive 
nuclear facilities which were not subject to Agency safeguards, and he was 
deeply concerned at the failure of the negotiations on the application of 
safeguards to the semicommercial enrichment facility under construction 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 6 


there. Those facts justified the apprehensions of the world community that 
the racist South African Government was working towards the possession of 
nuclear weapons. It had not responded to the various resolutions adopted by 
the General Conference on the subject. For those reasons, Cuba firmly 
endorsed the draft resolution under discussion and would approve any measures 
that might be applied to force the South African regime to comply with the 
Conference's decisions or to isolate it internationally. 


19. Mr. CAP (China) said that the South African authorities had ignored 
the Agency's resolutions and imposed unreasonable conditions during the 
negotiations on safeguards at the semicommercial enrichment facility. China 
condemned that attitude, and supported the draft resolution, which reflected 
the stand of the African countries. 
20. Mr. CHAPMAN (United States of America), exercising his right of 
reply, said that the abusive references to his country by the representative 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran were entirely out of place, as was his threat 
to undermine support for the Agency's safeguards budget. The United States 
was a truly democratic country which did not need instruction from the Iranian 
representative. 
21. Mr. GIGNAC (Canada) suggested that, under Rule 61 of the Rules of 
Procedure, the meeting be suspended to enable delegates to hold consultations. 
In the absence of objections, the meeting was suspended at 


4.40 p.m. and resumed at 5.10 p.m. 
22. Mr. CHRISTENSEN (Denmark) moved that operative paragraphs 11 and 12 
of the draft resolution contained in documents GC(XXX)/795 and Mod.1 be voted 
upon separately. 
23. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico) and Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) opposed the 
motion. 
24. Mr. CHRISTENSEN (Denmark), noting that no delegate had spoken in 
favour, withdrew his motion. 
25. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to vote on the draft 
resolution contained in documents GC(XXX)/795 and Mod.1 with the further 

GC(XXX)/0R.292 
page 7 


amendment proposed by the delegate of Tunisia. As had been requested by 


several delegations, the vote would be taken by roll-call. 


26. Indonesia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon 
to vote first. 


27. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, China, 
Colombia, Cote d'lvoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, Gabon, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, 
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Republic of Korea, 
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, 
Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, 
Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian 
Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, 
Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 


Against: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, 
France, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Iceland, 
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, 
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America 


Abstaining: Argentina, Chile, Paraguay 


28. There were 66 votes in favour and 26 against, with 3 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 


29. Mr. PELEG (Israel), explaining his vote, said that, although his 
country rejected all forms of apartheid and did not co-operate with South 


Africa in the nuclear field, his delegation had voted against the draft 


resolution contained in documents GC(XXX)/795 and Mod.1 because of its firm 


belief in the principle of universality of membership in all international 


organizations. 



GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 8 


30. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) thanked all delegates for their sympathetic 
consideration of the draft resolution condemning South Africa, which had just 
been adopted. 
31. Mr. W1LMSHURST (United Kingdom), speaking on behalf of the 
12 Member States of the European Community, emphasized their abhorrence of 
South Africa's policy of apartheid. It might be recalled that the Foreign 
Ministers of those States, less than three weeks earlier, had agreed on a 
package of restrictive measures against South Africa. However, the 
12 countries unanimously opposed operative paragraph 11 of the draft 
resolution, which passed judgement on the issue before the Board was invited, 
in paragraph 12, to consider it. Their negative vote was based on their 
support for the principle of universality and on their position that the 
Agency's aims, especially in relation to safeguards, would not be furthered by 
the proposed suspension. Lastly, it was not for the Agency to determine 
whether a Member State had violated the United Nations Charter. 


32. Mr. C0STANZ0 (Uruguay) pointed out that although his country 
absolutely rejected the South African Government's racist policy of apartheid, 
it believed that all States should participate in the Agency on equal terms 
and had therefore had reservations on the original wording of operative 
paragraph 12. However, the substantial amendment of that paragraph in 
document GC(XXX)/795/Mod.1 had enabled his delegation to vote in favour. 
33. Mr. AAMODT (Norway), speaking on behalf of the five Nordic 
countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway), stressed that they 
considered universality to be a basic principle in the United Nations 
organizations and could not therefore support the suspension of South Africa 
from the Agency. But for operative paragraphs 11 and 12, they would have 
voted in favour of the draft resolution. The Nordic countries had 
consistently condemned apartheid as a negation of fundamental human rights. 
It was a serious threat to world peace and security, and the United Nations 
Security Council should therefore adopt comprehensive and mandatory sanctions 
against South Africa. 

GC(XXX.)/OR.292 
page 9 


34. Mr. GIGNAC (Canada) pointed out that many elements of the draft 
resolution were already part of his country's foreign policy. However, 
Canada's negative vote was due to its concern for the principle of 
universality of membership in all United Nations bodies. Suspension should 
not be equated with sanctions. Moreover, operative paragraph 11 prejudged the 
conclusions of paragraph 12, even in the revised version. As to the demand 
made in operative paragraph 4, Canada held that all countries, and not only 
South Africa, should abide by it in the interest of non-proliferation. 
Lastly, it would be imprudent to preclude all future possibilities of 
safeguarding South Africa's nuclear facilities by suspending that country from 
the Agency. 
35. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that his country upheld the principle 
of universality of membership in international organizations and on that 
ground alone had been unable to support the draft resolution. 
36. Mr. GRIFFITHS (New Zealand) explained that his delegation believed 
universality of membership to be essential for continuing attempts to broaden 
the scope of Agency safeguards. Although he had voted against the draft 
resolution, he wished to express his strong support for operative paragraph 4 
thereof. 
37. Mr. TSUKADA (Japan) recalled that his Government did not condone 
the apartheid policies of the Government of South Africa; it had therefore 
adopted a number of restrictive measures against that country in the areas of 
sports, culture, education, investment and financing and was considering 
further measures. Nevertheless, Japan had found it difficult to support some 
paragraphs of the draft resolution, particularly operative paragraph 12, 
because they conflicted with both the letter and the spirit of the Agency's 
Statute. He urged all countries including South Africa which had remained 
outside the Non-Proliferation Treaty to accede to it and to accept full-scope 
Agency safeguards. 
38. Mr. SUARE2 de PUGA y VILLEGAS (Spain) said that his country's firm 
rejection of the policy of apartheid had been expressed in its support for the 
imposition of sanctions by the European Community. He would have endorsed a 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 10 


resolution reflecting those ideas. However, operative paragraphs 11 and 12 of 


the present resolution violated the principle of universality. Moreover, 


although his country had placed all its operating nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards, it could not accept the wording of operative paragraph 4, 
which sought to require universality of safeguards, because the question of 
mandatory safeguards went far beyond the provisions of the Agency's Statute. 
For those reasons, he had voted against the draft resolution. 


39. Mr. KELSO (Australia) observed that his country's repugnance 
against apartheid and the action which it had taken against South Africa were 
well known. However, operative paragraphs 11 and 12 and the nexus between 
them infringed upon the principle of universality of membership of 
international organizations, which Australia cherished. That was why it had 
cast a negative vote on the draft resolution. 
40. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his vote in 
favour of the draft resolution had been based, apart from the reasons 
mentioned earlier, on the firm belief, that the principle of universality could 
be guaranteed only if all Member States were committed to the spirit of the 
Statute, which called for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and respect for 
the rights and privileges of other Member States. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXX)/796 and Add.1) 


41. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Committee had met on the 
previous day as a credentials committee to examine the credentials of all 
delegates, as provided for in Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. The Committee's report was set out in document GC(XXX)/796 and 
the addendum thereto. Paragraphs 2-15 of the report described the manner in 
which the Committee had approached its task and conveyed the opinions 
expressed during the discussion. The Committee had agreed without a vote to 
recommend the adoption of the draft resolution contained in paragraph 16 of 
its report. 
42. Mr. KHARMA (Lebanon), speaking also on behalf of the delegations of 
Algeria, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Qatar, 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 11 


Saudi Arabia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and the United Arab 
Emirates, endorsed the reservations expressed in the General Committee by the 
representatives of Algeria and Jordan regarding the credentials of the Israeli 
delegation for the reasons given in paragraphs 5 and 6 of document GC(XXX)/796. 


43. Mr. JAMALUDDIN (Malaysia) and Mr. SURYOKUSUMO (Indonesia) also 
expressed reservations regarding the credentials of the delegation of Israel. 
i\h. Mr. PASHA (Pakistan) said that his delegation, too, had 
reservations concerning the credentials of the Israeli delegate because they 
had been issued from Jerusalem, which had been illegally annexed by Israel. 
That annexation had been declared null and void by the Security Council and 
the General Assembly of the United Nations. Furthermore, Israel was illegally 
occupying the Arab territories of the West Bank and the Golan Heights and 
consequently had no right to represent their population. 

45. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran), saying that he shared the 
view of those delegations which had expressed reservations about the 
credentials of the Israeli delegate, expressed his Government's reservations 
concerning those credentials. 
46. Mr^_jSyAS_H (Egypt) said his country's position was well known. It 
did not recognize the annexation of the Arab territories by Israel, an illegal 
action which was in breach of international law and various United Nations 
resolutions. 
4 7. Mr^ KENNEDY (United States of America) objected to the remarks made 
by previous speakers regarding the credentials of the Israeli delegate, on the 
grounds that they were of no relevance to the examination of credentials under 
the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. 
48. The draft resolution contained in paragraph 16 of document GC(XXX)/796 
was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION. COMMITTEE 


49. The PRESIDENT reminded the General Conference that it was currently 
represented on the Staff Pension Committee by two members - Mr. Morales 
Pedraza (Cuba) and Mr. Lozada (Philippines) - and by Mr. Sreckovic 
(Yugoslavia) and Ms. Voelkel (Federal Republic of Germany) as alternates. 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 12 


Since Mr. Lozada and Ms. Voelkel were no longer available to serve on the 
Committee, he proposed that Mr. Sreckovic be elected to replace Mr. Lozada as 
a member and that Mr. Bamsey (Australia) and Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) be elected 
as alternates. 


50. Mr. Morales Pedraza (Cuba) and Mr. Sreckovic (Yugoslavia) were 
elected as members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee and Mr. Bamsey 
(Australia) and Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) as alternates. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1987 (GC(XXX)/784/Rev.3) 


51. The PRESIDENT said that, by 6 p.m. on 2 October 1986, Members of 
the Agency had pledged voluntary contributions amounting to US $15 291 511. 
Since then a pledge of US $120 000 by Argentina had been received, making a 
total of US $15 412 511. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


52. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico), speaking as acting Chairman of the 
Group of 7 7 and on behalf of the Latin American countries, commended the 
President on the impartiality and patience he had shown in conducting the long 
and often difficult negotiations of the past week. 
53. Among its various tasks, the General Conference had discussed and 
approved a budget for 1987 which provided for some real expansion of the 
Agency's nuclear safety activities. While that increase was undoubtedly 
necessary in the present circumstances, the developing countries did not wish 
to see a future expansion of the Agency's safety activities unless it were 
accompanied by a similar increase in the remainder of the Agency's programme. 
54. Mr. GIGNAC (Canada), speaking for the North American group, praised 
the President for the skill and efficiency with which he had conducted the 
work of the General Conference. His perseverance and patience had played a 
vital role in ensuring that the more difficult issues were successfully 
resolved. The Vice-Chairmen, the Director General and his staff also deserved 
thanks for their work. 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 13 


55. Mr. SUAREZ de PUGA y VILLEGAS (Spain), acting as spokesman for the 
Western Europe group, said that the success of the Conference was largely due 
to the President's able guidance. The Western Europe group had taken an 
active part in the Conference, notably in the drafting of a resolution which 
held out hope that a balanced representation could eventually be achieved on 
the Board of Governors for all geographical areas and Member States. 
56. Mr. JAMALUDPIN (Malaysia), speaking on behalf of the countries of 
South East Asia and the Pacific, expressed his sincere admiration for the way 
in which the President had steered the Conference through difficult 
negotiations and brought it to a successful conclusion. 
57. Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland), speaking for the East European countries, 
said that, under the able guidance of the President, the Conference had 
succeeded in overcoming the many difficulties facing it. One of the 
highlights of the Conference had been the approval of an expanded nuclear 
safety programme. Many delegations had expressed their support of an enhanced 
role for the Agency following the Chernobyl accident and had commended the 
Soviet Union for providing - through the Agency - detailed information on the 
accident. 
58. Mr. TSUKADA (Japan), speaking on behalf of the Far East group, said 
that the success of the Conference owed much to the skills and leadership of 
the President. 
59. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan), speaking on behalf of the Middle East and 
South Asia group, expressed his appreciation for the way in which the 
President had conducted the proceedings of the Conference. 
60. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia), acting as spokesman for the African 
countries, paid a tribute to the President for the skilful manner in which he 
had guided the work of the Conference. He hoped that, through the efforts of 
the Board of Governors and Member States, a solution would be found in the 
coming year to the difficult problems that remained, notably the nuclear 
threat posed by Israel and South Africa. Also, he was convinced that more 
equitable representation of Member States on the Board of Governors would be 
achieved. 

GC(XXX)/OR.292 
page 14 


61. The PRESIDENT thanked all the delegates for their kind words and 
for the co-operation they had extended to him during the conduct of the 
Conference's sometimes difficult business. 
62. During the session many delegates had referred to the status of atomic 
energy in the world following the Chernobyl accident. He personally remained 
convinced that atomic energy was inevitable and was one of the safest and 
cheapest forms of energy discovered in recent times. Other sources such as 
fusion might be developed, but their commercial exploitation was still a 
distant prospect. Many delegations had expressed concern about the Chernobyl 
accident. He, however, believed that it was from such accidents that nuclear 
energy would emerge strengthened and even more useful to mankind. 
63. The Director General and his staff were to be commended for the 
excellent technical work carried out by the Agency, which had played no small 
part in the development of nuclear energy. 
64. On behalf of the General Conference, he wished to thank the Austrian 
authorities and the City of Vienna for their excellent hospitality. As 
delegates were aware, the following year's Conference would be held at the new 
Austria Center located next to the Vienna International Centre. The 
Conference was thus taking place for the last time in the historic setting of 
the Hofburg Palace, the delightful atmosphere of which had contributed to the 
success of many past sessions of the General Conference. That being so, he 
wished to invite Mr. Stock, representative of the Hofburg Congress Centre, to 
say a few words to the Conference. 
65. Mr. STOCK, speaking on behalf of the staff of. the Hofburg Congress 
Centre, said that the General Conference was meeting in the old imperial 
palace of the Hof.burg for the twenty-fifth time, and he was greatly saddened 
that that occasion should also be the last on which the Hofburg Palace would 
provide the venue for the Conference. He thanked the delegates and staff of 
the Agency for their coj-pper,ation in the past and wished them every success 
for the next twenty-five sessions of the General Conference. 

GC(XKK)/OR.292 
page 15 


66. The PRESIDENT thanked Mr. Stock on behalf of the Conference. Also, 
he expressed his gratitude to the Director General and his staff, who had 
provided valuable support for the work conducted in the past week. Special 
thanks were due to the Secretary of the Conference, Mr. Sanmuganathan, whose 
advice and quick reactions had saved him (the President) from many legal 
pitfalls and ensured the smooth running of the Conference. Before closing the 
session, he invited all those present to observe a minute of silence for 
prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


67. The PRESIDENT declared the thirtieth session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m. 



