GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
February 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 
on Monday, 21 September 1987, at 10.30 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. SR1NIVASAN (India) 
President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragi raphs 
agenda** 


Opening of the session 1 -6 


Election of the President 7 -27 


Election of officers and 
appointment of the 
General Committee 28 -32 


Procedural remarks by the President 33 -37 


Opening statements 38 -95 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 30 September 1981* 

[**] GC(XXXI)/799. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/lNF/246/Rev.3 


2318e/266e 
88-263 



GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirty-first regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT said the Conference's thirty-first session 
was of special significance, since it marked the Agency's thirtieth 
anniversary. He extended a special welcome to the Federal President of 
Austria, who would be addressing the opening meeting, to 
Mr. Bertrand Goldschmidt, and to three past Presidents of the General 
Conference, namely Mr. Keblusek (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Barreda Delgado (Peru) 
and Mr. Manouan (Cote d'lvoire). 
4. The General Conference was meeting for the first time in the Austria 
Center, a fine symbol of Austria's planning skills and sophisticated 
technology. 
5. In the three decades of its existence, the Agency had succeeded in 
establishing itself as the main international clearing-house for the exchange 
of information on nuclear science. However, much still remained to be done 
if it was to achieve its statutory objective, namely to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world. In its thirty-first year, the Agency should not only reflect on 
its achievements, but should also find ways of more effectively meeting the 
needs of developing countries. Those countries were looking forward to the 
many social and economic benefits to be derived from nuclear energy in such 
areas as the protection of crops, the combating of disease, improved use of 
water for farming, increased industrial efficiency, and the provision of 
low-cost electrical power. 


6. The events at Three Mile Island, and particularly the accident at 
Chernobyl the previous year, had given rise to considerable concern in the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 3 


developing world as to the safety, and therefore the future, of nuclear 
energy. The Director General and his staff were to be congratulated for the 
prompt and effective way in which they had acted to allay that concern. The 


lessons learned from those accidents had led to the enhancement of 


international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological protection, and 
nuclear power was now regaining widespread recognition as a safe and economic 
source of energy. 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


7. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
8. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland), speaking on behalf of the Western Europe 
regional group, proposed Mr. Colombo, delegate of Italy, as President of the 
General Conference at its thirty-first regular session. He had occupied 
positions of high responsibility both in the academic world, as Professor of 
Industrial Chemistry at Genoa University, and in the public domain, as 
Chairman of Italy's Nuclear Energy Commission. He had served on a variety of 
international committees concerned with scientific and technological subjects 
within the framework of the European Economic Community, the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, and the United Nations, and was the 
author of over 150 scientific publications as well as editor or co-editor of a 
number of works on science and energy policy. Those qualifications rendered 
him eminently suited to the post. 
9. Mr. HERRINGTON (United States of America), speaking on behalf of 
the North America regional group, seconded the nomination of Mr. Colombo. 
10. Mr. COSTANZO (Uruguay), on behalf of the Latin America regional 
group, Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic), on behalf of the 
Eastern Europe regional group, Mr. CHERIF (Algeria), on behalf of the Africa 
regional group, Mr. KHAN (Pakistan), on behalf of the Middle East and South 
Asia regional group, Mr. KONGSIRI (Thailand), on behalf of the South East Asia 
and the Pacific regional group, and Mr. LAVINA (Philippines) on behalf of the 
Far East regional group, supported the nomination. 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page A 

11. Mr. Colombo (Italy) was elected President of the General Conference for 
its thirty-first regular session by acclamation. 
12. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT congratulated Mr. Colombo on his election. 
Mr. Colombo (Italy) took the Chair. 


13. The PRESIDENT expressed his sincere appreciation of the honour 
conferred upon him by his unanimous election as President. The role entrusted 
to him was both important and sensitive and it was his earnest hope that with 
the goodwill and co-operation of delegates he would be able to fulfil his 
responsibilities with fairness and resolution. 
14. On behalf of the General Conference, he thanked Mr. Ramanna for his 
valuable work as President of the thirtieth session of the Conference. 
15. The thirty-first session of the General Conference represented an 
important milestone in the history of international co-operation in the 
nuclear field. The thirtieth anniversary of the Agency - which had come into 
being with the entry into force of its Statute on 29 July 195 7 - coincided 
with the first session of the General Conference in the impressive new complex 
at the Austria Center. He wished to express the deep gratitude of the 
Conference for the hospitality extended over the years by the Government of 
Austria. 
16. Among the many changes in the nuclear scene witnessed over the past 
thirty years, including the take-off and growth of nuclear power, an 
outstanding feature had been the strengthening of international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the enhanced role played by the 
Agency in that respect. The increased use of the Agency as an instrument of 
international co-operation had borne fruit, as had been evident in the past 
year, and Member States should strive to build on that foundation by actively 
seeking out areas of common agreement rather than concentrating on matters 
which obviously divided them. It was his profound belief that co-operation 
must spring, not just from appreciation of the virtues of solidarity, but also 
from an awareness that economic systems were now so closely interdependent 

GC(XXXI)/0R.293 
page 5 


that it would be impossible to avoid recession unless every effort was made to 
defeat shortsighted selfish attitudes and protectionism through whole hearted 
co-operation. 


17. In order to protect the Agency's role as a driving force and an 
instrument for international co-operation, Member States must diligently 
pursue the search for consensus, guided by the community of purpose which was 
the keynote of the United Nations Charter and the Agency's own Statute. 
Differences existed and must be respected where no violation of fundamental 
principles was involved; while the sovereignty of States was sacred and was 
the foundation of multilateral co-operation, the objectives of such 
co-operation were equally important and must always be borne in mind. Any 
weakening of that co-operative spirit could only lead to grave harm to the 
common interest of Member States. In that context, it was useful to remember 
that the Agency was a technical organization with a well-defined mandate and 
that seeking to resolve issues which were clearly political and beyond the 
scope of the Agency's competence would only weaken it and diminish its 
capacity to serve its Members in the areas in which it could help most 
effectively. 
18. The importance of the Agency's technical role had come to the fore in 
the wake of the Three Mile Island accident and, even more so, the Chernobyl 
accident, when the Agency had taken important new steps in the field of 
nuclear safety in close co-operation with Member States and with other 
international organizations. He had in mind in particular the rapid 
conclusion of two international conventions on safety and many other 
initiatives aimed at preventing accidents, strengthening technical controls on 
the safe use of nuclear energy and developing systems designed to limit any 
potentially harmful effects. 
19. He wished to express his great appreciation of the excellent work 
carried out during the past year by the Agency under the expert and dynamic 
leadership of its Director General, especially in promoting international 
co-operation in such fields as nuclear safety, radiation protection and 
technical assistance to developing countries. 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 6 


20. Nuclear energy, by its very nature, demanded a high degree of 
international co-operation, and while safety issues were primarily the 
responsibility of sovereign States, effective international co-operation was 
essential in order to optimize the performance of the tasks entrusted to 
national authorities. It was necessary now to increase the momentum and move 
towards the goal of strengthening public confidence in nuclear power. 
Effective co-operation in nuclear safety would help to restore the climate of 
trust necessary for further promoting nuclear energy, which had an important 
role to play in the future global energy supply. To that end, the continuing 
process of revising safety codes and guidelines would, it was hoped, lead to 
commonly accepted safety standards which would result in readier acceptance by 
the public of the benefits of nuclear power. 
21. There were already widespread signs of environmental degradation caused 
by the ever-increasing use of fossil fuels: the creeping impact of such 
pollution, though not immediately evident, could produce serious consequences, 
including undesirable climatic changes that would affect present and future 
generations. Nuclear fission, if properly managed, was a clean and cheap 
energy source and should therefore be fully exploited for a long time to 
come. The greatest possible attention to every aspect of safety, at all 
stages of the fuel cycle, the rigorous training of operators - in short, the 
worldwide diffusion of a real safety culture - would ensure a significant 
share for nuclear fission in the energy mix well into the next century. 
22. Looking into the more distant future, nuclear fusion offered an energy 
option of great potential interest. There was still a long way to go before 
its scientific and technological feasibility could be demonstrated, and 
international co-operation was therefore all the more important since it would 
enable efforts to be pooled and risks to be shared. The recent international 
initiative for new co-operation in the field of nuclear fusion under the 
auspices of the Agency, now embracing both East and West, was thus a matter of 
great satisfaction. 
23. Another important task deserving further expansion, was the one that 
the Agency performed in the area of non-power uses of nuclear energy. That 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 7 


was of great importance for the improvement of the quality of life, especially 
in the developing world, and involved applications in medicine, agriculture 
and industry. 


24. Prospects for international co-operation had also been considered by 
the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation 
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCP1CPUNE) which, while it had not 
been able to resolve differences in politics and principles, had succeeded in 
comprehensively reviewing the wide range of opportunities for nations to work 
together for development. 
25. If international co-operation was to succeed, it must take place in a 
climate of mutual trust. Governments and public opinion in many countries 
attached great importance to the assurance that the promotion of nuclear power 
did not lead to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The corner-stone of the 
non-proliferation regime remained the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear weapons (NPT), complemented by the treaties of Tlatelolco and 
Rarotonga. Substantial progress had been achieved in the past year, with a 
significant number of new accessions to NPT and the extension of Agency 
safeguards to more nuclear installations and material. Universal coverage of 
the safeguards system must remain the Agency's primary objective. 
26. To enable the Agency to fulfil its task in as broad a frame of 
reference as possible, the participation of a greater number of countries in 
its decision-making processes should be secured, due consideration being given 
to geographical representation and to the role and standing of Member States. 
27. Lastly, it was to be hoped that, in dealing with the many difficult 
problems on its agenda, the General Conference would be inspired by a spirit 
of co-operation and goodwill aimed at achieving a consensus, so that the final 
results would be acceptable to all. It was his fervent wish that during the 
present session delegates would prove that they could work constructively and 
in harmony for the common good, and that the thirty-first General Conference 
would mark a real step forward for the Agency. 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 


page 8 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


28. The PRESIDENT said he understood that informal consultations were 
still in progress on the appointment of the General Committee. However, some 
area groups had already put forward nominations. On the basis of those 
nominations, he proposed that the delegates of the following Member States be 
elected as Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: Australia, Canada, 
Ecuador, Federal Republic of Germany, Nigeria, and the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics. 
29. He proposed, in conformity with Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure 
of the General Conference, Mr. Guyer of Argentina as Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole and, pursuant to Rule 40, that the delegates of the 
following Member States be elected as additional members of the General 
Committee: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Hungary, Tunisia and the 
United States of America. 
30. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
31. The PRESIDENT suggested that further consideration of the matter be 
suspended until informal consultations had been completed. 
32


 It was so afireed. 


PROCEDURAL REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT 


33. The PRESIDENT said that document GC(XXXI)/INF/252, entitled 
"Statement of financial contributions to the Agency as at 21 September 1987", 
contained a list of those Member States to which Article XIX.A of the Statute 
applied on 21 September 1987. Article XIX.A stated that any Member in arrears 
in the payment of contributions should have no vote if the amount of the 
arrears equalled or exceeded the amount of contributions due for the preceding 
two years, but that the General Conference could permit such a Member to vote 
if it was satisfied that failure to pay was due to conditions beyond the 
control of the Member. He drew attention in that connection to 
document GC(XXXI)/INF/253, a communication from the Government of Nicaragua 
requesting that Article XIX.A not be applied to Nicaragua during the current 
session of the General Conference. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 9 


34. He suggested that, in accordance with Rule 42(b) of the Rules of 
Procedure, the matter be referred to the General Committee for consideration. 
35. It was so agreed. 
36. He further suggested that, as in previous years, pending the report of 
the General Committee on the agenda, the Conference take up items 2, 3, 5 and 
6. Those were formal items or items specified in the Statute. 
3 7. It was so agreed. 
OPENING STATEMENTS 


38. The PRESIDENT said that, on the occasion of the thirtieth 
anniversary of the founding of the Agency, he had pleasure in extending a 
welcome, on behalf of the Agency, to many distinguished guests from Austria, 
the host country, and elsewhere, including a number of persons who had been 
closely associated with the Agency's activities for many years and were 
honouring the General Conference with their presence. 
39. He welcomed the Federal President of Austria, Dr. Kurt Waldheim, whose 
presence served to underline the cordial relations that had existed between 
the Republic of Austria and the Agency over many years, and had great pleasure 
in inviting Dr. waldheim to address the Conference. 
40. Dr. WALDHEIM (Federal President of Austria) said that it was an 
honour and a pleasure for him to address the General Conference. Almost 
exactly 30 years before, on 1 October 1957, the General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, which had come into being in July of that 
year, had opened its first session and one of his predecessors, the late 
Federal President Dr. Adolf Scharf, had welcomed scientists and diplomats from 
55 countries to the opening meeting in Vienna's Konzerthaus. Today, 
representatives from almost all Member States were welcomed for the first time 
to the Austria Center in Vienna. He had great pleasure in extending to them 
the most cordial greetings and congratulations, both personally and on behalf 
of the Republic of Austria. 
41. Over the past three decades, the Agency had made a significant 
contribution to international co-operation, peace, security and the 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 10 


strengthening of an atmosphere of trust and mutual understanding between 
States. Thus, on the happy occasion of its thirtieth anniversary, the Agency 
was entitled not only to congratulations but also to gratitude from the 
international community for fulfilling a unique task and bearing a great 
responsibility. 


42. Only two years after regaining its full sovereignty in 1955, Austria 
had been particularly pleased at the choice of its capital, Vienna, as the 
site of the Agency's Headquarters, a decision seen as one of the first steps 
towards international acknowledgement of Austria's new position as an 
independent and neutral meeting place in the heart of Europe. Since then, 
Austria had revived its historical role as a place of encounter, drawing on 
experience gained through fruitful co-operation with the Agency. The fact 
that Austria's policy in that respect had received wide recognition and that 
Austria was now host to many international organizations and conferences could 
to a large extent be attributed to the early establishment of the Agency's 
Headquarters in Vienna. 
43. As a Member State of the Agency, Austria had the highest respect for 
what had been achieved through that organization's dedicated work. The Agency 
had effectively pursued its two statutory objectives of promoting the use of 
nuclear energy and ensuring that such use did not serve any military purpose. 
Over the years the Agency had earned international respect and trust for 
carrying out that twofold task with exceptional competence, particularly 
during recent events when increased public attention had been directed to the 
safety of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Those developments had 
ultimately led to a significant strengthening of the Agency's safety programme 
and the formulation of two new international conventions, and had confirmed 
the Agency as the international forum for information, analysis and joint 
action in the nuclear field. 
44. Today, almost 400 nuclear power plants produced 16% of the world's 
electricity, so that safety-related measures and the development and 
supervision of an effective safeguards system were legitimately among the 
Agency's main activities. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 11 


45. From personal experience, he remembered vividly the new dimensions that 
had been added to the Agency's safeguards responsibilities by the NPT 
in 1970. As chairman of a committee drawing up recommendations for the 
application of safeguards under the new regime of the Treaty, he had had the 
opportunity to become acquainted with the Agency's manifold activities and to 
work with its highly motivated and skilled staff. 
46. While the development of the safeguards system had undoubtedly been one 
of the most important elements of the Agency's work, its valuable output in 
other fields should not be underestimated. He had in mind particularly the 
nuclear safety standards programme, the international exchange of scientific 
and technical knowledge and experience - of which the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) was an important example - the valuable research 
done in the fields of agriculture and life sciences supported by the 
Seibersdorf and Monaco Laboratories and the work of the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics in Trieste. 
47. The past thirty years had undoubtedly produced a growing number of 
tasks for the Agency, tasks which had been accomplished to the satisfaction of 
Member States. The Agency's activities demonstrated convincingly how an 
international organization could contribute effectively to the promotion of 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world, thus becoming a model for 
international co-operation. 
48. The Agency was now facing new challenges. The present era required a 
concept of the peaceful use of nuclear energy that took changing perceptions 
into account. Looking back on thirty years of fruitful work, there was every 
reason to believe that those challenges would be met with the same enthusiasm 
and professionalism as in the past. 
49. On behalf of the Republic of Austria, he offered the warmest 
congratulations on an anniversary of which the Agency could be proud. His 
country would continue to give the Agency its full support. 
50. The PRESIDENT thanked Dr. Waldheim for his address and for his 
welcome words of continued support for the Agency. 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 12 


51. Ms. ANSTEE (Representative of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations) said she wished to convey a message from the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations. 
52. The Secretary-General had great pleasure in extending congratulations 
to the Agency on its thirtieth anniversary and wished it every success for the 
thirty-first session of its General Conference. 
53. The experience of recent years had shown with great clarity the 
importance of the responsibilities entrusted to the Agency and the 
effectiveness with which it was carrying them out. The Agency's safeguards 
system had stood the test of time, affording a basis for international 
confidence that would not otherwise have existed. That was indicative of the 
potential of multilateral organizations for providing verification services 
for future arms limitation agreements. At the same time, the Agency's 
technical assistance and co-operation programmes had been extremely helpful in 
meeting the needs of developing countries in the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. It was clear that the economic disparities existing in the modern 
world affected not only the well-being of the peoples of the poorest countries 
but might also have negative repercussions on global economic co-operation, 
commerce and development. It was therefore in the interests of the 
international community for the Agency to continue to expand those programmes 
to meet the growing needs of developing countries in various areas of the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
54. Another vital function of the Agency had been the development of safety 
standards for nuclear installations and nuclear waste management. Chernobyl 
had shown - if further evidence had indeed been required - that where the 
release of radioactive substances into the environment was concerned, the 
world was a single entity. The spirit of co-operation that had animated so 
many governments following the accident had been a strong reminder of the 
value and the necessity, in an interdependent world, of international 
co-operation in nuclear matters. The efforts of the Agency which had led to 
the adoption of conventions on nuclear safety constituted a significant 
contribution to global well-being and afforded reassurance on the continued 
use of the atom as a source of energy. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 13 


55. The myriad peaceful uses of nuclear energy had brought impressive 
benefits in fields such as health, agricultural production and scientific 
research as well as energy. The United Nations Conference on the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE) 
held earlier in the year in Geneva had provided an opportunity for extensive 
consideration of the subject and its report should constitute a useful 
contribution to the development of the future agenda of the Agency. 
56. While he was convinced that nuclear science could continue to 
contribute to better conditions of life, those benefits would never be fully 
secure as long as nuclear weapons existed. The progress achieved in ensuring 
the safety of the peaceful use of nuclear technology must be matched by 
progress in reducing the danger inherent in its military application. In that 
connection, the announcement of the agreement in principle between the 
Soviet Union and the United States to eliminate their intermediate-range and 
shorter-range nuclear missiles and to pursue negotiations on a complete test 
ban and the reduction of their strategic nuclear weapons was to be welcomed as 
a development of major importance. With that agreement, including the 
provisions foreseen for verification, it should be easier to make progress on 
other disarmament negotiations. In order to take full advantage of such a 
positive development to move towards the goal of eliminating nuclear weapons 
altogether, it was of critical importance to avoid both the vertical and 
horizontal proliferation of such weapons. 
57. In his annual report to the General Assembly of the United Nations, he 
had had occasion to comment on the improving climate of international 
affairs. Notwithstanding the political and ideological divisions between 
States and the stresses and strains of international events, he detected an 
increasing, commonly accepted interest in meeting successfully certain vital 
global challenges. Aware of the dangers of immobility, countries of disparate 
political orientations and economic systems had begun to tackle the problems 
of an interdependent world with a new pragmatism. 
58. The Agency was at the forefront of such efforts and had been for over 
thirty years. He commended the Agency for its contribution to multilateral 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 14 


co-operation. There could be no doubt that the safety and well-being of the 
global population would need the effective services of the Agency in 
ever-increasing measure. 


59. Mr. CEIRANO (Holy See) said he wished to convey a message from His 
Holiness Pope John Paul II, who extended his greetings and good wishes to the 
Agency as it began the thirty-first session of its General Conference. He 
prayed that the present session would further international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while ensuring the protection of the 
environment precisely at a time when steps were being taken to eliminate from 
the use of the atom the possibility of destruction which for so many years had 
dominated the development of atomic science. 
60. Upon all participants His Holiness invoked God's blessing of wisdom and 
peace. 
61. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria), conveying a message from the Chairman of 
the Bulgarian Council of State, Mr. Todor Zhivkov, congratulating the Agency 
on its thirtieth anniversary, said that in thirty years the Agency had 
developed into an organization whose competence regarding co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, expansion of nuclear power and application of 
the atom in science, industry and agriculture could not be questioned. It was 
an outstanding example of an efficient international body in which the 
knowledge and experience of countries with differing political systems and 
levels of development were actively exchanged. 
62. Bulgaria attached great importance to the Agency's activities and was 
actively co-operating in its efforts to attain the noble goals set out in its 
Statute. Atomic energy for peaceful purposes, which was increasingly being 
exploited by all of mankind, must be more widely used for the advancement of 
all peoples and mobilized for the creation of a world in which all could live 
in peace. Bulgaria valued highly the role played by the Agency in monitoring 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons: in the nuclear age, that work was 
of profound importance for the preservation of mankind from a nuclear 
disaster. There was no doubt that the Agency would continue successfully to 
promote the use of atomic energy in the interests of peace and world progress. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 15 


63. Mr. JIANG (China) said that he had pleasure in conveying a message 
of congratulation from Mr. Zhao Ziyang, Premier of the State Council of China, 
to the General Conference on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the 
founding of the Agency. 
64. Over the past thirty years the Agency had played a positive and 
effective role in promoting and ensuring the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and in fostering international co-operation in that field. He sincerely hoped 
that such a role could be further enhanced. 
65. Since becoming a Member of the Agency, China had enjoyed satisfactory 
co-operation with it. The Chinese Government wished to strengthen further its 
co-operation with the Agency and the other Member States as well its 
participation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the world. 
66. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba), reading out a message from 
Mr. Fidel Castro Ruz, the President of the the Cuban Council of State, said 
that for the past thirty years, the Agency had promoted the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and contributed to the dissemination of experience in that 
field, thereby benefiting the economies of many countries. During that 
period, the use of nuclear energy had expanded rapidly: 400 reactors were now 
in existence, producing 15% of the world's electricity. For many developing 
countries, particularly those which had no other renewable or secure energy 
sources, nuclear energy was the sole means of meeting energy requirements. 
However, as events had shown, the boom in the use of nuclear power was 
accompanied by potential dangers. That was why a key facet of the Agency's 
activities would continue to be the study and application of measures to 
ensure the safety of nuclear facilities and the radiation protection of 
workers. 
67. Cuba was introducing nuclear power, which was indispensable for its 
development, in full accordance with its international commitments and with 
due regard for security and safety. Special attention was being given to the 
nuclear safety requirements established for the type of power station that was 
being built: strict measures were being applied at a number of levels, 
including the planning, construction, assembly and future use of the plant and 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 16 


the training of the staff who would be responsible for its operation. Cuba 
was equally safety-conscious concerning the use of nuclear technology in 
various sectors of the economy and in health care. 


68. The experience of the thirty or so countries which already had nuclear 
power programmes was encouraging, but unfortunately it was now impossible for 
the benefits of that valuable resource to be extended to other countries which 
required it. That lamentable situation had to be attributed to the arms race, 
in which billions of dollars were invested annually, which escalated the 
threat of a nuclear holocaust day by day, and the adverse effects of which 
were compounded by the severe international economic crisis that afflicted all 
countries, particularly the neediest. 
69. As the Agency celebrated its thirtieth anniversary, mankind called out 
for an end to the arms race, the resolution of the economic crisis and the 
means of ensuring that nuclear energy would be man's ally, and not his ruin. 
Cuba would continue to support the Agency's programmes fully: the Agency 
could count on the active help of the Cuban Government in fulfilling the high 
responsibilities conferred upon it by the international community. 
70. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia), transmitting a congratulatory message 
from the President of Czechoslovakia, Mr. Gustav Husak, said that, as one of 
the Agency's founding Members, Czechoslovakia was deeply committed to the 
Agency's activities and worked constantly to enhance the authority it 
commanded within the complex mosaic of international relations. 
71. Thirty years of fruitful work by the Agency had shown that the use of 
the atom for exclusively peaceful purposes had contributed to the development 
of international co-operation and the maintenance of peace. In an age of 
nuclear and space technology, such a course was the only reasonable and 
realistic one. For that reason, Czechoslovakia had consistently supported 
efforts to avert the threat of nuclear war and to halt the arms race, and had 
urged the adoption of concrete disarmament measures, particularly in the 
nuclear field. In concert with its allies and other peace-loving States, 
Czechoslovakia was working for the speedy implementation of a programme for 
the gradual abolition of nuclear and other types of weapons of mass 

GC(XXXI)/0R.293 
page 17 


destruction by the year 2000. If the programme were implemented, the threat 
of a nuclear catastrophe would be removed and all the nations of the world 
could enter the new millennium in security, free from fear for their 
survival. The financial, material, scientific, human and other resources 
thereby released could be used to promote social and economic progress and to 
assist developing countries. 


72. Nuclear energy represented an indispensable and promising resource for 
future development. In implementing its programme of nuclear power 
generation, Czechoslovakia would continue to expand its comprehensive 
co-operation with the Agency. It had a high regard for the safeguards system, 
which was a recognized instrument of international control designed to ensure 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and attached great importance to the 
creation of a regime for the safe development of nuclear power. Through 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, it 
would continue in future to assist the developing countries, and it would also 
take an active part in implementing other useful Agency programmes. It would, 
in short, do everything in its power to ensure that those Agency activities 
which contributed to the preservation of international peace, the 
strengthening of security and the expansion of co-operation were pursued 
successfully in future. 
73. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic), conveying a message 
from Mr. Erich Honecker, Chairman of the Council of State of the German 
Democratic Republic, said that the Agency was commemorating its anniversary at 
a time when there was a chance that genuine disarmament measures might be 
achieved, thereby enabling a solid foundation for peace to be built and 
mankind freed from the nightmare of a nuclear catastrophe. At a session of 
the Political Consultative Committee held recently in Berlin, the Warsaw Pact 
States had reaffirmed their intention to do everything they could to help 
eliminate nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction by the end of 
the twentieth century. An agreement on the abolition of intermediate-range 
nuclear weapons by the United States and the Soviet Union would be a major 
step in that direction. Soviet proposals had brought such an agreement within 
close reach. 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 18 


74. The Agency's commitment to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
the safe development of nuclear energy was highly commendable: the Agency had 
long played an outstanding role in promoting scientific and technological 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in assisting 
developing countries. In so doing, it made an important contribution to the 
strengthening of international security, the building of confidence among 
States and the expansion of international co-operation. In performing its 
important tasks, it could in future rely on the continued active participation 
of the German Democratic Republic. 
75. Mr. ZILLER (Federal Republic of Germany), transmitting a message 
from the Federal Chancellor of his country, Dr. Helmut Kohl, said that since 
its establishment in 195 7, the Agency had proved to be an important instrument 
for promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It had established an 
exemplary system of international safeguards and gave technical assistance to 
a wide variety of Member States. It was committed to the cause of nuclear 
safety and, after the nuclear accident in the Ukraine, it had served as a 
forum for consultation and discussion: the speedy adoption of the early 
notification and emergency assistance conventions had underlined its 
efficiency and usefulness. 
76. The Federal Republic of Germany continued to espouse the aims and 
principles of the Agency and to support its work as a most valuable 
contribution to peace and development. 
77. Mr. TETENYI (Hungary), reading out a message from 
Mr. Karoly Grosz, the President of the Hungarian Council of Ministers, 
congratulating the Agency on its thirtieth anniversary, said the Agency had 
gained an outstanding international reputation within a comparatively short 
period of time. Its task in connection with the non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and the international monitoring of nuclear materials to ensure that 
they were used solely for peaceful purposes was quite unique. It had 
successfully organized extensive co-operation among its Member States in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, thereby contributing to the scientific, 
technical, social and economic progress of nations, and had worked effectively 
to promote the use of nuclear power and to enhance the safety of nuclear power 
plants. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 19 


78. In line with its foreign policy and political objectives, Hungary would 
continue its active and constructive participation in the Agency's work. His 
country was convinced that the activities carried out under Agency auspices 
represented an outstanding contribution to the building of confidence among 
the nations of the world. 
79. Mr. SRINIVASAN (India), conveying a congratulatory message from 
Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, the Prime Minister of India, said the Agency's primary role 
was to promote the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. Developing 
countries could derive immense socio-economic benefits from such peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy as power generation and the application of radiation 
technology in agriculture, medicine and industry. Future programmes of the 
Agency should be focused even more directly on achieving the objective of 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
80. India, as one of the Agency's founding Members, would continue to 
support the organization. 
81. Mr. TSEREN (Mongolia) reading out a message from the Chairman of 
his country's Council of Ministers, Mr. D. Sodnom, said the Agency was an 
international organization of high repute whose activities were directly 
related to the strengthening of international security and thereby served the 
interests of all States. In the thirty years of its existence, it had become 
a widely recognized centre for co-ordinating the efforts of governments to 
develop international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and to ensure nuclear safety. His 
country lent full support to the Agency's activities and took an active part 
in its work. 
82. At the present critical stage of human history, ending the arms race, 
particularly the nuclear arms race, was a task of capital importance. The 
Agency, whose mandate was to maximize the opportunities for mankind to live in 
peace, was making and would continue to make a unique contribution to the 
quest for a non-nuclear, non-violent world. Against that background, 
reinforcing the non-proliferation regime and improving the effectiveness of 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 20 


the safeguards system took on even greater significance. The Agency's 
experience in monitoring the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons could be 
used for the solution of other disarmament problems as well. 


83. The Government of Mongolia welcomed the Agency's efforts to strengthen 
conditions for the safe development of nuclear power: the early notification 
and emergency assistance conventions, which had already entered into force, 
afforded an international legal framework for the safe development of nuclear 
power. 
84. Mr. SOMINSKI (Poland), transmitting a message of congratulations 
to the Agency from the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Poland, 
Mr. Zbigniew Messner, said that, as a specialized agency established thirty 
years ago in a climate of rapprochement among nations, the IAEA had greatly 
facilitated the expansion of international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy and thereby helped strengthen the cause of international 
security and human advancement. 
85. The co-operation of a great many States under Agency auspices, on a 
number of aspects of atomic energy, had yielded tangible results, and it 
continued to enable nations to make safe use of the benefits of atomic energy, 
due regard being paid to the principles of non-proliferation. 
86. As a founding Member of the Agency, Poland commended the dedication of 
the staff to the fulfilment of important and difficult responsibilities: that 
would help the Agency to multiply its achievements and to contribute to the 
improvement of the well-being of mankind. Poland would spare no effort to 
help the Agency carry out its tasks to the full. 
87. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), 
transmitting a message of congratulations to the Agency from Mr. N. Ryzhkov, 
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, said the IAEA 
was rightly regarded as one of the most competent international organizations 
and as a centre for co-ordinating and harmonizing the efforts of States in the 
peaceful use of atomic energy and the monitoring of the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. The Agency's entire 30-year history had demonstrated beyond 
doubt that its establishment had been a landmark in the development of 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 21 


international co-operation to ensure that atomic energy was used for peace and 
to meet social and economic development needs. The Agency's practical 
assistance to countries in such areas as nuclear power production and the use 
of radioisotopes and radiation in industry, agriculture, medicine and science 
was of great value. 


88. Co-operation among States in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would 
enter a qualitatively new stage if real progress was made in instituting 
nuclear disarmament and universal security. The Soviet Union viewed 
co-operation in that field as an alternative to the nuclear arms race and to 
the expenditure of mankind's immense material and intellectual resources on 
the development of increasingly dangerous and sophisticated means of 
self-destruction. Guided by the idea that atomic energy should be used 
exclusively for creative purposes, the Soviet Union had advanced an entire set 
of initiatives which had opened up real prospects for progress towards a 
safer, non-violent world. That was concrete proof of his country's readiness 
to ensure, through practical steps, that the atom-for-peace principle 
developed into a universal norm of international relations. 
89. The Agency was making a substantial practical contribution to the 
strengthening of international security and the creation of an atmosphere of 
confidence and understanding among States. The Agency's safeguards against 
the diversion of nuclear materials and civilian facilities for military 
purposes were an effective barrier to the spread of nuclear weapons throughout 
the world. The Agency was the only international control mechanism operating 
today in the nuclear arms limitation field, and its experience in that area 
could be used for solving other nuclear disarmament problems. 
90. The Soviet Union, which was among those countries that had proposed the 
establishment of the Agency, was prepared to continue giving it generous 
assistance in key areas of its activities. It favoured extending the scope of 
the Agency's functions, a purpose which would be served by the implementation 
of the Soviet proposals to establish an international regime for the safe 
development of nuclear power; those proposals had already elicited a positive 
response and support from the Agency. 

GC((XXXI)/OR.293 
page 22 


91. His country recognized the importance of the Agency's safeguards 
activities and sought to enhance their effectiveness and reliability. It was 
prepared to continue, in strict compliance with the principles set out in the 
Agency's Statute, to share its experience and technical know-how with those 
countries that used atomic energy exclusively for peaceful purposes, and 
thereby to contribute to their prosperity and progress. 
92. Mr. HERRINGTON (United States of America), transmitting a message 
from Mr. Ronald Reagan, the President of the United States, congratulating the 
Agency on its thirtieth anniversary, said that over the past three decades, 
the Agency had served as a model of effective international co-operation and 
had fostered peace and prosperity world wide. Through its safeguards 
activities, the Agency had been an invaluable part of efforts to prevent the 
further spread of nuclear weapons, and it had also worked with competence and 
success to promote the peaceful uses of the atom through its technical 
co-operation, nuclear safety and research programmes. Its prompt response to 
the Chernobyl accident had been particularly noteworthy. 
93. The Agency had been, and remained, an organization of singular 
importance to the United States, one which, within the broader United Nations 
system, had demonstrated an exceptional commitment to the purposes and 
principles for which it had been established. His country would continue to 
provide strong support for the Agency's work in the years ahead. 
94. Mr. LE BA GAP (Viet Nam), conveying a message from Mr. Pham Hung, 
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Viet Nam, on the occasion of the 
Agency's thirtieth anniversary, said that in its 30-year history, the Agency 
had chalked up remarkable successes in promoting the use of nuclear science 
and technology for peaceful purposes and in contributing to the economic and 
social development of its Member States, particularly the developing 
countries. The fact that peoples throughout the world were stepping up the 
struggle for peace and international security, for an end to the arms race and 
for disarmament, particularly in the nuclear field, and that the Soviet Union 
and other countries had advanced constructive proposals to eliminate the 
nuclear threat and to establish nuclear-free zones, had created favourable 

GC(XXXI)/OR.293 
page 23 


conditions in the international arena for the Agency to intensify its 
activities in accordance with the principles of international co-operation 
endorsed by UNCPICPUNE earlier that year. 


95. Viet Nam's association with the Agency over the past ten years had 
been fruitful, which boded well for the future. Under difficult conditions, 
when it had been necessary for his country to heal the wounds inflicted by 
war and to achieve social and economic development, the Agency had actively 
helped to create the material and technical foundation required for the 
development of nuclear energy and to train a growing number of specialists in 
nuclear science and technology. Viet Nam was grateful for that effective 
co-operation, and would do everything in its power to help achieve the 
Agency's goals. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
April 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

For official use only 

THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 


on Monday, 21 September 1987, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 


agenda** 


Address by Mr. Goldschmidt on the occasion 
of the Agency's thirtieth anniversary 1 - 17 
3 Statement by the Director General 18 - 69 
6 General debate and annual report for 1986 70 - 138 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 70 - 84 
Japan 85 - 97 
Australia 98 - 110 
Nigeria 111 - 122 
Chile 123 - 138 
1 Election of officers and appointment of 
the General Committee (resumed) 139 - 141 


4 Arrangements for the Conference 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
of items for initial discussion 142 - 143 
[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 16 November 1987. 
[**] GC(XXXI)/799. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-1417 
2450e/0309e 



GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 2 


ADDRESS BY MR. GOLDSCHMIDT ON THE OCCASION OB' THE AGENCY'S THIRTIETH 
ANNIVERSARY 


1. The PRESIDENT said that the Agency's thirtieth anniversary gave 
Member States the opportunity to recall the ideals which had inspired the 
organization's founding fathers, to reflect on the major events of the past 
30 years and to look ahead to the future. No one, perhaps, was better 
qualified to help the General Conference to do that than 
Mr. Bertrand Goldschmidt, who had for a long time been one of the most 
distinguished members of the Agency's Board of Governors, who had been a 
member of the Scientific Advisory Committee and who had been Chairman of the 
Board at the beginning of the 1980s. Since Mr. Goldschmidt had agreed to 
address the General Conference, it was a pleasure to give him the floor. 


2. Mr. GOLDSCHMIDT said that his links with the Agency were indeed of 
long standing and in fact even stretched back to the time before its 
establishment, since he had been the first expert appointed to take part in 
the international negotiations leading to its creation. When the American, 
British, French and Soviet ministers of foreign affairs had met in Berlin in 
1953, Paris had decided to send him as an expert in the French delegation. 
Regrettably, the problems concerning the future of Germany and Austria, the 
armistice in Korea and the war in Indochina had left little opportunity to 
discuss the proposed international agency and the real negotiations had only 
taken place much later. 
3. Two missions had been given to the Agency by its founding fathers, to 
"accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world" and to "ensure, so far as it is able, that 
assistance provided by it or at its request or under its supervision or 
control is not used in such a way as to further any military purpose". There 
was no doubt that the Agency's success in that second mission was the 
brightest jewel in its crown. Although some countries, desirous of 
maintaining their independence, were reluctant to place all their activities 
under Agency safeguards, no State disputed the quality of the safeguards 
system; yet the creation of that system had been a long and difficult process. 
A. Two earlier proposals for the establishment of an international 
organization responsible for monitoring nuclear activities had been made - one 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 3 


American and one Soviet - between 1946 and 1948, during the work of the United 
Nations Atomic Energy Commission; both had resulted in deadlock. The American 
proposal of 1946, based on the philosophy of the Lilienthal-Acheson report, 
had totally ignored control and inspection. It proposed that all stages which 
were dangerous from the standpoint of their potential for the manufacture of 
weapons should be made the responsibility of an international authority which 
would possess all the fissionable material in the world and exploit it for the 
benefit of all nations. That revolutionary concept would of course have led 
to a loss of national sovereignty which many countries, including one of the 
main ones, had not been prepared to accept. The Soviet proposal of June 1947, 
on the other hand, had focussed entirely on control and inspection. It had 
been based on the prerequisite of rejecting and prohibiting weapons, and 
backed up by a system of regular international inspections to verify the 
peaceful nature of nuclear facilities - which would continue to be the sole 
responsibility of the State concerned; that proposal had been surprisingly 
similar to the future Non-Proliferation Treaty, which was to come only 
20 years later. However, it had been rejected by a majority of Member States 
on the Commission, who were hostile to inspection and favourable to 
international management. Having participated personally in the preparation 
of the expert report which had rejected the Soviet proposal, he had often 
wondered since that time whether an opportunity of slowing down, if not 
halting, the arms race had not after all been missed: as matters stood, only 
very recent meetings had given any grounds to hope that the arms race would 
slow down. 


5. The proposal made in 1953 by President Eisenhower had aimed at 
modifying the nuclear arms race to some extent, proposing that States owning 
fissionable materials should give up increasingly large quantities of them and 
hand them over to an international organization responsible for managing a 
store, for protecting the store or bank against any surprise attack, and for 
redistributing the materials throughout the world so that they could be used 
to benefit the whole of mankind. The agency which it had been proposed to set 
up was to have the important task of developing methods to ensure peaceful 
utilization of the fissionable materials which it distributed. That peaceful 
utilization clause had been completely original at the time and contained the 
seeds of the safeguards system later to emerge. The preparation of the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 4 


Agency's Statute had lasted from 1954 to 1956, and those three years had been 
a favourable period for nuclear energy, characterized by renunciation of the 
secret policy pursued since the war by the United States, Canada and the 
United Kingdom; by a resumption of the exchange of knowledge, nuclear 
materials and equipment; by the entry into service, in the United States, of 
the first nuclear powered submarine and, in the USSR, of the first nuclear 
power plant; and finally by the great success of the First Geneva Conference, 
held in August 1955, which had marked the lifting of the shroud of secrecy and 
followed by only a few months the announcement by the United Kingdom of the 


first nuclear power programme. 


6. The conference held in New York in 1956 to adopt the Agency's Statute 
had been characterized above all by differences of opinion regarding the 
extent of the control powers which should be given to the new organization. 
The French delegation (which he had led) had been instructed to give greater 
emphasis to the Agency's mission of promoting nuclear energy as opposed to its 
mission of control. It had been able to accept the principle of controls on 
enriched uranium and plutonium, products involving a considerable national 
effort which could easily be used for military purposes, but it had been 
opposed to controls on natural uranium, particularly because of the 
discrimatory nature of such controls, which would place countries with uranium 
mines on their own territory, or countries which had already signed contracts 
for the long-term purchase of uranium with no clause governing its peaceful 
use, in a more favourable position. Many developing countries, including 
India, had supported that view. Initially he had defended it himself - and, 
more generally, the reasonable application of controls and of "follow-up 
rights" - but had later come to the realization that there were no sound 
technical grounds for excluding controls on uranium; so, in the end, no 
distinction had been made between natural uranium and enriched uranium in the 
article on safeguards. 
7. The opposition had been led by the Indian delegate, the great physicist 
Homi Bhabha, who had presided at the First Geneva Conference and enjoyed 
considerable personal prestige. Bhabha had wanted, above all, to keep out of 
the Statute a clause which would have given the Agency, for any facility 
placed under its control, the right to fix the quantity of produced plutonium 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 5 


which the country involved could keep for itself. That clause, according to 
its opponents, would have given the Agency too much power over the economy of 
any country which based its electricity supply on nuclear power. On 
19 October 1956, the day fixed for the closing of the Conference, the result 
of the vote on Article XII, concerning safeguards, had still been uncertain 
after two weeks of discussions as had the fate of the Agency itself. The 
Swiss delegation and the French delegation had submitted a conciliation 
amendment giving countries the right to keep as much of the plutonium produced 
by them as was needed for their research programmes and for the refuelling of 
existing reactors or reactors under construction. Thereupon the United States 
delegation had asked for time to consider the proposal, and the Conference had 
been extended. The Americans, and then the Indians, had finally accepted the 
compromise; but failure of the Conference had been only narrowly averted. 
That clause, which had been discussed so much yet never applied in practice, 
was to become topical 25 years later as the basis for certain solutions 
proposed in the discussion on international plutonium storage - on which 
consensus seemed to be a long way off. 


8. The first years of the Agency's existence, under the direction of 
Sterling Cole, had been difficult. Subject to the vagaries of the cold war, 
it had never been able to play the role of banker of fissionable materials as 
envisaged by President Eisenhower. The advanced countries had undertaken a 
policy of construction and transfer of reactors through bilateral agreements; 
there could be no question for them of accepting Agency controls - indeed, it 
was proving impossible to set them up in any case, and the methods of applying 
them were the subject of interminable meetings and discussions in the Board of 
Governors. With such a bleak outlook, the Agency had been forced to 
concentrate its activities in those early years on problems of technical 
assistance, questions of safety and international regulations and the 
organization of international conferences and seminars. 
9. The outlook had suddenly become brighter following the Cuba affair in 
the autumn of 1962. After having apparently come to the brink of a nuclear 
conflict, the world had then embarked on a process of detente which had led, 
in August 1963, to the signing in Moscow of the Partial Test Ban Treaty and 
had been marked by the disappearance, in the Board of Governors, of obstacles 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 6 


to the establishment of an international safeguards system. The decision of 
the United States, in the middle of the 1960s, to give the Agency 
responsibility for monitoring its bilateral agreements, followed by the 
signing in 1968 of the Won-Proliferation Treaty and finally the acceptance, in 
1975, by France of a common policy for supplier countries regarding 
non-proliferation, had all been events which were to culminate in the maturity 
of the Agency's safeguards system. It was true that such a system could not 
altogether prevent illicit diversions or violations of the rules, but it acted 
as a deterrent because of the possibility of early detection of any failure to 
observe peaceful utilization commitments. It had conferred upon the Agency, 
so to speak, its patent of nobility; it had brought about the disappearance of 
bilateral controls and replaced the controls applied by the OECD - though not 
yet those of EURATOM. All that had been accomplished during the 20 years in 
which Mr. Eklund had calmly, skillfully and energetically guided the 
organization to its maturity, 


10. Those years had seen the introduction of a vast programme of technical 
assistance and training of experts, of research programmes involving 
co-operation between several countries, assistance missions, exchanges of 
information through the 1N1S system and, finally, the establishment of the 
famous International Centre at Trieste. 
11. However, while the nuclear power programmes of advanced countries or 
countries in the process of rapid industrialization had been successful, the 
development of medium-sized reactors had lagged behind - a particularly 
regrettable thing, since those were precisely the power plants needed by 
developing countries, whose grids and electricity demand could not accommodate 
the more powerful units. That would have been an ideal area for the Agency to 
exercise its promotional mission. 
12. Thus, the Agency had gradually been divided between countries which 
produced nuclear power and those which heard it being talked about but had no 
hope of profiting from it in the near future. Those countries, primarily the 
members of the Group of 77, already frustrated at not being able to 
participate more fully in the high echelons of the Agency and in the Board of 
Governors (one need only consider the famous, indeed interminable negotiations 
on Article VI of the Statute), also resented having to share, to however small 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 7 


an extent, the financing of the increasingly costly safeguards system. The 
safeguards budget at present accounted for more than a third of the overall 
budget, and he felt that that ceiling should not be exceeded even if the 
system had to be reviewed and made more flexible in order to maintain its 
effectiveness. 


13. The gap which had thus formed between those two categories of 
Member States during the 1970s had, fortunately, gradually been filled in the 
past few years through the diplomatic and administrative talent of the present 
Director General, Mr. Blix (a talent which had also enabled him to apply the 
Agency's technical potential quickly and effectively at the time of the 
Chernobyl accident and to draw all the appropriate consequences in the vital 
area of reactor safety). 
14. Nevertheless, discussions within the Agency had become clearly 
politicized during recent years, focussing sometimes on problems which, while 
undoubtedly serious, had nothing to do with the nuclear field and therefore 
belonged in international fora other than the Board of Governors or the 
General Conference. Similarly, a certain tendency to proscribe countries 
which had decided not to subject all their activities to Agency safeguards was 
somewhat disturbing: although their decision might be regrettable, it 
nevertheless lay within their sovereignty, and there was accordingly no 
justification for discrimination against them. If there were to be any 
discrimination within the Agency - which was after all wholly undesirable - it 
should rather be between countries which clearly favoured the mission of 
promoting nuclear energy - as mentioned in Article II of the Statute - and 
those which disapproved of that mission and emphasized their disapproval by 
banning the construction of power plants on their own territory and often by 
seeking to stop such programmes in other countries. However, the Agency, 
which tried to convince countries that they should accept full-scope 
safeguards, had not so far made any attempt to persuade those Members who 
rejected nuclear power to reverse their decision. 
15. It was, moreover, rather paradoxical that the Agency should have its 
headquarters in a country which, having completed its first nuclear power 
plant, had then decided not to put it into operation but instead to dismantle 
it. Similarly, it was paradoxical that the Agency's Director General should 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 8 


be the citizen of a country which, although among the most advanced in the 
nuclear field, had recently witnessed a decision of its Parliament to ban that 
form of energy on its territory by the beginning of the twenty-first century: 
whereas a candidate from a country which had kept the military option open 
could probably not aspire to the post of Director General. 


16. The modern world was thus full of contradictions, and the Agency would 
no doubt have to continue to develop with a disparate membership including 
nuclear-weapon States, States which had rejected such weapons, others which 
were keeping their options open, countries with nuclear power programmes, 
others opposed to such programmes, and yet others that wished to benefit from 
the new form of energy but were not yet technically and financially ready to 
adopt it; and that membership would have to co-exist without discrimination. 
For the good of the Agency, every effort should be made to remove politics 
from its discussions as far as possible and to recall that its main assets 
were its technical capital, represented by its engineers, research workers and 
laboratories as well as its safeguards system, which, in the event of nuclear 
disarmament, might well be used to verify stocks of explosives transferred to 
civil use, as had been envisaged by Eisenhower. However, it should not be 
forgotten that the Agency's future was basically linked to that of the overall 
development of power production from fission. 
17. He was personally convinced of the absolute necessity for civilization 
to continue to develop that form of energy in a world where the population was 
going to double rapidly. Taking up once more the famous formula of 
Homi Bhabha, he felt sure that there could be no form of energy more dangerous 
to peace, health and security than the absence of energy. The Agency should 
therefore pursue its dual mission by continuing to minimize the risks of 
proliferation and by laying due stress on its promotional mission - whatever 
the difficulties, and whatever its opponents might say. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


18. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that in the year that had passed, the 
Agency's thirtieth year, the world of nuclear energy had been dominated by 
actions and reactions springing from the Chernobyl accident. There had been 
sorrow and shock, but not paralysis. On the contrary, the accident had 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 9 


stimulated powerful efforts to prevent any repetition of such a misfortune and 
to ensure that if, despite all the precautions taken, a serious accident were 
to happen again, its consequences would be minimized. A particularly 
important point was that the accident had shown that collective action at the 
international level was essential to bring about much of the analysis, 
assessment and action that governments believed to be necessary. 


19. The fact that full use had been made of the Agency showed that Members 
had confidence in the Agency as a common forum and instrument for action. 
That confidence in the mechanisms and traditions of the Agency, and in its 
Secretariat, was an asset which had been gradually built up during 
three decades of fruitful co-operation. It was something that the governments 
of Member States and the Secretariat could alike be proud of. Properly used, 
the value of that asset would continuously increase as the Agency moved into 
its fourth decade. However, it was equally important to be aware particularly 
at the General Conference - that that vital instrument of 
co-operation could be jeopardized or seriously damaged if the demands placed 
on it were too heavy. Co-operation was not enhanced but rather damaged when 
matters were settled by means of controversial votes. There was in fact a 
serious danger, because in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, as in 
many other areas of endeavour in the contemporary world, international 
co-operation was a necessity and not a luxury. 
20. The general debate which was about to open would not lead to any common 
conclusions or decisions, but it provided governments with a good opportunity 
to benefit from each other's experience and knowledge. Indeed, decisionmakers 
throughout the world were faced with the same fundamental questions, 
namely what increases in the demand for energy could be expected and how they 
could be met. Many were wondering, in particular, what role should be played 
by nuclear power. Although answers to that question varied, there was no 
doubt that an examination of the facts and arguments at international level 
could be useful to Member States. In the past year, attention and discussions 
had been focussed on the risks associated with the operation of nuclear power 
plants. As governments considered their energy policies for the decade to 
come, they would be well advised to place those risks in the proper 
perspective and assess them dispassionately, together with all other relevant 
factors. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 10 


21. There was general agreement that, while in most industrialized 
countries primary energy demand seemed unlikely to increase significantly in 
the near future, an increased demand for electricity and the need to replace 
more old power plants with modern ones should be expected. In many of those 
countries, decisions regarding new power production capacity would have to be 
taken soon if the requirements of the 1990s were to be met. Developing 
countries were faced with similar problems, but in their case primary energy 
demand and electricity demand were increasing more rapidly and the resources 
available for investment were often inadequate. 
22. Similarly, there was broad agreement that electricity production should 
be increased in a way that was not only economic but also environmentally 
acceptable. There was, however, less agreement as to what was economic and 
what was environmentally acceptable. 
23. In its report entitled "Our Common Future", published in the spring 
of 1987, the World Commission on Environment and Development, also called the 
"Brundtland Commission", had put forward convincing arguments in favour not 
only of a renewal of economic growth, but also of a significant increase in 
the use of primary energy by developing countries. It pointed out quite 
rightly that the global distribution of primary energy consumption was 
extremely unequal, being more than 80 times greater in countries with market 
economies than in sub-Saharan Africa. The Commission indicated that if 
per capita energy consumption were to become uniform throughout the world at 
the current level of industrial countries, a world population of 8.2 billion 
in the year 2025 would require about 55 TW. That represented an increase of 
more than a factor of five by comparison with 1980 consumption levels. Even 
if less ambitious targets for consumption were set, an enormous increase in 
energy production would be necessary. 
24. The Commission stressed that every source of energy had its own 
economic, health and environmental costs, benefits and risks. It noted that 
the use of fossil fuels to supply the necessary additional energy would lead 
to a danger of global warming (greenhouse effect) and acidification. It 
recognized the limitations of so-called "renewable" energy sources, which also 
had environmental consequences. However, although the report of the 
Commission pointed to what were felt to be problems associated with the use of 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 11 


nuclear power, it conspicuously failed to mention the important fact that an 


increased use of nuclear energy would not add to the environmental risks of 
global warming, acidification or urban industrial air pollution. It 
recommended neither fossil fuels nor nuclear fuels. Instead, it advocated a 
rational use of energy and the development of renewable sources following a 


scenario of low-energy consumption in order to sustain mankind's progress. 
There was reason to wonder whether that advice was not simply a means of 


avoiding difficult choices. Even if energy-efficient practices and the 
development of renewable energy sources were vigorously promoted, it was 
unlikely that the world's energy requirements could be met by following that 


scenario. For the majority of countries, the real choice for power production 


lay probably between coal and nuclear fuel - or hydroelectric power, where 
that was available. China's Vice-Premier, Mr. Li Peng, had stated more 


realistically at the opening of the Sixth Pacific Basin Nuclear Conference at 
Beijing, two weeks ago: "As China is very rich in coal and water resources, 


its electric power supplies will mainly rely, for a relatively long period of 
time, on coal-fired and hydro-powered plants, with nuclear power as a 


supplement". Furthermore, the additional total electricity production planned 


in China until the year 2000 was some 100 000 MW(e), of which 70% would be 
provided by coal according to current predictions. 


25. More generally, it was likely that in the short term increasing use 
would be made of all sources of energy - more importance being given to safety 
and environmental protection techniques than in the past; but the process 
would be accompanied by an uneasy awareness that the use of fossil fuels would 
have to be gradually restricted. As far as one could judge at present, that 
could not be done without using nuclear power. Although one could welcome the 
fact that a promising co-operation project for the development of a fusion 
reactor for energy production had been started during the past year by four 
major partners, under the auspices of the Agency, it would be illusory to 
expect fusion processes to provide large quantitites of energy for many 
decades to come. Thus any reference to nuclear power in the context of the 
world's energy supply during the next few decades was inevitably a reference 
to fission power. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 12 


26. Since Chernobyl, several governments had had occasion to review the 
nuclear option. A few countries, such as Austria, had decided against it. 
Some, such as the Netherlands and Finland, had postponed their decisions, but 
several others had reaffirmed their commitment to nuclear power; that was the 
case of the United States in its report on "Energy Security", of the United 
Kingdom in the decision regarding Sizewell, of the Federal Republic of Germany 
in the "Energy Report of the Government" of September 1986, and of the USSR in 
several policy statements. France had continued its very ambitious programme 
of nuclear power plant construction and Japan planned to increase its 
installed capacity from 25 800 MW(e) to 60 000 MW(e) by the year 2000. India 
had drawn up a programme which aimed to achieve nuclear capacity of 
10 000 MW(e) by the year 2000, and China had set out on its long path towards 
establishing a sizeable nuclear power programme. 
27. Those decisions showed that nuclear power was still regarded as an 
energy source of growing importance, and they could be expected to increase 
the share of nuclear power in the world's electricity supply from 15% to 20% 
by the year 2000. They had been based on several considerations. The first 
factor was economic experience with nuclear power plants in all industrialized 
countries and in some developing countries. It was true that some power 
plants - whether nuclear or non-nuclear - had turned out to be very costly, 
but the 0ECD had calculated that nuclear power would be cheaper than 
coal-generated power in all OECD countries except for a few locations near 
coal-mines, as in Canada and the United States. Those calculations were based 
on reasonable construction times. A second consideration was the reliability 
of nuclear power plants: during the past three years, nuclear power plants in 
Europe had shown better performance characteristics than their oil- and 
coal-fired counterparts in all power ranges. The third factor was energy 
independence: even if nuclear fuel had to be imported, it was easy (and 
relatively cheap) to store it for several years. Finally, environmental 
considerations had been taken into account. In normal operation, nuclear 
power plants were environmentally benign generators of electricity. In 
several countries, nuclear programmes had clearly helped to avoid releases of 
pollutants which would have resulted from other fuels. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 13 


28. If nuclear power was to be generally accepted by governments and public 
opinion, three concerns felt by many - and mentioned in the Brundtland 
Commission Report - would have to be allayed: the possibility of accidental 
releases of radioactivity (in other words, nuclear safety) was one source of 
concern; another was waste disposal; and the third was the threat of a 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. Each of those problems had important 
international dimensions which would form a substantial part of the Agency's 
agenda for the coming decade. But before dealing with them, he wished to 
examine the future role of nuclear power in developing countries. 
29. In those countries, as in many industrial countries, nuclear power 
often gave rise to hesitations and a certain amount of opposition. A group of 
20 high-level experts had met the previous year at the Agency to examine the 
problems and prospects of nuclear power in developing countries. The group's 
report took as its point of departure the premise that all forms of energy 
would be needed for economic growth and for improving the quality of life in 
developing countries and that it would be essential to produce electricity on 
a large scale. While believing that nuclear power would probably have an 
increasingly important role to play, the group of experts noted that there 
were some serious constraints on the introduction of nuclear power programmes 
in developing countries. Some of those - such as the training of staff - had 
already been taken into consideration in the Agency's assistance programme, 
but the report urged the Agency to propose an integrated, comprehensive 
assistance package such that the nuclear option could be evaluated as part of 
the overall energy and economic development planning in each interested Member 
State. It also advocated giving more attention to regional co-operation in 
energy and nuclear power planning studies. 
30. Furthermore, the group of experts invited the Agency to improve its 
ability to advise and assist developing Member States in the financing of 
nuclear power projects. A comprehensive understanding of the matter was of 
course, essential for the future development of nuclear energy in developing 
countries, and it would perhaps be necessary for the Agency to strengthen its 
programme in that area - naturally without being involved itself in the 
financing. New concepts such as the "Build-Operate-Transfer" (BOT) formula 
should be examined, not only at the bilateral level but also within a wider 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 14 


group of interested participants. However, it was important to stress, as the 
group had done, that technological, human and organizational infrastructure 
requirements were just as important for the success of a nuclear power 
programme as the financial resources. The decision to launch a nuclear power 
programme was necessarily the responsibility of the State concerned, whether a 
developing or industrialized country. It emerged from the report that the 
Agency should have the capacity not only to offer assistance in energy 
planning techniques, but also, if so requested, to provide continuous support 
and advice for each individual developing country which decided to embark upon 
a nuclear power programme. 


31. With regard to the question of public acceptance, the expert group and 
several other advisory bodies had recommended that the Agency play a more 
active role in producing factual information on questions which often gave 
rise to discussion in Member States. The Agency had a great deal of 
information and data on all aspects of nuclear power. Part of that 
information had already been published, but it could be made available in a 
more concise form to assist governments if they so wished. Of course, that 
would inevitably involve some expense, and it would be interesting to know 
whether governments would attach high priority to it. 
32. With regard to the crucial question of safety, one might expect that 
years of profitable and safe operation of nuclear power plants throughout the 
world would be needed to dispel fears rooted in the public's unfamiliarity 
with radiation - fears that had naturally been reinforced by the accidents 
which had occurred. Unfortunately, it would not be enough to explain that all 
industrial activity - particularly energy production - involved some risk. 
Although the world had now gained practical experience with a worst possible 
accident and was no longer confined to theoretical scenarios, the slight risk 
of such an accident occurring was unacceptable to many people. That was a 
problem of which the nuclear industry was well aware, and it was taken into 
account very carefully in the programmes of industrial and governmental 
authorities. 
33. Fortunately, safety and good economic performance went hand in hand, 
and good management and operation practices were reflected in a higher level 
of safety and a reduced number of shutdowns. That fact, and the considerable 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 15 


gap between the best and poorest performances of nuclear power plants, would 
be at the centre of the work of the three conferences which were to be held in 
the near future, two of which would be under the Agency's auspices. 


34. The first Agency conference was to open in Vienna the following week 
and had the name "Nuclear Power Performance and Safety", which betrayed its 
main focus: it would examine the results at present being obtained and the 
measures which could be taken to improve performance and safety still 
further. The average load factor of nuclear power plants was at present 70%, 
but many utilities were obtaining availability rates of more than 80% year 
after year, by giving careful attention to safety and quality of operation and 
maintenance. That showed that there were lessons to be shared. 
35. The second Agency conference, on the specific subject of the 
man-machine interface, was to be held in Tokyo at the beginning of 1988. It 
was sometimes argued that the problem with nuclear power was that the machines 
assumed perfect human operators. That was not the case, but good relations 
between operators and machines nevertheless remained very important for good 
performance and safety. Operators should be masters of their information, not 
submerged by it, and they needed to be well trained and to follow good 
manuals. Such were the matters to be discussed at the Tokyo conference. 
36. The third conference, to be organized the following month in Paris by 
UNIPEDE and INPO, would bring together power utility executives to study the 
best ways of co-operating directly to improve safety and performance. At the 
intergovernmental level, there was every reason to welcome that initiative. 
Good experience did not necessarily require government reprocessing. 
37. As far as the Agency's expanded nuclear safety programme was concerned, 
it should be noted that the Early Notification Convention and the Emergency 
Assistance Convention, adopted in 1986, had entered into force. They had been 
signed by 69 and 6 7 countries and ratified by 16 and 12 countries, 
respectively. A number of measures had been taken to make them operative and 
steps were also being taken to create within the Agency's Secretariat the 
emergency response capability required by the conventions. In that respect, 
he was grateful for the assistance provided by other international 
organizations, such as WMO. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 16 


38. Secondly, revision of the Agency's nuclear safety standards had begun, 
starting with the five Codes of Practice which it was hoped could be submitted 
to the Board for approval in June 1988. During the special session of the 
General Conference in 1986, several delegates had expressed the opinion that 
the Codes could serve as binding international nuclear safety standards. 
Discussions had shown that for various reasons that was not realistic. 
However, the Codes did constitute commonly accepted standards, and that fact 
could be brought home to public opinion if Member States indicated their 
acceptance of them through individual communications to the Agency. Without 
infringing the sovereign responsibility of States to promulgate their own 
safety standards and regulations, such a procedure would help to show that 
there existed a set of widely accepted international standards; and that 
demonstration, in turn, would contribute to the rebuilding of public 
confidence, by enabling the public to see that good safety standards were 
applied everywhere. 
39. Working groups of government experts were at present meeting under the 
Agency's auspices to exchange ideas and experience derived from their 
respective programmes on new power reactors, particularly those new models 
which might have a higher level of intrinsic safety. In the Agency's work to 
improve safety, however, it should not be forgotten that 60 to 70% of the 
power reactors which would be in service in the year 2000 were already in 
service. It would therefore be necessary to focus on operational safety and 
improvements in those reactors. 
40. One contribution made by the Agency in that area was to be found in the 
work of the operational safety review teams (OSARTs), whose experienced 
experts reviewed the operation of a nuclear power plant over a period of 
several weeks. That service was usually provided in response to a request 
from the regulatory authority of the Member State concerned. The report, 
which was confidential, was given to the authority that had requested the 
review. During the past twelve months, eleven missions had been carried out 
in both advanced and developing countries. In several cases the authorities 
had decided to publish the OSART report - obviously to demonstrate openness 
and thereby to strengthen public confidence in the plant's operation. In one 
case, the Agency had been invited to send a follow-up mission to review the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 17 


measures which had been taken following comments made by the first mission. 
There was a steady demand for OSART missions, which would undoubtedly continue 
to be part of the Agency's programme for some time. Their usefulness would 
depend on the competence and operational experience which could be mobilized 
and made available. 


41. The International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) had played a 
very important role during the past year. Following the Post-Accident Review 
Meeting in 1986, it had submitted a consensus report which had had a worldwide 
impact. It had made a strong statement on the importance of quality assurance 
and, what was perhaps more important, was at present preparing a document on 
safety principles for nuclear power plants addressed to designers and 
operators. That work would play a decisive role in establishing safety 
objectives. There was no doubt that the mandate of INSAG, established in 
January 1985 for an initial period of three years, should be renewed. 
42. Although important elements of the supplementary safety programme were 
being implemented, as his survey showed, others would still require a certain 
amount of time. A typical case was that of the harmonization of contamination 
levels in foodstuffs at which governments should take action to protect the 
public. In view of the widely differing decisions taken by different 
authorities following the Chernobyl accident, that was obviously an area where 
governments should co-operate within international organizations to achieve 
some degree of harmony, so that public confidence in the good sense of their 
actions would not be undermined. The Agency had proposed a generally accepted 
methodology for defining those levels. The organizations primarily concerned 
were WHO and FAO and, through them, the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 
43. Many developing countries had found in 1986 that they were not equipped 
to monitor environmental radioactivity or to measure contamination of imported 
food. That was one aspect of the broader problem of organizing radiation 
protection at the national level. Although the exceptional consequences of 
the Chernobyl accident had emphasized the need to be able to monitor the 
environment and foodstuffs, there had not always been as clear an awareness of 
the need for regulation and monitoring of the daily use of radiation in 
medicine and industry. The many radiation protection advisory teams (RAPATs) 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 18 


sent out by the Agency since 1984 had discovered that the basic radiation 
protection infrastructure was deficient in many countries. The Agency should 
be ready to assist those countries, upon request, in training staff and in 
setting up simple regulatory rules and structures. Indeed, any assistance 
provided by the Agency in the nuclear field should include radiation 
protection and safety measures if they did not already exist. 


44. Finally, it should be noted that the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material had entered into force. Since the number of 
international shipments of nuclear materials was increasing steadily, it was 
important that the common standards of the Convention should be applied; that 
being so, States which had not yet done so were invited to sign and ratify the 
Convention without further delay. The Convention did not establish common 
standards for the physical protection of power plants or other nuclear 
facilities on the territory of States party to it, and so it did not really 
deal with the question of protection against terrorism. If governments wished 
to take multilateral measures or to formulate common principles in that area, 
new initiatves would be necessary. 
45. In resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/444, the General Conference had asked to be 
kept informed of work in other bodies on the question of the prohibition of 
attacks against nuclear facilities. The Conference on Disarmament had 
continued its work in 1987 and possible elements of such a prohibition had 
been proposed, with several alternative texts. Those discussions would 
continue in 1988. 
46. If safety had been the main public concern relating to nuclear power 
during the past year, it was evident that a second concern had been waste 
disposal. The claim that that problem had not been resolved was, however, 
only true to the extent that no high-level nuclear waste had yet been finally 
deposited in deep geological formations. There existed techniques for the 
safe disposal of high-level nuclear waste, but what was needed in many 
countries was a determined effort to make those techniques and their safety 
features more widely understood. An educational effort of that kind might be 
more difficult than the engineering effort itself. Perhaps only the actual 
establishment of disposal facilities - for different types of waste - would 
calm the debate. Fortunately, several countries were moving towards that 
stage. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 19 


47. The convergence of views among world experts on the subject of waste 
disposal was the fruit of years of discussion and exchange of knowledge and 
experience at the international level. That consensus or near-consensus 
should also be translated into generally accepted international standards for 
the safe disposal of waste. There was already a standard covering low-level 
waste, but work should progress on high-level waste as well. The question of 
dangerous wastes, whether nuclear or not, like that of nuclear power plant 
safety, was a matter of concern to everyone. 
48. In that connection, a number of developing countries were experiencing 
great difficulties in arranging for proper disposal of used radiation sources, 
which were sometimes stored under inadequate control; and, as a consequence, 
there been accidents. Various solutions could be envisaged - for example, 
regional co-operation to establish waste disposal facilities, or return of 
spent sources to the supplier countries, where they would make only a minimal 
addition to existing waste disposal operations. Member States should be 
encouraged to tackle that problem and to co-operate in finding practical 
solutions to it. 
49. To prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and to achieve nuclear 
disarmament were goals to which all governments subscribed. Success in those 
aims, both of which were embodied in the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), was 
of course vital to world security and development. It was also of importance 
for the public's attitude to nuclear power. An effective non-proliferation 
regime, strengthened by substantial nuclear disarmament measures, would help 
to overcome certain existing reservations. Recent developments in 
international negotiations on arms reduction had given new hope that the 
long-desired results might be forthcoming. 
50. The Agency was not a forum for negotiating arms control agreements but, 
as the institution responsible for applying safeguards, it fulfilled a vital 
function by creating confidence that non-proliferation commitments would be 
respected. In doing so, it helped to allay some of the fears that a more 
extensive use of nuclear power would increase the risk of proliferation. The 
Agency's safeguards activities had expanded considerably over the years, as 
more and more States adhered to NPT and to the Tlatelolco Treaty, and as more 
and more facilities and nuclear material were placed under safeguards. At the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 20 


end of 1986, in addition to 9 facilities subject to safeguards in nuclearweapon 
States, there had been 485 facilities containing safeguarded nuclear 
material and 414 other locations containing small amounts of safeguarded 
material in non-nuclear-weapon States. 


51. However, 46 of the 131 non-nuclear-weapon States which were party to 
NPT had still not complied with their obligation under the Treaty to conclude 
a safeguards agreement with the Agency. Even though most of those States did 
not at present have much activity that could be regarded as significant from 
the point of view of safeguards, the agreements should be concluded, and he 
respectfully urged the governments concerned to take the requisite action. 
52. As far as South Africa was concerned, the facility attachment for the 
hot cell laboratory at Valindaba had been completed and had entered into 
force, and South Africa had also adhered to the two conventions adopted in 
September 1986. However, there had not been any significant progress in other 
discussions with South Africa on the subject of safeguards. 
53. Furthermore, agreement had been reached in principle on the content of 
a safeguards agreement to be concluded pursuant to China's voluntary offer to 
place some of its civilian nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. When 
that agreement took effect, all five nuclear-weapon States would have 
submitted all or some of their peaceful nuclear activities to Agency 
safeguards. That not only underscored the global acceptance of safeguards but 
also enabled nuclear-weapon States and the international community to acquire 
direct experience of on-site verification, which had long been regarded as a 
critical element in arms control agreements. 
54. The objective of Agency safeguards, to create confidence, would not be 
achieved unless the safeguards administered by the Agency were credible. In 
order to ensure their credibility, sufficient independent verification 
activities had to be carried out; but, even so, the Agency could not fulfil 
its responsibilities effectively without the active co-operation of States. 
Although, on the whole, States were co-operative, there were still 
difficulties on certain points, for example the need to conclude facility 
attachments more rapidly, to solve problems of liability in the field of 
safeguards and to secure timely acceptance of the designation of a sufficient 
number of inspectors. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 21 


55. The adequacy of the resources available to the Agency for safeguards 
activities was a problem he felt bound to mention explicitly. Although it was 
encouraging to note that goal attainment at safeguarded facilities in 1986 had 
improved still further, with a zero-growth budget the prospects for the future 
were disturbing. The very substantial assistance which a number of States 
provided voluntarily under various safeguards support programmes and 
arrangements was gratifying and compensated in large measure for the absence 
of an internal research and development programme for the improvement of 
safeguards techniques; it did not, however, directly help the Agency to cope 
with its increased verification responsibilities associated with the 
continuously increasing numbers of facilities and quantities of material to be 
safeguarded in non-nuclear-weapon States. Nor had any new resources become 
available which would enable the Agency to take advantage of the increase in 
the numbers and types of facilities included in the voluntary offers of the 
Soviet Union and China. The Third NPT Review Conference had recommended that 
the Agency should take greater advantage of the voluntary offers made by 
nuclear-weapon States, but in the present financial situation that was not 
possible. 
56. The Agency could not permit the slightest deterioration in the 
credibility of its safeguards. Moreover, since at present the construction of 
a simple nuclear power plant cost about US $2000 million, additional charges 
of about $40 million per year could hardly be regarded as a heavy burden for 
governments to bear when the aim was to gain assurance that 95% of nuclear 
facilities in non-nuclear-weapon States were being used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes, and, furthermore, to acquire experience in the increasingly 
important area of international verification. 
57. Public concern over nuclear power did not extend to other applications 
of nuclear energy. At the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of 
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE), held at Geneva in the spring of 1987, the importance of those 
applications (and indeed of nuclear power too) had been stressed, and the 
central and constructive role of the Agency had been recognized. That view of 
UNCPICPUNE was both gratifying and challenging. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 22 


58. However, there had been a setback - probably only temporary - in one 
area, namely food irradiation and disinfestation on a commercial scale. The 
techniques involved were thoroughly tested and very promising, but tough 
opposition had arisen in certain countries after the Chernobyl accident. 
International co-operation in that area was nevertheless continuing under the 
auspices of the Agency, and the intrinsic merits of the technique, together 
with its evident superiority over others (in some cases, at least), would 
undoubtedly gain full acceptance for it in due course. 
59. Most developing Member States profited from their membership of the 
Agency through programmes in areas other than nuclear power, such as the use 
of radiation and isotope techniques in agriculture, medicine, biology, 
industry and hydrology. The Agency had a responsibility to those Member 
States which were not yet interested in nuclear power to implement programmes 
which would enable them to derive maximum benefit from applications of nuclear 
energy likely to contribute to their development: but its ability to do that 
effectively was closely dependent on resources voluntarily contributed. The 
increase in those resources during the past few years had fortunately enabled 
the Agency to provide more assistance to its developing Member States. 
60. As to the present and future implementation of those activities, it was 
gratifying to note that 1986 had brought not only assistance of improved 
quality but also a marked increase in the resource utilization rate. It was 
therefore particularly regrettable that late payment of pledged contributions 
had led to delays in the launching of new projects, and hence to a technical 
co-operation programme delivery lower than planned for 1987. 
61. With regard to the target for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1988, he advocated a substantial increase in, and timely payment of, 
contributions. He was aware of the difficult budgetary situation in most 
States; however, a substantial percentage increase in contributions to the 
Fund would not mean very large amounts in absolute terms, since the existing 
base was fairly low; and, on the other hand, the programmes had generally been 
of excellent quality. In that respect, regional co-operative arrangements 
such as RCA and ARCAL provided an excellent framework for co-operation between 
developing countries and allowed effective use to be made of local resources, 
expertise and facilities. The resulting networks of co-operating research 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 23 


centres, educational institutions and industrial enterprises promised 
effective utilization of resources and strengthening of the self-reliance of 
participating developing States. 


62. During the past five years, in the areas of nuclear safety, safeguards 
and technical co-operation, the Agency had been given new tasks and had 
undertaken an increased volume of activity within the framework of a zerogrowth 
regular budget. A minimal increase in the budget was planned for 1988 
as a consequence of exceptional circumstances. Those five lean years had been 
used to increase productivity and streamline procedures; but he was not 
advocating that the lean years be extended to seven. 
63. The Agency was more and more regarded in Member States as a common 
instrument to help strengthen nuclear safety, maintain non-proliferation and 
transfer technology for the purposes of development. In order to carry out 
the increasingly important tasks entrusted to it, it needed to have sufficient 
financial and human resources and to be assured that contributions would be 
paid in full and on time; only then could it be sure of being able to 
implement the programmes and to pay salaries. Unfortunately, the Agency was 
far from having that certainty at present. In fact, if the regular 
contributions due since the beginning of the year were not paid forthwith, 
there would not be enough money to meet commitments to staff and suppliers 
during the next few months. No organization, international or national, 
public or private, could maintain its efficiency and credibility under such 
circumstances. The Board was convinced that consultations between major 
contributors were urgently needed in order to find solutions to those 
financial problems. An end should be put to the habit of paying late or not 
paying at all, which was incompatible with established regulations and 
obligations. 
64. Governments should also review the common system as a whole and attempt 
to adjust it. At present, it operated in a way that had an adverse impact on 
morale. Professional staff had already suffered not only a regular decrease 
in take-home pay but also reductions in pensionable remuneration. Several of 
the Agency's best qualified staff had left early after long years of service. 
If the Agency was to be of increasing use to its Members, conditions of 
employment should not be allowed to deteriorate: otherwise, it would become 
impossible to attract high-calibre staff from all countries. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 24 


65. The General Conference had traditionally taken an interest in ensuring 
that the Agency was served by a high-quality, well-balanced international 
staff. In particular, questions of geographical distribution and 
representation of women on the staff had been referred to in General 
Conference resolutions. On those two points, the Agency's staffing structure 
had improved during the past five years. In the category of Professional 
staff subject to geographical distribution, the number of staff members from 
developing countries had increased by 97% since 1981, whereas the total staff 
increase in that category had been only 23%. The fraction of Professional 
posts occupied by women had also increased, but much more slowly - from 10.45% 
to 12.20%. Much more had to be done along that path. 
66. As to the future, a point had been reached where resources particularly 
human resources - were being stretched very thin to accommodate a 
larger volume of work within a zero-growth budget. But there should be limits 
to zero growth. If, in the future, governments wanted to make even greater 
use of the Agency in certain fields, there would either have be reductions in 
other areas of co-operation - which would be difficult - or some increase in 
resources. Certain organizational changes might also be necessary to adapt 
the Agency's structures better to the activities carried out at present and to 
bring about improvements in efficiency. 
67. The authors of the Agency's Statute had given the organization an 
effective and viable framework. Over a period of 30 years, an institution had 
been built up which served its Members competently and efficiently. To give 
just a few examples, the Agency was now applying international safeguards to 
some 500 nuclear facilities in more than 90 Member States; it was managing 
10 specialized information systems, of which the most important was the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS), handling about 90 000 items 
per year; it had developed a set of regulations for the transport of 
radioactive materials - regulations now generally accepted as the basis for 
national and international transport regulations and covering some 10 million 
shipments of radioactive materials each year; it implemented a technical 
assistance programme which made it possible to train about 650 fellows, send 
1200 experts into the field, provide US $25 million worth of equipment and 
organize 70 courses every year; it was the world's largest editor in the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 25 


nuclear field, with more than 200 volumes published each year; and it provided 


a forum for more than 8500 nuclear scientists who met for conferences, 


symposia, seminars and expert groups. 


68. The messages received on the occasion of the Agency's anniversary bore 
witness to the value which Member States attached to the Agency and were very 


encouraging at a time when international organizations were the subject of so 


much criticism. The Agency's reputation as a technical, practical and 


responsible institution had to be preserved; patience and care had to be shown 


in dealing with difficult questions, and attention had to be focussed on areas 


where it was possible to make effective contributions to the peaceful uses of 


nuclear energy. If it succeeded, the Agency could be proud of its work. 


69. He paid tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Eklund, who had guided the 
Agency wisely and competently for 20 years, and wished also to honour the 


memory of the Agency's first Director General, Mr. Sterling Cole, who had died 


earlier in the year. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1986 (GC(XXXI)/800) 


70. Mr. HERRINGTON (United States of America) read out the following 
message from the President of the United States, Mr. Ronald Reagan: 


"On behalf of the American people, I extend to the delegates and 
staff of the International Atomic Energy Agency good wishes for a 
productive, successful meeting. 


"This is a special moment in the life of a unique organization now 
thirty years old. The nuclear era brought unprecedented fears and 
hopes about a little-known technology that offered the prospect of 
devastation and the promise of major contributions to human welfare. 
Defining ways to harness this awesome technology to serve human needs 
preoccupied many of the world's finest minds in the 1950s. The 
institution known as the IAEA was the product of their inspiration and 
dedication. 


"The IAEA has stood the test of time, and the ideals and 
principles embodied in the IAEA Statute are as valid today as they were 
thirty years ago. Promoting international co-operation, under 
effective safeguards, to share the many benefits of the atom in a way 
that reinforces international peace and security is both the major 
challenge before the IAEA and a summary of its achievements. 



GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 26 


"This is an occasion for looking back, but also ahead. It is a 
time of hope and expectation: that all IAEA Members will seek to 
preserve the integrity of the Agency as an organization dedicated to 
serious, technical work; that all States will take steps to accept - as 
an important confidence-building measure - the application of IAEA 
safeguards to all of their peaceful nuclear facilities; that more 
States will be able to realize, through IAEA technical co-operation, 
the benefits of the atom to improve life; and, finally, that 
co-operation and understanding among States which share a common 
interest in peace will be enhanced as we work together in support of 
this important organization. 


"I offer to you congratulations and reaffirm continued U.S. 
support for the vital work of the Agency." 


71. He (Mr. Herrington) wished to join the President in congratulating the 
Agency on its thirtieth anniversary. During the last three decades, many 
important steps had been taken to promote the peaceful uses of the atom. 
There was every reason to be proud of the results of the Agency's efforts, 
which had contributed to the creation of a safer and a more prosperous world. 
72. And yet, as the 1990s and the twenty-first century approached, a great 
deal remained to be done, and many obstacles still had to be overcome before 
the enormous potential of the atom could be fully harnessed. Nuclear safety 
in particular was a source of great difficulties and concerns. It was 
incumbent upon the Agency's Member States now to renew their dedication to 
nuclear safety, to international co-operation and to non-proliferation. 
73. The events which had taken place in the world during the last two years 
had highlighted the importance of the Agency's mission in the area of energy 
security. The effect of the sharp decline in oil prices was still being 
reflected in oil imports and energy consumption levels, and in domestic energy 
production. In many countries, the concern aroused by Chernobyl was 
continuing to affect nuclear energy. Other questions relating to 
environmental concerns and energy trade were still lingering, particularly in 
the area of coal. Given those concerns and those challenges, it was clearly 
important to continue diversifying sources of energy. Incontestably, nuclear 
energy must remain a key factor in such efforts and a key element in energy 
security for the future. Nuclear energy was clean, its safety record was 
good, and its resources were virtually inexhaustible. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 27 


74. In the United States, nuclear power was the second most important 
source of electricity, and the energy source which was developing most 
rapidly. Throughout the world, with more than 390 installations now 
operating, nuclear power provided the energy equivalent of more than 
7 million barrels of oil per day. During the last 10 years, electricity 
generation by nuclear plants had increased at an annual rate of more than 
14%. Nuclear power was certain to remain the fastest growing source of 
electricity up until the end of the 1980s. More than 100 nuclear power plants 
had been ordered over the world during the last decade, and according to 
forecasts about 500 nuclear power plants would be operational by 1990. 
75. Clearly, nuclear power could and must play a greater role in meeting 
the energy needs of the future. Countries poor in fossil fuel resources had 
already opted for nuclear power, the only technology capable of producing 
power in large amounts and, accordingly, of providing an alternative to fossil 
fuels. Most countries which had undertaken to replace oil by nuclear power 
for electricity generation would have completed their conversion by 
the 1990s. But increases in demand for electricity and the necessity of 
replacing obsolete plant would continue to stimulate the construction of 
nuclear power into the 21st century. It was to be expected that the use of 
nuclear power would grow parallel with the consumption of electricity 
throughout the world. Increases in national productivity, enhanced 
competitiveness in world trade and improved standards of living were closely 
linked with a continuous growth in the consumption of electricity and hence in 
the utilization of nuclear power. That was a reality which no one could 
ignore. 
76. Despite the great promise it held out, nuclear power was still meeting 
with hesitations rooted in considerations of safety. The legacy of Chernobyl 
could not be overcome in a short time. Despite the progress that had been 
made, public opinion continued to harbour fears about the safety of nuclear 
energy, and nuclear power would never realize its full potential until 
governments jointly undertook to put those fears aside. It hardly mattered 
how safe and efficient nuclear power plants were: if public opinion was 
against them, no new plants would be ordered. The concerns of the public and 
the problems that stemmed from them could not be allayed overnight, and in 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 28 


most countries it would require a combination of public education, 


technological progress and continued safe operation of existing plants to 
bring about a change of heart in the public and among investors. 


77. To a large extent that task was in the hands of the Agency's 
Member States. Only a year ago the Agency had found itself confronting a 
great challenge - that of responding to the Chernobyl disaster and its 
consequences for the peaceful utilization of nuclear power. At its special 
session and its regular session in 1986, the General Conference had dealt with 
many important problems: in particular, it had adopted the two new 
international conventions on early notification and emergency assistance; it 
had launched an enhanced nuclear safety programme; and it had firmly rejected 
certain efforts to dictate extraneous political actions that would have 
undermined the Agency's goals. Since then, prudent programmes had been 
implemented which responded to the increased interest of Members in nuclear 
safety and radiation protection. The Agency had, of course, provided 
information on Chernobyl, but it would be useful to receive from the Soviet 
Union more detailed information on the accident; and in fact his delegation 
believed it was incumbent upon that country to provide such information. 
Meetings to be held in the weeks to come would provide it with an excellent 
opportunity to do so. 
78. The Agency should also continue to play a role in promoting worldwide 
nuclear safety and sound practices. An important step in that direction had 
been taken in 1986 with the signature of the two new conventions, which 
guaranteed better international co-operation in the event of an emergency or 
an accident. Ratification procedures had not yet been completed, but the 
United States nevertheless reconfirmed the commitment it had given the 
previous year concerning voluntary notification. 
79. The Agency should now concentrate on the priority tasks it had been 
given under its nuclear safety mandate. It should ensure that the tools at 
its disposal were well adapted and adequate to the task. The United States 
would be happy to contribute to implementing that objective. The Agency had a 
mandate and a responsibility to work for a stronger programme of international 
co-operation in nuclear safety. A step in the right direction had been taken 
in 1986, but it was important to continue to move forward. Ensuring public 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 29 


safety was an important mission of the Agency's and one which should continue 
to have first priority among its concerns. There should be no compromise on 
that issue. 


80. The Agency's system of international safeguards was another critical 
area of concern. Safeguards were imperative and constituted a key factor in 
building confidence among nations. The United States had always been 
convinced of the viability of the Agency's safeguards system and had 
demonstrated its confidence by making sizeable financial contributions and by 
providing the services of experts. In practice, the United States pursued in 
international nuclear commerce a policy completely consistent with Agency 
safeguards. Safeguards were in the interest of all Member States, and the 
Agency had the means to implement them efficiently. It should continue to 
ensure that inspectors in the field had access, in good time, to the equipment 
and instruments they needed. 
81. The Agency's safeguards programme was one of the pillars upholding the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). As had been said at 
the recent NPT Review Conference, those safeguards were a fundamental element 
of the Treaty and played a key role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and other nuclear explosive devices. For its part, the United States 
continued to believe in the viability of the NPT and, in particular, supported 
the efforts of the President to achieve a reduction in nuclear arms. There 
was every reason to be optimistic about the progress that had been made on the 
question of intermediate-range and short-range missiles - progress that had 
been announced by President Reagan the preceding Friday. The agreement 
between General Secretary Gorbachev and President Reagan to sign such a treaty 
in the course of the autumn would mark a historic moment in the world's 
efforts to reduce the risk of nuclear war. 
82. In a few days' time, the General Conference would once more debate the 
question whether a Member State of the Agency should be excluded for political 
reasons. Participants in the General Conference should be forever on their 
guard against those who sought to impart a political character to the Agency's 
discussions. During the first session of the General Conference, in 1957, 
President Eisenhower had expressed the hope that "the fission of the atom, 
under the wise administration of the International Atomic Energy Agency, will 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 30 


one day make it possible to unite a divided world". The intrusion of politics 


would destroy that vision, because it would divide an organization whose goals 


were practical and not political. 


83. If the General Conference voted to exclude any Member State of the 
Agency for political reasons, it would be voting at the same time against 
nuclear safety and world peace. Chernobyl had shown clearly that nuclear 
safety was not, and could never be, a purely national concern. It was an 
international problem, and all participants at the General Conference must 
seek solutions to it - must meet the challenge both individually and 
collectively. The General Conference should reject any effort which tended to 
compromise that effort and to harm the integrity of the organization. 
84. The Agency's future would perhaps depend on the manner in which it 
responded to those who wished to put politics before the important issues 
confronting the organization. The Agency was one of the few international 
bodies that had retained its technical character, and political questions were 
not its task. The United States felt that the present session of the General 
Conference would be of decisive importance for the credibility of the Agency. 
The existence of the Agency would no doubt cease to be justified if it became 
another political tribune. 
85. Mr. MITSUBAYASHI (Japan) read out the following message from Prime 
Minister Nakasone of Japan: 
"On the occasion of its thirtieth anniversary, I have the honour 
to extend my heartfelt congratulations to the International Atomic 
Energy Agency on the outstanding achievements the Agency has 
successfully made in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


"As a strong advocate of Japan's nuclear programme, and deeply 
involved in its development since its inception, I firmly believe that 
multilateral efforts should be pursued vigorously for the extensive 
application of the atom to peaceful activities for the benefit of 
mankind. 


"It is most gratifying, therefore, to note that the Agency has 
made appreciable progress in such areas as safeguards, nuclear safety, 
radioisotopes and technical co-operation. 


"Japan, for its part, is determined to further pursue active 
international co-operation, thereby contributing universally to the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy and nuclear non-proliferation. 



GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 31 


"The Agency, whose active contribution to the cause of peaceful 
atomic development and nuclear non-proliferation has won universal 
praise and recognition, has an important mission to fulfil in 
promoting, through its future programmes, the peaceful pursuit for 
greater nuclear application. 


"May I express Japan's increasing support for the Agency's 
multiple activities and wish the Agency every success in the days 
ahead." 


86. Japan had begun to use nuclear energy on a large scale for peaceful 
purposes at about the time the Agency's Statute had been adopted. In the 
ensuing 30 years, great progress had been made in the establishment of nuclear 
power generation systems and in creating a viable nuclear fuel cycle 
programme. On the basis of the results thus obtained, the Atomic Energy 
Commission had adopted, in June 1987, a new long-term development programme 
for the utilization of nuclear energy in which the latter was treated as a 
"key energy source" and its development accordingly given first priority. 
87. Installed nuclear power in Japan was at present 28 GW(e), or 28% of 
total electricity generation; that meant that nuclear power generation had 
already overtaken oil-fired stations. Under the new programme, nuclear power 
in Japan was expected to reach at least 53 GW(e) by the year 2000 and 
100 GW(e) in 2030 - in other words, about 40% and 60%, respectively, of total 
electricity generation. With that end in mind, Japan was planning the 
construction of a commercial uranium enrichment plant and a facility for 
shallow burial of low-level radioactive wastes, both to be operational 
around 1991. Japan had undertaken to apply what was called a "reprocess and 
recycle" policy, in other words to use the plutonium and uranium obtained 
through the reprocessing of irradiated fuel in order to make the most efficent 
use of uranium resources and to guarantee stable nuclear power generation. In 
that connection, the construction of the first privately financed reprocessing 
plant, to begin operation around the middle of the 1990s, was foreseen. The 
programme also provided for the construction - in the second half of the 
1990s - of a demonstration breeder reactor on the model of the Monju prototype 
breeder which was at present under construction and was to go into operation 
in 1992. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 32 


88. Another basic objective of the programme was to promote research and 
development on new uses of nuclear energy - at the "frontiers" of nuclear 
science, so to speak. It was hoped that by thus encouraging research, Japan 
would contribute to technological innovations all over the world. 
89. Another of the fundamental points of the programme was Japan's resolve 
to make an active contribution towards international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of the atom for the benefit of all mankind by placing special 
emphasis on non-proliferation and on safety. In was in that spirit that Japan 
had recently participated in the work of the quadrapartite committee set up to 
consider a conceptual study for an international experimental thermonuclear 
reactor. Japan would continue to strengthen its participation in the Agency's 
activities by making as much use of the Agency as possible when promoting 
international co-operation. 
90. Japan would continue to assist countries where the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy were still in their infancy. In doing so, it would continue to 
lay emphasis on multilateral co-operation, particularly at the regional 
level. In the past, Japan had made generous contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund, and it had participated actively in the 
regional co-operative agreement for research, development and training in 
nuclear science and technology (RCA) by making its own special contribution 
thereto. Within the framework of that agreement, Japan envisaged a new 
project designed to strengthen radiation protection, as part of its 
contribution to promoting co-operation in the region of Asia and the Pacific. 
It hoped that that example of regional co-operation would be followed in other 
regions as well. 
91. Nuclear safety was an essential condition for the success of nuclear 
technology. For that reason, Japan's Nuclear Safety Commission played an 
important role and its directives were regularly applied by ministries and by 
industry. That being so, safety standards were very strict, as could be seen 
from the very small number of incidents and the high operational availability 
of plants. As the Commission had indicated in its report published in May, 
which ventured a comparison of the situation in Japan with the accident at 
Chernobyl, it was important to continue concerted efforts to improve nuclear 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 33 


safety in design, operational control and in human safety consciousness. The 
new long-term programme likewise provided that the ministries, research 
establishments and industrial undertakings should continue to guarantee safety 
by optimizing their safety measures and by promoting research programmes on 
the subject. 


92. International co-operation was of the greatest importance. Japan 
appreciated the role the Agency had played in the activities following 
Chernobyl, such as its post-accident analysis and the preparation of the two 
conventions. It hoped that the Agency, having drawn appropriate lessons from 
the accident, would continue to play an active role in the exchange of 
information and research results; Japan would, for its own part, participate 
fully in such work. Thus, Japan's Nuclear Safety Commission expected to host, 
in December 1987, an international symposium entitled "Nuclear safety: water 
reactor regulation and safety"; and the Japanese Government, in collaboration 
with the Agency, planned to host, in Feburary 1988, an international 
conference entitled "Man-machine interface in the nuclear industry". 
Moreover, Japan had recently requested the Agency to send an OSART mission. 
In June it had acceded to the conventions on early notification and emergency 
assistance, and invited countries which had not yet done so to accede to those 
conventions without delay. 


93. As the Director General had indicated, physical protection was an 
important element in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. That 
being so, the Japanese delegation was happy to note that the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material had entered into force in February. 
Japan had taken care to adopt the essential measures of physical protection, 
in conformity with the Agency's standards. Conscious of its international 
responsibility in matters of physical protection - particularly in view of the 
fact that nuclear material transports were bound to increase - Japan intended 
to accede to the Convention as soon as possible: at present, it was taking 
the necessary steps for that purpose. 
94. Obviously, it was not necessary to dwell on the principle that the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy was linked with non-proliferation. Having 
incorporated those principles in its Basic Law on Atomic Energy in 1956, 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 34 


Japan, as a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), had actively 
contributed to maintaining and strengthening the international 
non-proliferation regime. It was a matter for satisfaction that new States 
had become parties to NPT in 1986, and in particular that Spain had announced 


its decision to accede to the Treaty in February - all of which enhanced the 
universality of the Treaty, for the application of which the Agency's 
safeguards programme constituted an essential mechanism. The fact that no 
case of a diversion of materials for military purposes had been discovered 
during the past year was evidence of the efficiency of that programme. 
However, the number of facilities under Agency safeguards was progressively 


increasing, and one might legitimately wonder how it would be possible to 
maintain and strengthen a rational and effective implementation of safeguards 


in view of the present financial situation. In that connection, Japan had 
contributed to the development of inspection techniques through its JASPAS 
programme. Given the recent evolution of safeguards-related technology, it 
was now a matter of urgency to devise "a new approach to safeguards" which 
would be more rational and more efficient, and his delegation hoped that the 
debate in SAGSI would continue with that objective in view. 


95. The Agency was basically a technical organization whose mission was to 
promote the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy while preventing nuclear 
weapons proliferation. That being so, it was important not to introduce into 
the debates of the Agency's policy-making organs extraneous political 
considerations which might divert the Agency from its true objectives. 
Political questions should indeed be thoroughly debated, but that debate 
should take place in the appropriate forum; above all, it was vital not to 
alter the character of the Agency, which was an international organization 
with a technical vocation. His delegation hoped that other delegations would 
take that consideration into account during the debates of the General 
Conference. 
96. The Agency had the reputation of being one of the best international 
organizations; even so, it must not forget that, during the last few years, 
questions of administrative and budgetary reform had taken on a priority 
importance in many other organizations. The Agency should make a resolute and 
realistic effort to adopt measures which would further enhance its efficiency 
and which would enable it to maintain zero real growth. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 35 


97. As the principle international organization in the nuclear sphere, the 
Agency had made a vast contribution to peace and to the welfare of humanity 
through its various co-operation activities and by successfully discharging 
its obligation to prevent nuclear proliferation. It had succeeded thanks in 
part to the wisdom of Member States, and with the purpose of bringing to the 
world the benefits of the atom. Aware as it was of the importance of the 
Agency's role, Japan was firmly resolved to support the Agency to the greatest 
possible extent in all its activities. 
98. Mr. HAYDEN (Australia) recalled that the Agency had been created 
after a decade of momentous upheavals marked by the collapse of the existing 
world order, the first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction and - less than 
three years later - the testing and use of nuclear weapons. It was against 
that background that the nations of the world had sought to inaugurate a new 
international order of peace and security based on co-operation between 
States. Within the newly formed United Nations, they quickly focussed on ways 
of ensuring that the potential benefits of nuclear technology could be 
effectively harnessed through international co-operation - and strictly 
limited to peaceful uses. In 1946, the United States of America, the only 
country then in possession of nuclear weapons, had put forward far-reaching 
proposals (known as the Baruch plan) aimed at the establishment of an 
organization to which all phases of the development and use of atomic energy 
could be entrusted. In 1953, President Eisenhower had proposed the 
establishment of an international atomic energy agency which would take the 
necessary steps to ensure that fissionable materials were used for peaceful 
purposes in the service of humanity. Three years later, in October 1956, the 
Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency had been opened for 
signature, and it had entered into force on 29th July 1957. Australia was 
proud to have been among the drafters of the text and took pride likewise in 
the vitality, relevance and professionalism consistently shown by the Agency. 
99. Only a short time after the founding of the Agency, negotiations had 
begun on the creation of a nuclear safeguards system which would make it 
possible to detect any diversion of safeguarded nuclear material for military 
purposes. It had been generally felt that such a system was essential: 
without it the Agency would not be able to fulfil its mandate and there would 
be no hope of slowing down the proliferation of nuclear weapons. That was why 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 36 


the Agency had from the start had a dual mission: on the one hand to promote 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world; and on the other hand to verify, through the application of 


international safeguards, that nuclear facilities and nuclear materials were 
used exclusively for peaceful purposes. That responsibility had taken on a 
new focus, and an increasingly universal dimension, in 1970 with the entry 


into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
which itself had led to the development of the Agency's NPT safeguards system. 


100. The development and application of safeguards were highly complex but 
nevertheless essential activities of the Agency which required a constant 
renewal of systems, structures and equipment as well as close co-operation 
with the Board of Governors to settle quickly any difficulties that might 
arise, to foresee problems and to ensure that all necessary steps were taken. 
Thanks to the goodwill and co-operation of its Member States, the Agency had 
shown itself equal to the task and had been able to give the assurances which 
the international community had expected of it - namely that no nuclear 
material was being diverted for military purposes or for the production of 
explosive devices. 
101. It was up to Member States to ensure that the Agency had the human and 
financial resources required to discharge its international legal obligations 
in the field of safeguards. Inevitably, the cost of applying safeguards would 
increase as new materials and facilities were submitted to the system and as 
new methods and techniques were adopted to deal with innovations in the design 
of power plants and equipment. Nevertheless, those costs were negligible 
compared with the price humanity would have to pay if the Agency's safeguards 
did not exist. The Agency likewise needed the co-operation of Member States 
for the day-to-day operation of the safeguards system, and in particular to 
settle problems relating to implementation and the designation of inspectors. 
102. The assurance that no material subject to safeguards had ever been 
diverted for military purposes or for the production of explosive devices was 
a matter of the first importance for all countries, whether Members of the 
Agency or not, and whether or not they had adhered to NPT or had nuclear 
programmes of their own. Thus, everyone bore a part of the responsibility for 
supporting the safeguards system by every possible means. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 37 


103. At the time of acceding to NPT, Australia had possessed the skills 
needed to produce a nuclear weapon; but it had rejected that path. As a 
major exporter of uranium, Australia had a special interest in the safeguards 
system. It remained convinced that the best way for a country to conduct a 
responsible nuclear policy was to accept the international obligations 
inherent in NPT, as 136 countries (soon to be joined by Spain) had already 
done. 
104. Australia had long advocated that States not party to NPT should at 
least submit all their nuclear activities to full-scope safeguards, and that 
acceptance of such safeguards should also be a condition for the supply of 
nuclear materials to non-nuclear-weapon States. It was extremely concerned by 
the fact that a small minority of non-nuclear-weapon States had so far 
preferred not to undertake any binding international legal commitment in the 
matter of non-proliferation, and was especially worried by the increasing risk 
of proliferation in South Asia, as it had had occasion to say to the countries 
concerned. 
105. The authors of the Agency's Statute had been motivated essentially by 
the need to take account of the destructive potential of nuclear technology, 
even while promoting its use for peaceful purposes. The creation of an 
international body with a mandate to verify by on-site inspections that States 
were respecting their obligations under the Treaty was an unprecedented 
enterprise, assuming as it did that States would surrender a part of their 
sovereignty. The Agency's safeguards system had been and still was an 
unqualified success, and it was hardly surprising that the guiding principles 
of safeguards should be under consideration for application in other areas of 
arms control. 
106. In keeping with its Statute, the Agency was also playing an 
increasingly important role in the area of nuclear safety. Some months ago, 
at the time of the first anniversary of the Chernobyl accident, the world had 
had occasion to recall the importance of nuclear safety and the seriousness of 
the threat which attended any underestimation of nuclear safety. His 
delegation welcomed the rapid conclusion of the two new conventions, and also 
the stress laid by the Agency on safety review teams and on safety standards. 
Australia had signed the two conventions in question during the special 
session of the General Conference in 1986 and would be depositing its 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 38 


instruments of ratification in the course of the present session. It had 


likewise decided to co-sponsor, with the Agency, a conference on Radiation 
Protection in Nuclear Energy, to be held in Sydney in April 1988, and to 
ratify the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. That 
convention, drafted pursuant to a recommendation of the First NPT Review 
Conference, had entered into force during 1987 and would guarantee additional 
protection against diversion of nuclear materials and against the possibility 
of terrorist attacks, involving nuclear materials. 


107. In technical assistance and co-operation, the Agency had consistently 
obtained impressive results. The transfer of peaceful nuclear technology 
through the Agency's programmes had contributed to advances in electricity 
generation, industrial development, medicine, agriculture and so on. Apart 
from its contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, 
Australia was continuing to make extrabudgetary funds available for projects 
under the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA). In 
June it had signed the third agreement on the extension of the RCA, which had 
proven itself to be an exceptionally fine mechanism for regional co-operation 
in the nuclear field. 
108. During the past year, Australia had modified the legislative basis of 
its nuclear activities. In the course of that modification it had promulgated 
a Nuclear Non-Proliferation (Safeguards) Act, which gave effect to Australia's 
international obligations under NPT and the Treaty of Rarotonga, and which 
established stringent controls over the possession and transfer of nuclear 
materials. Australia had also submitted its own national nuclear research 
programme to a rigorous review. The former Australian Atomic Energy 
Commission had given way to the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology 
Organisation (ANSTO). That body would be focussing its attention on the 
practical applications of nuclear technology relevant to the economic and 
social development of the country. The law by which ANSTO had been set up 
expressly prohibited any research and development aimed at the design or 
production of nuclear weapons or any other nuclear explosive device. Research 
and development work on SYNROC, a promising method for the management of 
second generation nuclear waste, was being continued. Australia hoped soon to 
sign bilateral co-operation agreements with Italy on research and 
development. ANSTO had recently given a successful demonstration - in a 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 39 


non-radioactive plant - of the fabrication of commercial-scale SYNROC storage 
cylinders. Uranium production had continued to make progress, and Australia 
was proud of its reputation as a responsible and reliable supplier. 


109. The Agency could take just pride in the results it had obtained during 
the 30 years of its existence and in the fine reputation it had won. In the 
future, too, it would continue to bear heavy responsibilities, and would have 
to confront its challenges in a climate of extreme budgetary stringency. It 
would have to take difficult decisions in establishing its priorities. 
Safeguards, safety and technical assistance would remain the key activities, 
but others such as the treatment and utilization of plutonium could not be 
neglected either. 
110. The Agency was not, any more than the other international 
organizations, exempt from political disputes among its Members. Whatever the 
political ideas of each Member might be - and as far as South Africa was 
concerned, it was a familiar fact that Australia vigorously condemned 
apartheid - it would be contrary to the common interests of the Agency's 
Members to allow political problems to compromise the organization's 
activities. If countries had reason to be proud of the Agency's successes, 
that was unquestionably because of the respect in which the principles and the 
rules laid down in its Statute had consistently been held; that must continue 
to be so, if the Agency was to contribute further to world peace and security. 
111. Mr. LUKMAN (Nigeria) conveyed the warm congratulations of the 
Government and people of Nigeria to the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
its Director General and its staff on the occasion of the organization's 
thirtieth anniversary. The Agency had become a true symbol of multilateral 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It had every reason to be 
proud of the accomplishments of its 30 years, for it had in fact, to a large 
extent, realized the objectives assigned to it by its founders. In 1953, the 
creation of such an agency had seemed a distant and impossible dream, in view 
of the controversies then raging over the "atom". But the dream of voluntary 
sharing of knowledge concerning the peaceful uses of atomic energy, under the 
control and with the appropriate safeguards of an international authority, had 
become reality, and the Agency was today one of the most efficient and 
respected bodies of the United Nations family. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 40 


112. His delegation had read the Agency's Annual Report for 1986 with 
interest, but could only regret that, of the 397 power reactors at present 
operating, none was to be found in Africa - unless the South African nuclear 
installations were taken into account - and that of the 23 plants which had 
gone into operation in 1986 none, apart from the one in the Republic of Korea, 
was in a developing country. Although the main objective of the Agency was to 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world, the developing countries were still not 
receiving their full share of those advantages. 
113. Africa, for example, seemed to be a passive observer which had not yet 
been able fully to benefit from nuclear technology. There were many reasons 
for that, particularly the lack of adequate financial resources, of a suitable 
infrastructure, the dearth of high-level specialists, limited access to raw 
materials, to nuclear equipment and technology, and the low level of 
assistance to research and development. The Agency should continue its help 
towards solving the problems of developing countries in general, and of those 
of Africa in particular. In that connection his delegation noted with 
satisfaction the work of the high-level expert group on the promotion of 
nuclear power in developing countries, and hoped that the Agency would do its 
utmost to expedite that work. 
114. Nigeria appreciated the importance of nuclear energy as a complementary 
or replacement source of energy. It was likewise aware of the numerous 
applications of nuclear energy in food and agriculture, energy, medicine, the 
physical sciences and technology in general. As far as technical assistance 
was concerned, it could be seen from a perusal of the annual report that the 
share of assistance provided to Africa in 1986 had dropped by comparison 
with 1985. The Agency should try to increase its technical assistance to 
Africa, not just in relative terms but in absolute terms, since 26 of the 36 
least developed countries were African. The training courses and study 
fellowships provided by the Agency, notably those arranged in collaboration 
with FAO, held great interest for Nigeria, which hoped to benefit from those 
programmes more and more in the future. It was also reassuring to see that 
the programme for Africa laid stress on agriculture: a generalized 
application of nuclear techniques in agriculture would stimulate production 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 41 


and make it easier to attain the goals of Africa's economic recovery 
programme. Nigeria was furthermore satisfied with the technical assistance it 
had received towards elimination of the tsetse fly by the sterile insect 
technique uder the BICOT project, and hoped that the second phase of the 
project would be implemented without delay. 


115. A number of questions were of particular interest to his delegation among 
them nuclear safety and radiation protection. The Director General and 
the Secretariat were to be congratulated on the work that had been done in 
that area, and in particular on the preparation for the two conventions and 
the elaboration of the expanded nuclear safety programme. The efforts that 
had been deployed in that direction for more than a year would certainly help 
to restore public confidence in nuclear power. In that connection, his 
delegation wished to urge the necessity of providing developing countries with 
training in nuclear safety and radiation protection. Similarly, all Member 
States should seek agreement on other questions relating to safety, notably 
the sharing of safety-related information, the creation of an emergency 
assistance fund to aid the developing countries in the event of a nuclear 
accident, and the preparation of a convention on State liability for nuclear 
damage. 
116. Another question of concern to the Nigerian delegation was the 
amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. The gross under-representation of 
the regions of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia was a problem that 
had gone too long without a solution: the question had been on the agenda of 
the General Conference for nine years and still, unfortunately, seemed no 
nearer to a solution. Africa was the region with the largest number of Member 
States, but still had only five seats on the Board. It was in the interest of 
the Agency that the regions with the largest numbers of Member States should 
be represented equitably in the policy-making organs, and his delegation hoped 
that the General Conference would make definite proposals on the subject at 
its present session. 
117. He wished to reaffirm his country's dedication to the objectives and 
the Statute of the Agency. Nigeria had been one of the first Member States to 
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Eager as it 
was to use the peaceful applications of nuclear energy to accelerate its own 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 42 


economic and social development, Nigeria had decided to negotiate and sign a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. It hoped that that agreement, which 
would strengthen co-operation between Nigeria and the Agency in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, could be rapidly concluded. 


118. His delegation believed that, although the Agency's aims were 
essentially technical, it could not stick its head in the sand like an ostrich 
and fail to take account of political events which were having a considerable 
impact on the Agency's work. With regard to the nuclear capability of South 
Africa, his delegation and the African group as a whole wanted to express 
their gratitude to the Board of Governors for the courage it had displayed in 
June when it had recommended the General Conference to deprive the racist 
regime of South Africa of its rights and privileges as a Member of the Agency, 
under Article XIX.B. of the Statute. Nigeria trusted that all delegations 
which respected the dignity and freedom of man and attached importance to the 
Agency's credibility would support that carefully considered recommendation of 
the Board. The Board had adopted that recommendation because South Africa had 
bluntly refused to comply with the various resolutions in which the General 
Conference had asked it to submit all its nuclear facilities to the Agency's 
safeguards, and also because South Africa had refused to behave in accordance 
with the aims and principles of the United Nations Charter and to abolish its 
inhuman and hateful system of apartheid. South Africa would like to enjoy the 
rights and privileges of membership of the Agency and other international 
organizations, whereas through its own institutions it was depriving 90% of 
its population of human rights and individual liberties. 
119. Very-well-informed sources corroborated the fact that the apartheid 
regime had set up a testing ground in the Kalahari in 1977, had tested a 
nuclear device on the coast in 1979, and was now building a nuclear missile 
testing centre on the island of Marion. As had been said on many occasions, 
the nuclear capability of South Africa represented a very serious danger to 
peace and international security. It was a threat in particular to the 
security of African states and enhanced the danger of nuclear^-weapons 
proliferation. In the hands of a regime which sought to preserve its racial 
supremacy at all costs, nuclear weapons were a source of tremendous concern 
and danger. Was it not true, after all, that very highly placed members of 
the South African regime had asserted they were prepared to defend apartheid 
by any and all means? 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 43 


120. The General Assembly of the United Nations had, in its 
resolution 41/35B, expressed once more its indignation over the evils of 
apartheid and had asked the Security Council to apply obligatory sanctions 
against the racist regime of South Africa in conformity with Chapter VII of 
the United Nations Charter. It had likewise requested Member States to 
exclude South Africa from all organizations of the United Nations system of 
which it was still a member. It was time that the Agency took that step in 
conformity with the recommendation of its own Board of Governors. For years 
South Africa had taken no notice of the Agency's resolutions and was adopting, 
in its negotiations with the Agency, an attitude of contempt and disdain, 
thereby seriously compromising the operation of the Agency's safeguards. 
121. Certain countries were opposed to the exclusion of South Africa, 
notably in the name of what they chose to call the principle of universality. 
However, everyone knew that the racist regime of South Africa did not practise 
universality within its own borders, and that it denied the universal 
principles of the rights of man, of human dignity and of self-determination. 
Those same countries claimed that the Agency would lose control of safeguards 
in South Africa if the latter were excluded from membership. But one could 
only lose what one in fact possessed, and his delegation wondered what control 
the Agency was today able to exercise over South Africa. South Africa had 
developed its nuclear weapons capability at a time when it was a Member of the 
Agency, and the situation could hardly get worse. The exclusion of South 
Africa would not prevent the Agency from fulfilling its safeguards functions, 
since, as the African group had stressed in its aide memoire on the subject, 
there were already cases in which the Agency was performing safeguards 
functions in States not Members of the Agency. Another argument often put 
forward was that the Agency was a technical organization and that it should 
not concern itself with political questions. The distinction between 
technical and political questions was, however, artificial and tendentious. 
At all events, South Africa had already been excluded from a number of 
specialized institutions and international bodies belonging to the United 
Nations system as a consequence of its odious policies. 


122. Trying at all costs to avoid exclusion, South Africa had recently made 
certain symbolic gestures: a month earlier, for example, it had hastily 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 44 


signed and ratified the two conventions on early notification and emergency 
assistance, in order to give an illusory impression of "progress". Yet it had 
not applied the resolutions of the General Assembly or of the Agency's General 
Conference in which it had been asked to submit all its nuclear facilities to 
Agency safeguards, and the security of African States was still threatened by 
South Africa's nuclear weapons capability. His delegation accordingly urged 
the General Conference in the strongest terms to support the recommendation of 
the Board that South Africa should be suspended from membership. 


123. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) read out the following message of 
congratulations from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Chile to the Director 
General on the occasion of the Agency's thirtieth anniversary: 
"Sir, 


"I have the honour to address you in the name of the Government of 
Chile, and also on my own behalf, to express our most sincere 
congratulations on the occasion of the Agency's thirtieth anniversary. 
I hope that the Agency will continue to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy for the well-being and prosperity of all the world's 
peoples and, in particular, on behalf of the populations of the 
developing countries. 


"I take this occasion to thank the IAEA for the assistance it has 
given to Chile in developing the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. 


"Accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest esteem. 


Ricardo Garcia" 


124. Describing Chile's activities in the nuclear sphere over the past year, 
he said that a great deal of progress had been made in connection with nuclear 
materials, particularly in developing the infrastructure required for research 
on the treatment of radioactive ores and the construction of a fuel element 
fabrication plant for research reactor fuel. 
125. Efforts to promote the use of radioisotopes and radiations in various 
sectors of production and research and development had continued. The support 
given by the Agency's technical co-operation programme for the adaptation and 
use of these techniques in areas of direct relevance for the socio-economic 
development of Chile - such as agriculture, medicine, hydrology and industry deserved 
special mention. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 45 


126. With regard to nuclear safety and radiation protection, following the 
unfortunate accident that had occurred in a nuclear power plant a year and a 
half earlier, intensified controls had been applied to imported foodstuffs, 
and indicators of environmental activity had been continuously checked 
throughout the country's territory. Chile had, moreover, co-operated with 
other countries of the region in monitoring doses of food contaminants. It 
had also continued to work out regulations and standards and to train 
personnel in such a way that nuclear development could be pursued in complete 
safety. 
127. The Chilean Government considered the regional co-operative 
arrangements for the promotion of nuclear science and technology in 
Latin America (ARCAL) to be an efficient tool for improving standards of 
living in the countries of the region, and a helpful way of advancing towards 
integrated technical co-operation in the nuclear sphere. Chile therefore gave 
unreserved support to that regional initiative: it was participating actively 
in all ARCAL projects, was contributing to them through the services of its 
experts and was receiving fellows from the region in its own facilities; 
accordingly, it welcomed the support that the Director General was giving that 
programme. Chile had hosted the fourth technical co-ordination and planning 
session of ARCAL, and intended to submit the document established during those 
meetings for the approval of Latin American delegates within a few days. 
128. A course for librarians and nuclear information specialists, organized 
in July 1987 in Chile within the framework of the ARCAL programme, also 
deserved mention. The Government of Chile had welcomed the suggestion that 
Chile should serve as a pilot centre for the project on nuclear information. 
He was convinced that the common efforts of Member States and efficient 
management by the Agency would enable the programme to serve as an effective 
spearhead for the development of nuclear technology in Latin America, just as 
the regional co-operative agreement for South East Asia and the Pacific had 
done in that region. 
129. Chile, as he had already said, was prepared to put its facilities and 
the experience of its professional workers at the service of the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities. His Government felt that a country 
possessing sufficient energy resources (water, coal and so forth) might 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 46 


perhaps not have a vast nuclear power programme, but at the same time might be 
very advanced in other applications of nuclear technology, such as those to be 
found in medicine, agriculture and so on. 


130. His delegation wished to express its gratitude to the People's Republic 
of China, since the sale by the latter of 20%-enriched uranium hexafluoride 
for the fabrication of fuel elements for one of Chile's research reactors 
would contribute meaningfully to the country's nuclear development. It also 
thanked the Agency's Secretariat for the expeditious manner in which it had 
drafted the final text of the relevant safguards agreement. 
131. With regard to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1988, 
Chile's familiar attitude was that technical co-operation activities should be 
financed from reliable and predictable sources, such as the Regular Budget. 
In fact, Chile was convinced that all the Agency's activities should be 
treated in the same way and that none should be given priority over others. 
However, even though it could not agree with the present system, Chile had 
announced that it would contribute for the next year the full amount 
corresponding to its share of the assessed budget. It wished to appeal to 
other Member States to make the contributions requested of them and to do so 
in good time. Otherwise, the technical assistance and co-operation programme 
would continue to suffer from a dearth of funds, and that would bear prejudice 
to the developing countries in particular. 
132. With regard to nuclear safety, Chile, which had signed the Conventions 
on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and on Emergency Assistance in the 
Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency a year ago, was convinced 
that those instruments would help to strengthen international co-operation in 
nuclear safety and to rebuild confidence among the general public. In that 
connection, Chile applauded the Agency's efforts to enhance nuclear safety 
through supplementary programmes carried out with a very small additional 
budget. 
133. It would be very important to continue studies on the establishment of 
a legal regime embodying the liability of States for trans-frontier damage 
resulting from a nuclear accident, and to include in that new regime the 
concepts of nuclear damage, genetic damage to persons and environmental 
damage, which were not clearly defined by the international conventions at 

GC(XXXI)/0R.294 
page 4 7 


present in force. Furthermore, if claims submitted under a regime of State 


liability were to be honoured properly, there would have to be some 
harmonization of international standards on radionuclide concentrations and 


levels of radioactive contamination in the event of accidents. 


134. With regard to the question of strengthening co-operation between large 
international organizations, his delegation approved of efforts aimed at 
framing an agreement to regulate relations between the Agency and UNIDO so 
that their actions could be better co-ordinated. 
135. Two questions had been debated at great length and so far in vain: the 
amendment of Article VI of the Statute as a whole, and the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. The Government of Chile felt that the very 
nature of the subject meant that highly divergent interests must be involved; 
but until Member States had realized how important it was to display more 
flexibility in their positions, and to leave their own parochial interests 
aside as far as possible, the solution awaited for so long would remain out of 
reach. 
136. With regard to the draft budget for 1988, he welcomed the Agency's 
efforts to use its financial resources to the best advantage by making 
economies and transferring appropriations between different programmes. In 
that way its objectives would, as far as possible, be attained even without 
departing from the principle of zero growth. At the same time, however, he 
feared that the zero-growth policy was bound to affect the Agency's 
promotional activities. 
137. The Agency was to be congratulated on the activities carried out during 
the past year which were described in the annual report for 1986. Activities 
involving the applications of nuclear techniques throughout the world had had 
a considerable impact on agricultural production, food supplies and health all 
sectors which had a direct influence on development, particularly in the 
developing countries themselves. For that reason Chile welcomed the fact that 
technical co-operation activities had become more efficient - in particular as 
a result of the evaluation programme. 
138. On the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary, he wished to honour in 
particular the Agency's former Director Generals, Sterling Cole and 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 48 


Sigvard Eklund, as well as the present Director General, Hans Blix. His 
gratitude went likewise to all employees of the Agency, who had given and were 
still giving of their best. Member States could be proud of the expansion 
that had taken place in the 30 years of the Agency's existence, because the 
projects supported by the Agency were actively contributing to the progress of 
humanity. 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (resumed) 


139. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to return to the 
question of appointment of the General Committee. The Middle East and South 
Asia group had now informed him of the names of their candidates for the 
General Committee: they were the delegate of the Syrian Arab Republic, for 
the post of vice-president, and the delegate of Iraq. He suggested that the 
General Conference elect those two delegates. 
140. The General Conference accepted the President's proposal. 
141. The PRESIDENT noted that one candidate was still outstanding, 
namely the delegate to be selected by the Far East group, and expressed the 
hope that consultations would be concluded rapidly so that the General 
Committee could be duly appointed the following morning. 
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
142. The PRESIDENT proposed that the General Conference, in order to 
gain time, should once again depart from the provisions of Article 42(a) of 
its Rules of Procedure and ask the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, who 
had been elected at the preceding meeting, to convene the first meeting of 
that Committee for the following morning: in that way the Committee could 
begin its debate on the questions which the Secretariat, in the provisional 
agenda (GC(XXXI)/799), had suggested allocating to it for initial discussion, 
as specified by the Statute, or those questions on which the General 
Conference itself had, the previous year, requested that reports be submitted 
at the present session. The agenda items in question were: 

GC(XXXI)/OR.294 
page 49 


Item 9 (Measures to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear 


safety and radiological protection) 


Item 10 (The Agency's budget for 1988) 


Item 13 (The financing of technical assistance) 


Item 14 (Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat) 


Item 15 (Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute) 


Item 16 (Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole). 


143. Noting that there were no objections to his proposal, he assumed that 
it was acceptable to the Conference. The Committee of the Whole would 
accordingly begin its work the following morning. 
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m. 



GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
February 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1987, at 10.40 a.m. 
President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 
(resumed) 
General debate and annual report 
for 1986 (resumed) 3 - 101 
Statements by the delegates of: 
China 
Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics 
Finland 
Republic of Korea 
India 
Canada 
Pakistan 
Hungary 
Bulgaria 
3 
9 
29 
35 
44 
55 
69 
81 
91 
8 
- 28 
- 34 
- 43 
- 54 
- 68 
- 80 
- 90 
- 101 

[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 25 September 1987. 
[**] GC(XXXI)/799. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-0552 
2273e/262e 



GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 2 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference that consultations 
had ultimately resulted in agreement on the filling of the outstanding vacancy 
in the General Committee: he accordingly proposed that the delegate of the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea be elected as a Vice President of the 
General Conference. 
2. The President's proposal was accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1986 (GC(XXXI)/800 and Corr.l) (resumed) 


3. Mr. JIANG (China) noted that, in the 30 years since its 
establishment, the Agency had demonstrated that it was a competent 
international body for promoting international co-operation in various fields 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, such as nuclear power, nuclear safety, 
radiation protection, and the production and application of isotopes. The 
Agency had also provided necessary and useful assistance to its Member States, 
particularly the developing ones. Furthermore, in 1986 the Agency had taken 
only two months to formulate the two conventions on early notification and 
emergency assistance and his country had already deposited the instruments of 
ratification of the two conventions with the Director General. 
4. Although there was no question about the importance of the Agency's 
role in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, that role had for various reasons 
not been fully exploited. In view of the existing unbalanced development of 
nuclear energy, it was to be hoped that the developed countries would give 
greater support to the Agency and contribute more to helping other 
Member States in the development of nuclear energy. The Agency itself should 
strive to increase the implementation and effectiveness of its technical 
assistance projects and use its limited resources as economically as possible. 
5. Since it joined the Agency in 1984, there had been satisfactory 
co-operation between China and the Agency. During the past four years, China 
had sent many experts to participate in various technological activities 
sponsored by the Agency and had also held various training courses of 
practical significance for economic development. In addition, China had 
hosted meetings on the technology of insect disinfestation by irradiation, 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 3 


food preservation by irradiation, isotope hydrology, semi-dwarf mutants for 
rice improvement, and so on. Similar activities were expected to be held in 
China in 1988. China had also started to provide technical services to the 
Agency and, through the Agency, to other developing Member States. 


6. China was striving to accelerate construction of its nuclear power 
plants and the application of nuclear energy in other fields. Construction of 
the Qinshan Nuclear Power Plant, which had been independently designed and 
manufactured by China, was proceeding smoothly. Upon completion of the 
pre-engineering phase, construction had started at the Daya Bay Nuclear Power 
Plant introduced from Britain and France. In the field of nuclear research, 
China's first tandem accelerator went into operation in 1987 thereby 
establishing the necessary conditions for basic nuclear physics research in 
China. While exerting great efforts in the construction of such large-scale 
facilities as the Tokamak torus device, it also implemented research and 
development projects such as the gamma irradiation facility. China had made 
substantial progress in isotope and radiation technology which had been 
successfully applied to the national economy and public health. 
7. As part of China's commitment to strengthening international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and its support for the 
objectives of the Agency's Statute, China intended to place some of its 
civilian nuclear installations under Agency safeguards and had conducted two 
rounds of negotiations with the Agency on the conclusion of an agreement. 
8. Despite the difficulties encountered during the last 30 years his 
delegation was optimistic about the future prospects of nuclear energy with 
the future development of the world economy and increasing energy 
requirements. It was to be hoped that the Agency would successfully promote 
the realization of the objectives of seeking to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world as laid down in its Statute. 
9. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that it 
would fall to the General Conference to examine and decide on a number of 
important matters in the activities of the Agency which would determine what 
its work was to be in the years to come; it was the Soviet Union's hope that 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 4 


the decisions taken by the General Conference would herald a new and major 
stage in the development of international co-operation in the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy to the benefit of Member States of the Agency, in 
the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime and in the more effective 
application of Agency safeguards. 


10. The thirty years that had passed since the entry into force of the 
Agency's Statute had given proof that the Agency had over those years become 
the generally acknowledged centre for finding joint solutions to the 
scientific and technical problems involved in using nuclear energy to peaceful 
ends and for providing assistance in that field to the developing countries. 
11. The Agency's monitoring functions had a special place in its 
activities; non-proliferation rightly held the key position. The practical 
work of the Agency over its thirty years had made patent to the international 
community the advantages of the peaceful development of science and technology 
over applying them to warlike ends, and had clearly pointed to the only 
rational way of using the energy of the atom. He noted that international 
co-operation in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy would beyond doubt 
be given a powerful boost if there were a general improvement in the world 
political climate and were progress to be made in ensuring general security. 
12. The Agency had throughout the years ceaselessly worked towards its 
fundamental goal, that of achieving the rapid and widespread use of atomic 
energy to underpin world peace, health and prosperity. He noted with 
satisfaction that the overwhelming majority of the Agency's Member States had 
made common cause towards that end, and gave their sincere support to the work 
and the principles of that truly unique international organization; the 
thirty years of the Agency's existence had given convincing proof that all 
States, irrespective of their social and economic systems, could and must 
contribute to strengthening international security, and the thirtieth 
anniversary was a good opportunity once more to examine in depth States' 
co-operation through the Agency. The Soviet Government had taken a special 
decision that the Agency's anniversary was to be widely marked; a ceremonial 
congress had been held in Moscow, special medals struck and special stamps and 
envelopes printed. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 5 


13. The Soviet Union had not strayed from its main thrust in the field of 
disarmament, and was doing all it could to make headway in the principal 
discussions on limiting the arms race and on disarmament; it was putting 
forward constructive proposals towards reining back the arms race - the 
nuclear race in particular - and towards making the shift to real disarmament. 
In a world become interdependent, one in which the priority had become the 
survival of humankind, any further build-up of arms threatened not only to 
handicap progress in all spheres of human endeavour to an even greater degree, 
but also to wipe out the achievements of the past, and the future of 
civilization. History and the realities of the age of the atom and of space 
spoke with one insistent voice for disarmament, for a non-nuclear, non-violent 
world. The idea of a world of that kind was not Utopian and was no pipedream; 
it was taking on real shape and was beginning to stand out ever more 
clearly as the only rational alternative to "nuclear restraint". 
14. The programme for a non-nuclear world had made it possible to carry 
disarmament to lengths that had until very recently seemed unthinkable; the 
security of one and all in the nuclear age, the space age, could be guaranteed 
not by piling up armaments, but by creating an all-embracing system of stable, 
dependable peace. Practical proposals to that effect had been made by the 
General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Gorbachev, 
in an article published on 17 September that year. 
15. There was no area in arms limitation and elimination in which the 
Soviet Union would not be prepared to reach mutually acceptable agreement; 
an example of the Soviet Union's determination to make palpable progress 
towards a non-nuclear world was its position at the recent talks between 
Mr. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Mr. Shultz, the 
Secretary of State of the United States of America; a result of those talks 
had been that most of the differences and obstacles to agreement on 
eliminating intermediate-range and battlefield missiles had been removed. For 
the first time in the history of nuclear weaponry, there had been agreement in 
principle to eliminate two classes of missile. A decision had also been taken 
to begin, before 1 December 1987, full-scale, stage-by-stage talks, in a 
single forum, on matters relating to nuclear testing. It had been agreed at 
the Washington talks that there would be a meeting in the autumn of that year 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 6 


between Mr. Gorbachev and the President of the United States of America, 
Mr. Reagan, which the Soviet Union hoped would be the point of departure for 
new and far-reaching moves towards the total elimination of the nuclear threat 
to humankind. 


16. As the acknowledged international body for co-ordinating States' 
efforts in the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, the Agency could not 
help but be in the mainstream of world politics. Active Agency participation 
in efforts to prevent the appearance of new nuclear States was one of the most 
important factors in combating the threat of nuclear war, in strengthening 
peace and international security and in limiting the nuclear arms race. The 
Soviet Union had noted with satisfaction that in 1986, as before, the 
Secretariat had discovered no irregularities which would have indicated that 
nuclear materials or facilities under safeguards had been switched to 
production of weapons or to other military purposes, or to the construction of 
explosive devices of a nuclear kind. That being so, it was in favour, bearing 
in mind the world situation, of the Agency's concentrating its safeguards 
efforts first and foremost where there was the greatest risk of diversion 
towards weapons production, and therefore favoured increasing the 
effectiveness of Agency monitoring in near-nuclear States, particularly those 
not signatory to NPT. The Soviet Union had given and would continue to give 
the Agency all possible support in carrying out its functions directed towards 
ensuring non-proliferation, including co-operation in developing the system of 
safeguards. 


17. The Soviet Union was successfully carrying out a programme of 
scientific and technical support for Agency safeguards, in which the leading 
scientific research institutes were participating, and every year training 
courses for inspectors, and other Agency activities, took place there. 
18. The Soviet Union considered the Agency's activities to be of great 
significance in developing scientific and technical co-operation between 
Member States, and actively supported the fundamental directions in the 
Agency's work in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, particularly 
programmes of benefit to all countries; of these, nuclear power and its fuel 
cycle were paramount. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 7 


19. Considering the great significance with which matters of nuclear safety 
had become invested, the Soviet Union also supported expanding the Agency's 
activities in that field and had put forward advanced proposals on a programme 
to create an international safety regime for the safe development of nuclear 
power, which was to be based on close collaboration between States which had 
received broad support from the special session of the General Conference. 
20. The Soviet Union considered of great importance the work of the 1NIS 
system and co-operation through the Agency in the field of nuclear data; 
those areas were of importance for the development not only of nuclear power, 
but also for other areas in the use of atomic energy in all the Agency's 
Member States. The Soviet Union therefore supported the Agency's activities 
in controlled nuclear fusion, which might serve in future as an inexhaustible 
source of energy. 
21. The Soviet Union had always considered technical assistance and 
co-operation with the Member States of the Agency to be of primary importance, 
and had noted with satisfaction the constant growth in the Agency's activities 
in transferring experience, knowledge, technology and equipment for the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy to further economic and social 
development in the countries receiving technical assistance. Allocations to 
technical assistance would increase by 12% in 1988, an increase to which the 
Soviet Union gave its support. It considered that the principle by which the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) was funded by voluntary 
contributions in national currency should remain unchanged; the system 
adopted by the Agency, that of Indicative Planning Figures, had proved its 
effectiveness and provided a reliable forecast and guarantee of the financing 
of the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities. The Soviet 
Union's policy, based on principle, towards co-operation with developing 
countries found expression in the constant increase in its inputs to the TACF, 
and it regularly paid its due share in full; indeed, he was authorized to 
reveal that his Government was to increase its contribution to the TACF for 
1988 to US $3 834 000 in Soviet currency. In addition, the Soviet Union had 
allocated a further two million roubles over the 1986-88 period to providing 
additional assistance to Member States of the Agency which had acceded 
to NPT. That assistance was given by making available Soviet equipment, 



GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 8 


supplies, instruments and facilities and by giving training on various courses 
in the Soviet Union to specialized personnel from developing countries which 
were Member States of the Agency. 


22. Power generation was a leading and fast-growing sector of the Soviet 
economy, and in the decades to come would be based on fossil and nuclear fuel 
and on hydroelectricity, insofar as there were as yet no other sources of 
comparable capacity available; forms of energy such as solar, geothermal and 
others would provide a small fraction of the energy supply by the end of the 
century, and it could only be hoped that in the first half of the next century 
other sources of energy would be capable of making a significant contribution 
to the fuel equation. Increased demand for oil, gas and coal was associated 
with increases in exploitation costs in the remote eastern and northern parts 
of the Soviet Union, and it therefore regarded nuclear power as one of the 
most important means of balancing the fuel equation over a prolonged period. 
23. The accident at Chernobyl in April 1986 had done major damage to the 
Soviet Union, and in August of that year the Soviet delegation had given at 
the Agency a detailed account of its causes and effects. He informed the 
General Conference that at the moment of speaking, eighteen months later, the 
first and second units of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant were operating at 
their design capacity of 1 GW each. The third unit was being readied for 
startup, and the fourth, the one which had been destroyed by the accident, was 
completely sheathed in concrete cladding, a "sarcophagus", as it was commonly 
called. He took the opportunity to thank, on behalf of the Soviet people, the 
organizations, companies and Governments which had given their assistance in 
successfully dealing with the accident. 
24. The accident at Chernobyl A and accidents at power stations abroad had 
made it necessary critically to study the safety of nuclear power. The Soviet 
Union's painstaking and comprehensive study of the causes, course and effects 
of the accident, the measures taken to counter it and their effectiveness had 
shown how these problems could be solved. On the basis of that study, a 
long-term plan to improve nuclear power safety had been developed in which a 
great deal of attention had been given to improving the man-machine interface, 
including automatics, monitoring, information provision and staff training, 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 9 


especially for accident conditions. A study was being conducted of the remote 
effects of the accident, and much significance was attached to work on 
developing power reactors of the type termed inherently safe. 


25. The critical analysis of which nuclear power had been the object after 
the accident at Chernobyl had not impelled the Soviet Union to change its 
position on the further development of nuclear power; nuclear power would 
meet about 20% of the demand for electricity by 1990 and would rival fossil 
fuel in its contribution by the year 2000. 
26. The Soviet Union shared the concern of the Director General regarding 
the worsening financial situation of the Agency caused by delays in payment by 
some Member States of their due contributions. The Agency was faced with the 
real prospect of a substantial shortfall in the resources needed for its 
activities, which could not but also affect the implementation of Agency 
functions of importance for all Member States, such as its monitoring 
activities and ensuring non-proliferation. The Soviet Union placed high value 
on the role in the modern world which the Agency had played for thirty years, 
a role which should be further expanded; it was of the profound conviction 
that it was intolerable to use financial leverage to exert pressure on the 
Agency. The Soviet Union had always spoken for providing the Agency with the 
finance it needed for its activities, for underpinning its operating situation 
and for strict adherence to all the provisions of the Agency's Statute, and 
was therefore prepared to continue co-operation towards eliminating the 
financial difficulties which had arisen; it would pay its contributions to 
the Agency's budget punctiliously, in full and in accordance with the approved 
scale. Having regard to the financial embarrassment in which the Agency found 
itself, the Soviet Union had decided to pay its mandatory contributions 
early; from 1988, they would be paid in April and October, and the 
contribution for the second semester of 1987 would be made on 18 September. 


27. The Soviet Union called on all Member States which had not yet 
liquidated their debts to the Agency to do so with the minimum of delay. 
28. He associated himself with those delegations which had expressed their 
approval of the Agency's Annual Report for 1986, and said that he was 
convinced that the Agency would continue to be a trustworthy tool in the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 10 


development of international co-operation in the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy under the conditions consequent upon it of non-proliferation. 
The Soviet Union was of the firm intention to be guided in its work by the 
sincere desire to facilitate a succesful outcome to the work of the General 
Conference, and to co-operate in a constructive and businesslike manner with 
all parties in seeking ways to resolve the important and the crucial matters 


in hand. 


29. Mr. SUOMIHEN (Finland) noted that at the time of the Agency's 
establishment, there had been widespread enthusiasm for nuclear energy and at 
that time the main concern had been the possible misuse of fissionable 
material, but during the past few years many countries had begun to have 
misgivings about the acceptability of nuclear power as a whole. Despite that 
fact, the importance of nuclear energy in the world was unquestionable. It 
accounted for more than half of the total electricity consumption in a number 
of countries and for 15% on average. In Finland, the proportion was 
almost 40%, and despite the costs of stringent safety measures, the use of 
nuclear energy had resulted in cheaper electricity. The availability of 
Finnish nuclear power plants was an average of almost 90% and per capita 
consumption of nuclear energy in Finland was among the highest in the world. 
30. Although the introduction and use of nuclear energy in Finland had 
largely been based on its economic advantages, environmental aspects had also 
been seen as an argument in favour of nuclear energy. The attention paid to and 
the material and intellectual investment in - safety had been worth 
while. Public confidence in nuclear energy one and a half years before in 
Finland had been on such a level that preparatory steps were being taken to 
construct additional nuclear capacity. However, the Chernobyl accident had 
changed the prospects, and the Government had taken a decision not to continue 
with the development of new nuclear energy capacity, although nuclear energy 
had not been excluded from the list of options and there was no question of 
the premature dismantling of existing plants. Currently, there was worldwide 
uncertainty about the future role of nuclear energy among the available 
options. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 11 


31. The acceptability of nuclear energy, and especially of nuclear power, 
was founded on nuclear safety and non-proliferation, and he wondered whether 
everything possible was being done to strengthen those foundations and to 
demonstrate their solidity to the public. It was essential that safety, 
including the safety of nuclear waste management and the external safety of 
nuclear power plants and materials, remain a top priority wherever nuclear 
energy was used. Perhaps more should be done to make people understand the 
real nature of the problems associated with safety in nuclear waste 
management - the complete isolation of radioactive products from the 
ecosphere. Equally important, but perhaps less in the forefront of public 
awareness, was the question of nuclear non-proliferation. The Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) had greatly helped to dispel fears 
that nuclear power and nuclear weapons would be inseparably linked. Any new 
adherences to NPT were very welcome, since they served to enhance the 
credibility of the non-proliferation regime. 
32. The Agency enjoyed the reputation of being one of the most efficient 
organizations in the United Nations family. It was - and would continue to 
be - a forum where all relevant issues could be openly discussed. At the same 
time, the Agency should guard against acquiring the image of an exclusive club 
of representatives of the "nuclear establishments" in various countries using 
its international prestige to promote single-mindedly the use of nuclear 
energy. In his introductory statement, the Director General had rightly 
emphasized the importance of collective international action and continued 
trust and confidence in the Agency on the part of its Member States and also 
the importance of settling matters without controversy. The Agency should 
continue to serve as a forum for finding commonly acceptable solutions to 
divergences of opinion as it had done in the case of the two conventions 
adopted by the General Conference at its special session and the Convention on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
33. The Agency was in a position to promote the exchange of safety-related 
information and it also had a crucial role in safeguarding nuclear materials 
against diversion to military or otherwise proscribed uses. Safeguards helped 
to create trust in the peaceful nature of the nuclear programmes of 

GCCXXXD/OR.295 
page 12 

Member States and it was to be hoped that it could lead to the complete 
separation of the nuclear fuel cycle of power plants from any military 
applications. 


34. The financial difficulties facing the UN system were well known, but 
stringency should not be pressed to the point at which it became detrimental 
to crucial activities such as safeguards inspections. All Member States 
should be urged to fulfil their financial obligations to the Agency on time so 
that its activities did not suffer owing to lack of money. If the credibility 
of safeguards control was allowed to diminish, it would inevitably have 
consequences for the nuclear programmes of both developed and developing 
countries alike. 
35. Mr, PARK (Republic of Korea) noted that during the past 30 years, 
the Agency had greatly contributed to the promotion of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and the prevention of nuclear proliferation. The Agency had 
played a central role in providing various technical assistance and 
co-operation programmes to facilitate access by developing countries to the 
benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in disseminating 
information on the applications of nuclear technology in the development of 
energy, medicine, food and agriculture. In addition, the Agency had served as 
a mechanism through which Member States had developed various safety 
standards. The Agency had also greatly contributed to fostering nuclear 
non-proliferation through the applications of international safeguards. 
36. His delegation was pleased to note that the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund (TACF) had increased by 11% in 1986 in spite of the 
zero-growth budget, while the net expenditure rate had risen significantly to 
75.7% from 66.3% in 1985. However, it was regrettable that almost two thirds 
of the Member States either had not pledged their share or had not respected 
their pledges to the TACF, and that actual payments represented only 60% of 
the indicative planning figure. 
37. With regard to the Agency's 1986 Safeguards Implementation Report, his 
delegation welcomed the conclusion that nuclear materials under safeguards had 
remained in peaceful nuclear activities or had been otherwise adequately 
accounted for. The fact that the proportion of facilities under safeguards 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 13 


for which the inspection goals had been attained as a whole had risen from 57% 
to 637o in 1986 was most welcome. Effective inspection activities in 1986 had 
considerably increased to over 86% of the Planned Actual Routine Inspection 
Efforts, compared with 73% in 1985. The Secretariat should continue to strive 
for such improvements. 


38. Under the current nuclear power programme in Korea, there were 
seven nuclear power plants in operation with an installed capacity of over 
5.7 GW(e), representing about 50% of the total electricity supply. Two more 
nuclear power plants of 950 MW units were under construction and would be 
added to the national electricity grid within two years. Despite the 
Chernobyl accident, two additional nuclear power units would be constructed by 
1996 to meet Korea's ever-growing energy demands. 
39. As a party to NPT and under the Agency's full-scope safeguards his 
country's nuclear power programmes were solely for the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. His country had recently been strengthening its national safeguards 
system for effective accounting for and control of nuclear materials. The 
legal framework for safeguards had already been reflected in the revised 
Atomic Energy Law, and a computer system for safeguards data processing was 
currently being developed. 
40. Great importance was also attached to nuclear safety. The Nuclear 
Safety Centre, established in 1982 under the Atomic Energy Law, had recently 
been reorganized in view of the need to improve nuclear safety and in view of 
growing public concern in the wake of the Chernobyl accident. His delegation 
believed that the benefits of nuclear energy, for power and other peaceful 
uses, should be fully available to any country which had demonstrated a firm 
commitment to non-proliferation. In that connection, his country, as one of 
several Member States which made contributions to the Agency in addition to 
its Regular Budget and voluntary contributions, had hosted the RCA Regional 
Workshop on Photon, Electron and Neutron Dosimetry in Radiotherapy in 
June 1987 with financial support from the Korean Government. It had also 
hosted the RCA Regional Training Course on Non-Destructive Testing at the 
Korean Advanced Energy Research Institute and was also considering providing 
extrabudgetary funds for a footnote-a/ project. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 14 


41. His country continued to support the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation programme for developing countries and it was hoped that Korea's 
modern research and training facilities could be used for IAEA/RCA 
activities. In addition, Korea would host the IAEA Interregional Training 
Course on Nuclear Power Project Planning and Implementation in 1988 with full 
financial support from the Korean Government. 
42. With regard to spent fuel management, his delegation believed that 
spent fuel should not be regarded as waste but rather as a promising nuclear 
energy resource in view of its high radioactivity. Spent fuel would 
undoubtedly become an international issue within a decade or so as it 
increased in amount to exceed the interim storage capacity and became an 
economical nuclear energy source. The Agency should therefore devise an 
international mechanism for its possible reuse and effective management 
without jeopardizing the international non-proliferation regime. 
43. In conclusion, his Government was confident that the Agency would 
continue to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while constantly 
maintaining the effectiveness of the international non-proliferation and 
safeguards regimes. 
44. Mr. SRINIVASAN (India) said that the thirtieth year of the 
Agency's fruitful career was an appropriate time at which to assess past 
achievements and to look ahead toward future tasks and objectives. 
45. The Agency had come into existence in response to the widespread 
realization that nuclear technology was an important factor in economic 
development, it being clearly reflected in the Statute that the international 
promotion of nuclear energy was its most important task. In that connection, 
he noted that India had participated actively in the Statute Conference in the 
person of the late Dr. Homi Bhabha, who had been an articulate champion of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
46. The current year was also the fortieth anniversary of India's 
independence, shortly after which it had already conceived a modest yet 
ambitious nuclear programme. Forty years on, India was a developing nation 
that was self-reliant in nuclear energy, having acquired the ability to 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 15 


operate the entire nuclear fuel cycle, from uranium exploration to spent fuel 
reprocessing and the recycling of plutonium. In India, with its very limited 
fossil fuel reserves, nuclear energy would have to play a major role if 
economic development objectives were to be met and living standards improved. 
Clearly, if available safety principles and knowledge were effectively 
deployed, nuclear power at its present stage of development represented an 
acceptable and beneficial source of energy. Although both the Three Mile 
Island and Chernobyl accidents had occurred mainly through the failure by 
operating personnel to observe safety rules and procedures, it was now the 
duty of the nuclear community to restore public confidence in nuclear energy. 
The Early Notification Convention and the Emergency Assistance Convention both 
of which India had already taken steps to ratify - were an important step 


in that direction. 


47. The year 1986/87 had been a satisfactory one for the Indian atomic 
energy programme. The pressurized heavy-water reactor system was now totally 
indigenized from the point of view of design, component manufacture, 
construction and operation. The successful attainment of criticality within 
the Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) at Kalpakkam had given India the 
necessary experience and confidence to proceed with the design of a prototype 
500 MW(e) fast breeder reactor, the preliminary design for which had already 
been completed. Significant progress had also been made on detailed designs 
for the main components. India's efforts during recent years at planning and 
designing larger unit size 500 MW(e) pressurized heavy-water reactors (PHWRs) 
were also nearing fruition, with design work on the primary heat transport 
system, moderator system, reactor boiler and auxiliaries now at an advanced 
stage. The two units of the Tarapur plant had logged 34 reactor years of 
successful operation. The Rajasthan Atomic Power Station Unit-2 had achieved 
the highest annual power generation since commencing commercial production. 
The problems encountered in the two units of the Madras plant - in the 
generator transformer and fuel transfer system - had been successfully 
overcome. The indigenously designed and constructed 100 MW high-flux research 
reactor, DHRUVA, had had early problems, but since modification of its fuel 
design had been operating at 60 MW(t), shortly to be raised to 80 MW(t). A 
uranium-233-fuelled neutron reactor facility was nearing completion at 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 16 


Kalpakkam. It would be used mainly for the neutron radiography of radioactive 
and non-radioactive objects. The other research reactors, APSARA and CIRUS, 
continued to operate in a safe and efficient manner. 


48. Another major development in India's nuclear programme was the 
conversion of the Nuclear Power Board into a corporation to manage nuclear 
power generation along modern commercial lines, with public involvement in its 
financing. That would definitely speed up achievement of India's aim to 
generate 10 000 MW(e) of nuclear power by the year 2000. 
49. In its enthusiasm for harnessing nuclear energy for vital developmental 
activities, India had never lost track of the need to assure the public of 
absolute safety in its nuclear installations. The Atomic Energy Regulatory 
Board, which had been established and entrusted with overall responsibility in 
that area, had set about its task - including the preparation of codes and 
guides in the nuclear medical, industrial and transportation areas - in a 
systematic manner. A fresh safety assessment of the country's nuclear power 
plants had been undertaken the previous year, and environmental surveys had 
been conducted around all nuclear plants and research centre sites. 
50. In the light of governmental and public concerns over nuclear safety, 
the 1986 General Conference had been preceded by a special conference at which 
scientists and experts had taken a comprehensive and detailed look at all the 
safety-related aspects of nuclear technology. The information made available 
after the Chernobyl accident could only serve to add, both qualitatively and 
quantitatively, to the safety culture of nuclear energy. It was above all 
encouraging to note the spirit in which a concerted effort, such as that 
witnessed the previous year, could meet the challenges ahead. In that 
connection, he thanked the Agency for organizing the forthcoming Conference on 
Nuclear Power Performance and Safety. 
51. India had made significant progress in the application of radioisotopes 
in agriculture, industry, medicine and fundamental research. As well as in 
fertilizers, genetic engineering and other related fields, radioisotopes were 
also being used in leak detection and hydrology. New and improved strains of 
staple crops were being subjected to field trials. India had been sharing its 
experience in those fields with other Member States, and particularly those of 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 17 


its own region, under the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA), with which it 
had been associated from its very inception and to which it had made 


substantial contributions, both financial and through the provision of 
expertise. Over the preceding year, the training demonstration programme on 
the use of radiotracer technology in industry had been organized. His country 
had also offered to host RCA workshops in the current year on the operation 
and maintenance of research reactors and on the use of personal computers for 


laboratory automation and data acquisition. RCA had matured over the previous 
16 years and the time was now ripe for expanding its activities to cover 
collaboration efforts in various aspects of nuclear power generation, as 
indicated by the Director General, who had referred in his statement to the 
desirability of regional co-operation in that area. For its part, India 
would, as in the past, make a contribution equivalent to US $50 000 for the 
current year in respect of RCA activities. The real success of RCA depended 
on the sharing of knowledge and expertise, and he reiterated that Indian 
expertise would remain available to Member States. Indeed, India would 
endeavour to contribute in all areas of interest to RCA. It would also pay 
its assessed share of voluntary contributions to the Agency's Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1987, even though it no longer sought to 
benefit from it. 


52. Recalling that the Agency also had a role to play in relation to the 
threat posed by the possible military use of nuclear technology, he said that 
the implementation of safeguards at those facilities where India had 
voluntarily placed nuclear material under safeguards continued to proceed 
smoothly. India was deeply committed to nuclear disarmament, and was an 
active participant in the Six-Nation Initiative sponsored by the 
Parliamentarians for Global Action. It was firmly opposed to any kind of 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, whether horizontal, spatial or vertical, 
since it could occur only at the cost of vital development assistance to 
developing countries. There were links between disarmament and development, 
and it was in that spirit that his country had participated at the recent 
disarmament conference in New York. He hoped that the same spirit would 
gradually permeate the Agency's activities and that the effort that now went 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 18 


into building nuclear weapons would be diverted into the production of nuclear 
power in those developing countries that were acutely short of conventional 
power sources. 


53. Along with its firm commitment to peace, India categorically rejected 
the pursuit of discriminatory practices within non-proliferation. In that 
connection the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) was unequal and one-sided, 
allowing the nuclear-weapon States to continue increasing their nuclear 
arsenals while at the same time requiring the non-nuclear-weapon States to 
exercise restraint. If the world was to be made safe from nuclear 
destruction, nuclear weapons of all types and in all countries must be banned, 
and nuclear technology everywhere used only for peaceful purposes. In that 
regard, he noted with satisfaction the recent exchanges between the 
United States and the Soviet Union on nuclear-weapons negotiations. 


54. In conclusion, it was entirely dependent on human ingenuity whether 
nuclear power would take the world from darkness to light or plunge it back 
into darkness and destruction. His Government was confident that the Agency 
would contribute to making the very best use of that unlimited source of power, 
and he reiterated its commitment to support the Agency in the tasks ahead. 
55. Mr. SHIELDS (Canada), congratulating the Director General and his 
staff on the occasion of the Agency's thirtieth anniversary, said that since 
its foundation the Agency had been in the forefront of international efforts 
to promote nuclear co-operation. Its safeguards, by providing the confidence 
needed for nuclear commerce, had helped to strengthen the international 
non-proliferation regime. Over the past thirty years, the Agency had provided 
an increasing number of countries with the benefits of nuclear energy 
technology in such vital areas as pest and pollution control, food 
preservation, medical diagnosis, cancer treatment, and a number of industrial 
applications. 
56. Canada strongly supported the Agency's activities, and was grateful for 
the support it had provided to the Canadian nuclear programme. Canada would 
continue to be an active Member of the Agency, and hoped that political issues 
extraneous to its mandate would not be allowed to divert it from its essential 
tasks. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 19 


57. He commended the Secretariat for the high quality of the annual report 
for 1986 (GC(XXXI)/800). The report showed that the Agency had been 
successful not only in handling a heavy work programme, but also in meeting 
exceptional challenges in the field of nuclear safety, and he was pleased to 
state that his Government fully approved it. 
58. In the post-Chernobyl period, nuclear safety continued to be a major 
concern of governments and the public, and had occupied a significant 
proportion of the Agency's resources. In particular, the expanded nuclear 
safety programme had contributed to the sharing of knowledge and experience 
among experts, and was helping to facilitate consensus on a number of 
important matters, such as intervention dose levels. The Secretariat had also 
undertaken the important task of reviewing nuclear safety standards. Canadian 
experts had played an active role in that review, and in other activities of 
the Agency concerned with safety. 
59. In June of that year, the Pickering nuclear power station, near 
Toronto, had been visited by an operational safety review team (OSART) made up 
of internationally recognized experts in nuclear safety. Canada was pleased 
by the favourable report prepared by the team, and intended to authorize the 
Secretariat to make that report available to other Member States. The team's 
visit had been of great practical benefit, and his delegation commended the 
Agency for initiating the OSART programme. 
60. He had been pleased to note from the annual report for 1986 that the 
Secretariat had not detected any anomaly which would indicate diversion of 
safeguarded material. He wished to reaffirm the importance attached by Canada 
to international safeguards, which constituted an essential feature of its own 
nuclear non-proliferation policy. 
61. Canadian programmes supporting the Agency's safeguards activities 
continued to bear fruit. In the past year the Agency had conducted field 
trials of advanced sealing and surveillance systems provided by the Canadian 
safeguards support programme, both in Canada and in other Member States. The 
results to date had been favourable, and it was expected that those systems 
would soon be accepted for routine use. Canada would make all possible 
efforts to meet the safeguards goals set by the Agency. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 , 
page 20 , 


62. The Canadian Government firmly believed in the use of multilateral 
technical co-operation to help meet the needs of developing countries. In 
reviewing its technical co-operation policies and in introducing important 
changes in its programme, the Agency had done much to improve the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the technical assistance activities of the 
United Nations system. Canada strongly supported the Secretariat's efforts in 
that regard, and commended particularly the high implementation rate of 
projects in 1986; the extensive use of evaluation of Agency programmes; the 
commitment to a gradual overall policy review; and the trend towards closer 
co-ordination with other United Nations agencies. 
63. He urged the Director General to ensure that the Agency's role in 
technical co-operation reflected both its mandate and its particular expertise 
in the nuclear field by responding to requests for assistance from developing 
countries. His Government intended to continue to help make appropriate 
nuclear technology available to such countries, particularly in the non-power 
sphere, both bilaterally and through the Agency. 
64. Canada remained committed to the development and use of nuclear 
energy. Its nuclear programme, the world's sixth largest, was not only of 
great importance domestically, but also played a substantial role in meeting 
the needs of developing countries. Canada was proud of its achievements to 
date and was eager to share its technology with other countries. It had 
designed a smaller, 300-MW version of its unique heavy-water reactor, the 
CANDU, in the belief that that version would be more easily accommodated, both 
technically and financially, by many countries. 
65. Canada remained in the forefront of international research into the 
applications of nuclear energy in the non-power sector, notably in such areas 
as the environment, materials, basic physics and the effects of radiation. It 
was now developing and marketing the Maple research reactor, the essential 
feature of which was the involvement of the user in the conceptual design of 
each individual reactor system. As the world's leading exporter of 
radioisotopes, Canada planned to meet the expanding demand for industrial 
irradiation equipment and medical therapy equipment using cobalt-60, and to 
supply a major share of the rapidly expanding global market for food 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 21 


preservation by irradiation. Canada actively participated in the Agency 
programmes in that field. Accelerators for industrial irradiation were also 
being developed, and a pilot scale machine for use in laboratories was now 
available. 


66. Canada took pride in being a reliable supplier of uranium at reasonable 
cost to the world's growing nuclear power industry. Currently, it was the 
world's leading producer and exporter of uranium. Canada hoped that all 
countries would strive to maintain policies on uranium import and export which 
would encourage stability in world markets, to the benefit of all. Any major 
disruption could easily lead to another period of imbalance, which could in 
the long run adversely affect the price and the reliability of supplies of 
internationally traded uranium. 
67. The international uranium industry had benefited significantly over the 
years from the Agency machinery for the exchange of technical information on 
uranium resources and geology and on uranium exploration and exploitation 
technology. The biennial assessment of world uranium supply (the "Red Book") 
prepared in co-operation with OECD's Nuclear Energy Agency, was an excellent 
example. Such activities were an essential part of the Agency's overall 
programme. 
68. The present Conference offered an opportunity to take stock of the 
Agency's accomplishments in its first thirty years. He hoped that the next 
thirty years would be equally fruitful for the development of the beneficial 
uses of nuclear energy. 
69. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) congratulated the President on his election, 
and paid tribute to the Director General, his predecessors and the staff of 
the Agency, who had made the organization one of the most respected and 
well-managed bodies in the United Nations system over the last thirty years. 
70. Although that period had brought such notable achievements as the 
international system of safeguards and the two safety conventions, it was 
regrettable that the will for co-operation in promoting nuclear energy which 
had characterized the first half of the Agency's existence had given way to a 
reluctance to share know-how and technology. It was unfortunate that the 
strengthening of non-proliferation measures had been used as an excuse by some 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 22 


exporter countries for withholding the exchange of equipment and technology 
even when they were under Agency safeguards. Instead of being inspired by the 
aim of ridding the world of nuclear weapons, non-proliferation had been used 
as a political tool. Though the reluctance to share nuclear know-how had been 
reflected in revised guidelines for Agency technical assistance, it had proved 
counter-productive, having encouraged many countries to develop their own 
nuclear industries. Several Third World countries had acquired the supposedly 
sensitive technologies of enrichment and reprocessing; such hard-won 
acquisitions had created a reluctance to submit to international controls 
which might discriminate against them. The only way to strengthen nuclear 
non-proliferation was through co-operation and interdependence rather than 
through denial and isolation. Pakistan could thus not help feeling 
disappointment at the fact that dialogue between the industrialized and 
developing nations had not yielded results. The Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS) and UNCP1CPIJNE, the latter despite ten years of preparation, had 
ended without agreement. There must be a renewal of dialogue in a greater 
spirit of earnestness. 


71. It was not logical that the developing nations, with two thirds of the 
world's population but only one quarter of its conventional energy resources, 
should fail to benefit from nuclear power. In fact, only 5% of the world's 
total generating capacity of 274 million kilowatts was produced in the 
developing countries. It was anticipated that by the year 2000 that share 
would only be 8% of a total anticipated capacity of 482 million kilowatts. 
Pakistan predicted that the Agency would lose much of its real significance 
for a large number of its Member States if it did not play a greater role in 
promoting nuclear power in the energy-deficient Third World, especially in 
view of the recommendations of the senior expert group studying the promotion 
and financing of nuclear power programmes in developing countries. 
72. On the subject of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, his 
delegation welcomed the recent agreement between the United States and the 
Soviet Union on a limited reduction in nuclear missiles. None the less, 
further effort would inevitably be needed if the Superpowers were to have the 
moral authority to convince others not to acquire nuclear weapons. Pakistan's 
proposal for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in southern Asia 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 23 


was a reflection of its commitment to non-proliferation. It was prepared 
along with the other countries in the region to make a joint declaration not 
to acquire, manufacture or store nuclear weapons; that could be followed by a 
simultaneous signing of NPT, acceptance of full safeguards, and reciprocal 
inspections or similar measures. 


73. On the subject of the relationship between the Agency's programmes and 
its budget, Pakistan believed that a careful balance had to be maintained 
between promotional and regulatory activities if the Agency wished to maintain 
its credibility and comply with its Statute. Since demand for services within 
both those areas of Agency activity would undoubtedly expand, there was no 
justification for a zero-growth budget. Moreover, the Working Capital Fund 
should be increased to an amount equivalent approximately to one month's 
expenditure. If Member States demanded more from the Agency, they would have 
to lend it greater support. Pakistan therefore echoed the Board's appeal for 
all Member States to pay their dues on time. 
74. With regard to nuclear safety, all countries had a duty to co-operate 
not only in responding to nuclear accidents, but also in efforts to prevent 
them. In that connection, supplier States had a technical and moral 
responsibility to share nuclear-safety-related information with recipient 
States. If a nuclear accident were to occur because of a lack of such 
information, the international community would not be forgiving. 
75. In the light of the transboundary effects of the Chernobyl accident, 
Pakistan supported all measures to prevent uncontrolled releases of 
radioactivity, and in particular the adoption of a convention on the 
prohibition of attacks on nuclear facilities and measures against terrorist 
attacks on nuclear installations. The Agency should be prepared to accept the 
role appropriate to it in that regard. 
76. During the negotiation of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, the Group of 7 7 
had set the target for representation of the developing countries on the 
Agency's Professional staff at one third of the total, in view of the large 
number of such countries among Member States. The efforts of the Director 
General had now brought the proportion up to 23%, but further efforts were 
needed to ensure that the target was met. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 24 


77. Since technical assistance was an important part of the activities of 
the Agency, Pakistan called for stable funding of the programme in accordance 
with resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388. It praised the activities of the Trieste 
Centre as an outstanding example of co-operation between advanced and 
developing countries, and called for more regional co-operation along the 
lines of the RCA and ARCAL agreements. 
78. Pakistan expressed its support for the recommendation of the Board that 
South Africa's rights and privileges of membership be suspended because of its 
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. 
79. Pakistan continued to make progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, operating the Karachi nuclear power plant with domestically produced 
fuel and components. The Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission had been entrusted 
with setting up a National Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering. 
Three agricultural centres had developed new crop varieties and a ninth medical 
centre was due to be inaugurated. The Government had just commissioned a 
gamma irradiation plant for sterilizing medical and agricultural products. 
80. Finally, Pakistan felt the Agency's tasks over the forthcoming decade 
should lie in striking a good balance between its promotional and regulatory 
activities, furthering public confidence in the safety of nuclear power, and 
bringing the benefits of nuclear power to the Third World. Meanwhile, the 
Agency could be strengthened if it were given the necessary financial 
resources; rationalizing the size and composition of the Board to make it more 
representative, ensuring more equitable staffing for the Secretariat, making 
the safeguards system more economical and credible so as to provide an example 
for international verification in nuclear disarmament - those were all 
endeavours which would lead to renewed strength. Pakistan pledged its support 
in all of those areas. 
81. Mr. TETENYI (Hungary) said that the thirtieth anniversary of the 
Agency's foundation was an excellent occasion on which to survey past 
achievements, to sum up results and to assess the degree to which the Agency 
had fulfilled the objectives expressed in its Statute. It was his country's 
view that the Agency had successfully carried out its primary functions, and 
that the majority of Member States had derived economic and scientific benefit 
from its activities. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 25 


82. In April 1986, following the Chernobyl accident, the Agency had taken 
prompt and decisive measures. In co-operation with the Member States it had 
now developed a plan of action aimed at preventing similar situations. In 
that connection, Hungary highly appreciated the dedicated responsibility which 
had resulted in the rapid elaboration of two multilateral conventions. Such 
speed - somewhat unusual in diplomatic practice - proved that Governments were 
aware of the responsibility they bore toward their people and toward all the 
peoples of the world when it came to minimizing the risks inherent in the use 
of nuclear energy and the effects of possible nuclear accidents. 
83. One of Hungary's major tasks was to improve nuclear power safety 
levels. To that end, it had launched a medium-term national research and 
development programme to enhance the safety of its existing reactors. For 
that reason, it participated in the Agency's expanded nuclear safety 
programmes and supported the Soviet proposal on the establishment of an 
international regime for the safe development of nuclear energy. Hungary also 
adapted the NUSS recommendations to its own conditions. It had signed and 
ratified the Early Notification Convention and the Emergency Assistance 
Convention. It also took an active part in the Agency's Incident Reporting 
System. In order to review the operational safety of its Paks nuclear power 
plant, Hungary had requested the Director General to send an OSART mission 
toward the end of 1988. 
84. His country had also signed and ratified the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Materials. It agreed with the proposal relating to the 
drafting of a relevant international agreement to prevent deliberate attacks 
on nuclear facilities, including terrorist attacks, and the misappropriation 
of highly enriched fissile materials. It was, moreover, both necessary and 
timely to draw up conventions on international and state liability for damage 
arising from a nuclear accident. 
85. Technical assistance was one of the Agency's most important and 
fruitful activities. In that connection, he expressed his country's thanks to 
the Agency for its support toward establishing a cyclotron laboratory at 
Debrecen and for the support which was helping to accelerate the modernization 
of its research reactor. Hungary, for its part, would do its utmost to 

GC(XXXI)/OK.295 
page 26 


contribute to the successful implementation of the Agency's technical 


assistance and co-operation programme. Every year it received 15-20 fellows 


from developing countries - primarily from Africa and Asia - for fellowship 
courses and scientific visits of varying length. During their stay, those 
fellows were given the opportunity to acquaint themselves with Hungary's 
achievements and experience in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy for 
medical, industrial and agricultural purposes. Missions by Hungarian experts, 
moreover, had contributed to and promoted the successful implementation of a 
great number of projects in several developing countries. 


86. Despite current world economic difficulties, the amounts assigned to 
technical co-operation and assistance had been further increased. Hungary 
would be making its own voluntary contribution for 1988 in the sum of 
4.4 million Hungarian forints. He noted with satisfaction that the Agency 
annually made full use of his country's voluntary contribution. 
87. Hungary steadfastly supported the Agency's safeguards system, which was 
closely related to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT). He had noted with satisfaction that more countries had now joined the 
NPT and that the Agency had commenced negotiations with the People's Republic 
of China on the conclusion of a safeguards agreement. 
88. The previous decade had seen periods of rising international tension 
and obstacles to international co-operation. It was nevertheless promising 
that, even at such times, co-operation could be maintained on one of the most 
vital issues facing mankind, namely, preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. Tension was bound to rise from time to time, but it was always 
essential to maintain conditions under which the Agency could continue to 
pursue its work on implementing the NPT. The community of States must seek to 
reach compromises through which advances might be made. Hungary, for its 
part, was ready to extend political support to any efforts intended to prevent 
conflicts from endangering international co-operation and its further 
expansion in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
89. It was reassuring to read in the Agency's Safeguards Implementation 
Report for 1986 that in carrying out the Agency's safeguards obligations, its 
inspectors had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the diversion of 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 27 


any significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material - or the misuse of 
facilities or equipment subject to safeguards - for the manufacture of any 
nuclear weapon, or for any other military purpose, or for the manufacture of 
any other nuclear explosive device, or for purposes unknown. Hungary had 
fulfilled entirely its obligations under Agency safeguards. It had readily 
received the inspectors assigned to Hungary and also trainees carrying out 
field practice. A computerized safeguards accountancy system had been 
established and his country's reports were forwarded to the Agency on magnetic 
disk. Hungary took part in the Agency's instrument development programme, in 
support of the work of safeguards inspectors. As an example of that, and in 
co-operation with the Agency, it was further developing an underwater 
telescope for safeguards purposes. 


90. In the view of the Hungarian Government the Agency, through its 
excellent, responsible and dedicated work, and through its work to further 
international co-operation aimed at attaining its objectives, had effectively 
contributed to the preservation of peace and to the strengthening of 
international relations aimed at promoting peaceful development throughout the 
world. It was Hungary's wish and expectation that the Agency should continue 
to follow that line in years to come. 
91. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) said that, thirty years after its 
foundation, the Agency had consolidated itself as the world's main centre for 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The 
Agency's technical assistance and co-operation with Member States, 
particularly developing ones, was an important means of enabling them to make 
faster and more effective use of nuclear technology in their economic, medical 
and scientific activities. The unique combination of such promotional 
functions with the Agency's regulatory functions and activities aimed at 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons was of the greatest importance 
in preserving peace and strengthening international confidence. 
92. Bulgaria highly valued its relations with the Agency and was 
particularly grateful for the Agency's technical assistance with regard to 
specialists' training and qualifications and the execution of projects of 
great importance for the country. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 28 


93. The Agency's thirtieth anniversary had been widely noted in Bulgaria: 
the press, radio and television had reported in detail on the various 
anniversary celebrations, and a special postage stamp had been issued on the 
occasion. 
94. The past year had been a special one in the Agency's history. 
Questions of nuclear safety had acquired very wide attention throughout the 
world, and the Agency had proved its technical and political maturity in its 
response to the demands made upon it. The Early Notification Convention and 
the Emergency Assistance Convention, which had been drafted and signed in such 
record-breaking time, had been first steps towards creating a legal basis for 
an international regime of safe nuclear power development as proposed by the 
Soviet Union. Bulgaria had signed and was applying the two conventions, but 
it felt that there was a need to prepare further international instruments on 
State liability for nuclear damage and on measures to prevent nuclear 
terrorism. 
95. The supplementary nuclear safety programme adopted by a special meeting 
of the Board of Governors was certainly one of the main tasks of the Agency 
for the years ahead. However, all joint efforts to strengthen international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear safety would be to no avail if the danger 
of nuclear war could not be averted. Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
cessation of the arms race, and above all the nuclear arms race, destruction 
of medium-range and tactical nuclear missiles, and finally total abolition of 
all nuclear weapons towards the end of the century, as proposed by the General 
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the USSR, 
Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, those were unavoidable steps which mankind would have 
to take if it was to be led not into nuclear disaster, but towards 
co-operation, progress and economic development. In that connection, he had 
been pleased to learn of the recent agreement which had been reached between 
the United States and the Soviet Union with regard to medium-range missiles. 
96. Bulgaria highly valued and supported the Agency's technical assistance 
activities and would be contributing its full share of the target for 
voluntary contributions in 1988, which amounted to US $60 800, and it called 
upon all Agency Member States to adopt a similar policy. Without universal 

GC(XXXI)/OR.295 
page 29 


support, the Agency's technical co-operation programme could not accomplish 
the tasks entrusted to it. His country also attached considerable importance 
to the Agency's safeguards activities and noted with satisfaction the 
successes which had been achieved; however, additional efforts must be made 
to increase the effectiveness of safeguards, to improve their technical 
efficiency, and to apply both existing and new technology in order to optimize 
the work schedule of inspectors and, ultimately, to increase safeguards goal 
attainment. Bulgaria was prepared to approve the Agency's budget for 1988 and 
the proposed scale of assessment of Members' contributions for that year and 
called upon all Member States to make their contributions to the budget in 
good time. 


97. With regard to the staffing of the Secretariat, he considered that any 
solution to the problem must take into account the interests of all 
Member States. On the amendments to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and to 
Article VI as a whole, his country's position was well known, but he wished to 
reaffirm it on the present occasion. His country was concerned about South 
Africa's nuclear capabilities and considered that decisive steps should be 
taken to implement General Conference resolution GC(XXX)/RES/468 and the 
corresponding resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly. 
98. Bulgaria's peaceful nuclear programme had continued successfully in 
1986, and the existing nuclear power plant had produced 30% of the total 
electricity consumed in the country. Construction had been completed and 
startup was about to begin on a fifth unit of the Kozloduj nuclear power 
plant, which would have the first 1000 MW(e) WWER-1000 reactor outside the 
Soviet Union. A sixth unit was under construction which would also have such 
a reactor, and at another site a further power station with WWER-1000 reactors 
was being built. In addition, two AST-500 district heating units were being 
planned which would cover all the heating needs of the city of Sofia. 
99. Bulgaria was actively participating in the Agency's nuclear safety 
programmes and had taken a number of steps to enhance the safety of existing 
reactors and to improve operating personnel qualifications. Agency safeguards 
had been applied to all its nuclear facilities and the safeguards goals had 
been fully attained for his country. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.295 
page 30 


100. Bulgaria was also engaged in" applications of nuclear energy other than 
power and had been receiving assistance from the Agency in such projects as 
the construction of a gamma irradiation facility for the sterilization of 
medical products, the use of induced mutations in agriculture, and the 
construction of an accelerator for plastics processing. 
101. Bulgaria also helped to support the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. In 1986 an irradiation facility had been supplied for Zambia, and 
a number of Bulgarian experts had made their services available to the 
Agency. Specialists from the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Poland and other 
countries had received training at Bulgarian scientific and industrial 
centres, and Bulgaria was prepared to expand that activity in the interests of 
all concerned parties. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
March 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 


PROVISIONAL RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1987, at 3.55 p.m. 


President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 
later: Mr. AVENDANO (Ecuador) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 


General debate and annual report 
for 1986 (continued) 52 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Islamic Republic of Iran 1-1 4 
German Democratic Republic 15 - 26 
Italy 27 - 35 
Egypt 36 - 52 


Arrangements for the Conference 
53 - 58 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
of items for initial discussion 53 - 56 
(b) 
Closing date of the session and 
opening date of the next session 57 - 58 
Communication received by the Director 
General from Nicaragua 59 - 60 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 13 November 1987. 


[**] GC(XXXI)/799. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-1134 
2523e/0300e 



GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 2 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 


6 General debate and annual report for 
1986 (resumed) 61 - 163 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Iraq 61 - 75 
Switzerland 76 - 91 
Norway 92 - 109 
Zimbabwe 110 - 114 
Spain 115 - 125 
Netherlands 126 - 140 
Malaysia 141 - 155 
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission 156 - 163 



GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1986 (continued) (GC(XXXI)/800 and Corr.l) 


1. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) read out a message from 
the Prime Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mr. Mirhossein Mousavi, to 


the International Atomic Energy Agency on its thirtieth anniversary: 


"In accordance with Islamic thinking, the Islamic Republic of Iran 


believes that science and technology are the common heritage of mankind 


and that all nations have the sovereign and inalienable right to 


choose, apply, develop and pursue their programmes for the peaceful use 


of nuclear energy for economic and social development in conformity 


with their needs, interests and priorities, provided that morality is 


taken into serious consideration as a determinant factor. 


"It is regrettable that, today, access to vitally useful and universal 
knowledge, particularly regarding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
is monopolized by the great Powers, which prevent it from spreading to 
other countries. 


"Not only has the triumphant march of science and technology that we 
are witnessing today not yet touched the lives of millions of people in 
the Third World, but the Earth is faced with the nightmarish threat to 
the survival of humanity posed by the existence of nuclear weapons and 
the escalation of the arms race. Once more, human life is being 
jeopardized by the fact that knowledge and science do not go hand in 
hand with virtue and morality. 


"Specialized international organizations such as the IAEA are expected 


to provide the maximum amount of co-operation and assistance to 


developing countries in order to remove the aforementioned constraints 


and obstacles. 


"Finally, I would like to express my sincere wishes for the IAEA's 


success in achieving its statutory objective, which is to accelerate 


and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 


prosperity throughout the world." 


2. The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran hoped that the General 
Conference would be successful and would promote international co-operation in 


order to eliminate the existing obstacles to the peaceful use of nuclear 


energy. 


3. Islam taught respect for friendly and peaceful relations between the 
followers of all religions, irrespective of race, nationality and colour. 


Islamic thinking did not recognize any geographical frontiers to knowledge and 


science, which it regarded as the common heritage of all mankind. However, 


Islam believed that there had to be some criterion for controlled knowledge 



GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 4 


and science which was not to be found in the developed and advanced world: 
without morality or virtue, knowledge changed to become a weapon in the hands 
of rich and powerful forces. 


4. The Agency was empowered to search everywhere in a poor Third World 
country to find one gram of uranium, but it was not entitled even to mention 
the arsenals of the superpowers specifically, and of course it had no right to 
inspect them. Furthermore, it was becoming increasingly difficult for Third 
World countries to develop their nuclear industry, and nuclear programmes in 
those countries could regularly be seen to fail, mainly as a result of the 
difficulties and barriers erected by the industrialized countries. The 
capitalist regimes created enormous obstacles to the transfer of technology to 
developing countries, even though more than two thirds of the fissionable 
materials available to the industrialized world belonged to Third World 
countries. 
5. During the 17 years which had elapsed since the entry into force of the 
NPT, there had been tremendous proliferation of nuclear weapons, and nuclear 
weapons tests, the deployment of nuclear arsenals in non-nuclear-weapon States 
and the militarization of space had increased sharply. The developing 
countries and the world as a whole were extremely concerned and very 
disappointed. Even more discouraging was the fact that the Agency's 
safeguards had not prevented or even reduced vertical and horizontal 
proliferation - mainly because nuclear installations in nuclear-weapon States 
and in countries which had not accepted internationally binding commitments, 
such as Israel and South Africa, were not fully covered by Agency safeguards. 
6. The more the developing countries fulfilled their obligations under 
treaties such as NPT, the less they benefited from the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (GAS) had not 
succeeded, after more than five years, in establishing an internationally 
acceptable system of assurances in that respect. 
7. The Board of Governors was one of the main policy-making organs of the 
Agency. The composition of the Board was therefore a question of considerable 
interest to Member States. Although it was mentioned in the Agency's Statute, 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 5 


the need for equitable representation of Member States on the Board of 
Governors was not fully reflected in Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, since the 
areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia were both underrepresented. 


8. The inconsistency of the Statute and its unjust treatment of Member 
States had discouraged the developing countries in those two areas, 
particularly during the past decade in which resolutions calling for a prompt 
amendment had been repeatedly adopted but not implemented. 
9. His country had participated constructively in the meetings of the 
informal working group established by the Board of Governors in accordance 
with General Conference resolution GC(XXX)/RES/467 in order to consider the 
revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole. As reflected in the report 
by the Chairman of that group (GOV/2309), almost all the participants believed 
that the article should be revised to ensure equitable geographical 
distribution. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran supported the 
majority which favoured giving first priority to the amendment of Article 
VI.A.2 before the Agency's credibility was further damaged. 
10. The lack of any criteria to facilitate equitable representation of the 
Middle East and South Asia area and the ambition of one or two members of that 
area, had deprived other States, including the Islamic Republic of Iran, of a 
seat on the Board. That double under-representation was unjust and 
detrimental and needed to be given serious consideration. 
11. On the basis of United Nations General Assembly resolution 32/50 and 
after a long preparation period, the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE) had finally been held in Geneva from 23 March to 10 April 1987. 
His country had participated actively in the work of the Preparatory Committee 
for the Conference, and in the special Group of 77 Conference task force and 
in the Conference itself. It had not been possible to reach consensus on the 
main questions, namely universally acceptable principles of international 
co-operation for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and means of promoting 
such co-operation. During the Conference, his country had submitted, in 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 6 


document A/CONF.108/L.16, a draft resolution entitled "Prohibition of terrorist 
and armed attacks against all nuclear installations". The Conference had not 
adopted that draft or any other owing to a lack of agreement on other 
important questions, particularly the principles just mentioned. 


12. Nuclear safety had acquired a new international dimension after the 
accidents at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl. It was essential to promote 
international co-operation for the exchange of experience, the preparation of 
safety standards, and the sharing of responsibility for safety between 
suppliers and recipients. 
13. The Agency was expected to help developing countries establish the 
necessary national infrastructure to ensure the safe use of nuclear energy. 
The credibility and usefulness of an international organization such as the 
Agency depended on its objectives and its functions, and on its effectiveness 
in implementing in full the decisions and resolutions adopted by its Member 
States. The principle of universality could be applied only to Member States 
which were united by universally acceptable principles as well as by 
resolutions adopted by the international organization in question. The main 
political problems facing the Agency were: the violation of the spirit of the 
Agency's Statute and the persistent refusal to abide by its resolutions on the 
part of the Zionist and racist regimes of Israel and South Africa; the 
unbalanced representation of Member States on the Board of Governors and the 
non-implementation of the resolutions adopted on that subject during the past 
decade; the terrorist and military attacks and threats by Israel and Iraq 
against nuclear facilities; the impossibility of guaranteeing and predicting 
the level of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund; and the 
application of the principle of zero growth to the Agency's promotional 
activities. Those obstacles had led to the politicization of the Agency and 
seriously jeopardized its credibility and the effectiveness of its promotional 
and regulatory functions. In order to eliminate those obstacles, his 
delegation proposed that the following measures be adopted: to suspend Israel 
and South Africa from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership 
in accordance with Article XIX.B of the Statute, bearing in mind the 
recommendation by the Board of Governors in document GC(XXXI)/807 and the fact 



GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 7 


that the very existence of both regimes was unfounded and illegal; to amend 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute immediately so as to correct the underrepresentation 
of the areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia; 
to adopt without delay an international convention on the prohibition of 
terrorist and military attacks against all nuclear facilities; to finance the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund from the Regular Budget instead of 
from voluntary contributions; and to abolish the policy of zero growth for 
promotional activities. 


14. In conclusion, summarizing the activities of the Atomic Energy 
Organization of Iran during the past year, he said it had been very active in 
research and development, particularly in medicine and agriculture. The Gamma 
Irradiation Centre was, according to international experts including those 
from the Agency, the best Centre of its kind in the Middle East. Despite all 
the foreign pressure, it had been possible during the past year to examine all 
the foodstuffs exported to the Islamic Republic of Iran and to send back 
contaminated substances to the suppliers. Finally, his delegation wished to 
inform other countries that there was no place in the Islamic Republic of Iran 
for the storage of their contaminated materials. 
15. Mr SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) expressed once again the 
sincere congratulations of his Government to the Agency which, during the 
30 years of its existence, had made a considerable contribution to promoting 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to preventing the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
16. One of the Agency's activities which had developed significantly was 
technical co-operation, whereas the Agency's technical assistance budget 
during its first year had been $250 000, the target for the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund had by now reached almost $40 million. That 
increase in financial resources had been accompanied by a considerable 
improvement in quality as a result of new project formulas such as multi-year 
and regional projects, increased participation of technical Departments, 
systematic evaluation of project implementation and the more active role 
played by developing countries. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 8 


17. His country supported the Agency's technical co-operation activities by 
paying its share of the target for voluntary contributions as well as by 
providing equipment and material and endeavouring to train scientists from 
developing countries. Thus, 12 training courses and 16 study tours had 
already taken place in the German Democratic Republic and some 50 fellows from 
developing countries had received individual training. Moreover, his country 
had donated to the Agency a high-quality research microscope for the new 
agricultural facilities at Seibersdorf. 
18. Turning to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, he confirmed his 
Government's position that nuclear energy had an extremely important role to 
play in solving energy problems, provided very high safety standards were 
observed. It had been clearly demonstrated at UNCPICPUNE that many countries 
held the same view. At the last meeting of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA), in approving the CMEA nuclear power plant construction 
programme up to the year 2000, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the 
German Democratic Republic had stressed that his country would continue to 
attach the highest priority to safety in the implementation of its nuclear 
power programme. 
19. The period which had elapsed since the previous session of the General 
Conference had been marked by a number of important events, in particular the 
entry into force of the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
and of the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency. 
20. In addition to the efforts it made to avoid any nuclear accident, his 
country, like others, had taken steps to comply with the requirements of those 
Conventions. Furthermore, in accordance with article 9 of the Early 
Notification Convention, bilateral agreements had been or would be concluded 
with neighbouring States. 
21. Just as nuclear safety and radiation protection were an integral part 
of all nuclear activities, safeguards were inseparably associated with the use 
of nuclear materials. The credible assurance provided by Agency safeguards 
that States were respecting their non-proliferation commitments did much to 
help create a climate of mutual confidence between States. Thus, he welcomed 

GC(XXXI)/0R.296 
page 9 


the fact that in 1986, as in previous years, nuclear material under Agency 


safeguards had been used for peaceful nuclear activities or had been otherwise 
adequately accounted for. His country had always endeavoured to provide 
maximum support for the Agency's safeguards system in view of its importance 


for international security. That was why it had organized eight training 
courses for newly recruited inspectors and two courses on safeguards for 
trainees from developing countries. 


22. In future, those activities would be carried out under an official 
support programme for Agency safeguards. From 1988, his Government would 
provide services up to a value of 300 000 marks per year in support of the 
Agency's safeguards system. 
23. The problems of the physical protection of nuclear materials were 
closely linked to the question of safeguards. Eight years after its adoption, 
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material had entered into 
force. That was a welcome development, but he hoped it would also be possible 
to reach an international agreement on the physical protection of nuclear 
facilities. 
24. The future of mankind would depend to a large extent on developments in 
the field of nuclear energy, and in particular of nuclear weapons. The 
existing huge arsenals of nuclear weapons caused concern and mistrust between 
nations and constituted a serious threat to mankind. 
25. At the meeting of their Political Consultative Committee in Berlin, the 
Warsaw Pact States had submitted a comprehensive programme aimed at promoting 
international agreements to halt the arms race and encourage disarmament, 
particularly in the nuclear field, with the aim of achieving general and 
complete disarmament. His Government supported unreservedly the Soviet 
initiative to eliminate all nuclear weapons by the year 2000. The 
implementation of the Soviet proposals (refusal to use nuclear weapons first, 
cessation of nuclear weapons tests, establishment of nuclear-free zones, 
reduction of the number of nuclear weapons, and elimination of medium- and 
short-range missiles) would lay the foundations for a world free of nuclear 
weapons. His delegation therefore welcomed the agreement reached the previous 
week between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 10 


26. In the 30 years of its existence, the Agency had achieved outstanding 
successes in both its promotional and its regulatory activities, thereby 
demonstrating its competence to deal with all questions related to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Under its auspices, international 
co-operation had proved useful in solving common problems, and the Agency 
could continue to count on the active co-operation of the German Democratic 
Republic. 
27. Mr. BATTAGLIA (Italy) said that, since the Chernobyl accident, 
there had been considerable progress in improving awareness of the role of 
safety in the exploitation of nuclear energy and in strengthening 
international co-operation in that area. That progress was demonstrated not 
only by the many initiatives taken within the Agency and elsewhere, but also 
by important facts which had been raised during technical and political 
discussions. Generally, there was now an awareness of the important role 
which the Agency had played and would continue to play in achieving two 
parallel goals: improved safety and closer international co-operation. 
28. In that context, his Government believed that the Agency's increased 
responsibilities called for a strengthening of its policy-making organs; in 
particular, the Board of Governors should be made more representative by a 
revision of Article VI of the Statute. That was why Italy, together with 
Belgium, Portugal, Spain and Sweden, had submitted a proposal which would both 
enable a larger number of important countries to participate in the work of 
the Board and ensure more adequate geographical representation, while 
maintaining the existing delicate balance. At all events, Italy would 
continue to give its full support to the Agency so that it could play an 
increasing role in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
29. Among the initiatives already taken by the Agency, Italy regarded the 
adoption of the Convention on Early Notification and the Convention on 
Emergency Assistance as a remarkable success, even though it considered that 
the agreed wording of the former made it difficult to apply and restricted its 
scope. During the negotiations, his country had indicated a clear preference 
for a broader definition of nuclear accidents than that which had been finally 
adopted. It would have liked that definition to cover not only those 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 11 


accidents which might be expected to have significant transboundary 
radiological consequences, but all significant nuclear accidents. His 
Government wished to stress the urgent need to arrive at a clear definition of 
the concept of a nuclear accident with significant radiological effects. 


30. His country supported the Agency's NUSS programme, which was currently 
being revised. The technical delegations of all countries had recognized that 
the five Codes of Practice constituted a good international reference for 
nuclear safety. The safety codes would now have to be updated in the light of 
the latest experiences and he hoped that the revision process would be 
completed as soon as possible so that Member States could adapt their national 
legislation in that area. Italy would also welcome the establishment of a 
common system guaranteeing a satisfactory level of uniformity at the 
international level and was in favour of a formal commitment such as adherence 
to a multilateral convention. 
31. Furthermore, his country supported the balanced development of 
co-ordinated research programmes at the international level in the area of 
safety and radiation protection. The decommissioning of nuclear power plants 
was a question worthy of particular interest, and his country was ready to 
make available its Garigliano nuclear power plant for the implementation of an 
international programme to study the different stages of the decommissioning 
process. 
32. The direct support which the Agency could provide to Member States in 
evaluating power plant safety, particularly through the OSART and ASSET teams, 
was equally important; his country had submitted its Caorso nuclear power 
plant to review by an OSART team and could testify to the quality of that 
programme. Italy was convinced that if maximum use were made of those teams 
and if the main nuclear countries submitted their plants to them, they would 
do much to improve collective safety. The OSART mission had confirmed that 
the management system at the Caorso power plant was reliable and that the 
level of safety was satisfactory, as had already been established by the 
competent national authority. However, the plant had not been put back into 
operation because it was considered wise to await the completion of an 
improved emergency plan, the preparation of which was already well advanced. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 12 


33. With regard to the non-proliferation regime and the implementation of 
safeguards agreements, his country noted with satisfaction that the Safeguards 
Implementation Report for 1986 once again did not indicate any diversion of 
nuclear materials or equipment under safeguards. In that context, it was also 
very important that countries which had a military nuclear capability should 
voluntarily submit their power plants to the safeguards system with a view to 
improving the climate of confidence between signatories to the NPT, increasing 
the transparency of that system, and thereby encouraging other countries to 
accede to it, as Spain had recently done. His delegation reiterated that, 
while it was in favour of the full-scope safeguards envisaged by the Treaty, 
it considered it desirable that general acceptance thereof be obtained through 
persuasion and with the consent of each State. 
34. His country had always attached great importance to the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities, which it regarded as a good way of 
initiating a lasting development process. It had concentrated its assistance 
on sectors such as agriculture, hydrology, medicine and training. Not only 
did it provide a large number of fellowships, it also made a substantial 
contribution to the International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste 
which at present represented about 90% of the total resources allocated to the 
Centre. 
35. In conclusion, his delegation recalled that the Chernobyl accident had 
had significant consequences on the energy plan which had already been 
approved by the Italian Parliament. The doubts and concerns raised by that 
accident had provided arguments to the section of public opinion which was 
calling for a review of Italy's nuclear programmes. Three referendums were to 
take place shortly on the abrogation of laws concerning the siting of power 
plants, financial contributions to local authorities, and the participation of 
the National Electricity Board (ENEL) in international programmes. Since the 
beginning of the debate sparked off by Chernobyl, his Government had tried to 
provide rational answers to public concerns and had linked, even more strictly 
than in the past, the development of energy sources, both nuclear and 
conventional, to maximum levels of safety for the population and the 
environment. The Agency could provide real assistance as an authoritative 
point of reference in such debates: there was an increased need for safety 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 13 


and control which all countries should meet by strengthening their 
co-operation. It was obvious that the future growth of nuclear energy in many 
countries would depend to a considerable extent on the way in which the Agency 
reacted. 


36. Mr. ABAZA (Egypt) said that the Agency was playing an increasingly 
important role as a forum for international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy and that past crises, of which the most recent had been the 
Chernobyl accident, had shown that the Agency was able to deal with the 
situation. Thus, in 1986, the Agency had carried out remarkable work in the 
area of nuclear safety and radiation protection, the most notable result of 
which had been the ratification and entry in force, in a relatively short 
time, of the Convention on Early Notification and the Convention on Emergency 
Assistance. With the full co-operation of all its Member States, it had 
managed to a considerable extent to re-establish the confidence of 
international public opinion, which had been seriously shaken by the Chernobyl 
accident, as a result of which a number of States, including Egypt, had been 
led to review their nuclear power plans and programmes. 
37. Despite the repercussions of the Chernobyl accident, nuclear power 
remained an important source of energy. Thus, in 1986, its share in world 
electricity production had increased by 8.97!. over the previous year, 
representing more than 15% of world electricity production and, by the end of 
the century, that proportion was expected to increase still further to 20-22%. 
There was no doubt that the expansion of nuclear energy and the strengthening 
of its role as a factor in economic and social development would raise 
numerous problems for Member States and for the Agency, which should sustain 
the momentum gained following the Chernobyl accident by intensifying efforts 
to guarantee a maximum level of safety. 
38. In that context, he welcomed the Agency's efforts to enable a maximum 
number of States to use that form of energy safely. Remarkable results had 
been obtained by the Senior Expert Group on Mechanisms to Assist Developing 
Countries in the Promotion and Financing of Nuclear Power Programmes. That 
Group, which had been set up following a proposal which Egypt had had the 
honour of making in the Board of Governors in February 1986, had drawn up, 

GC(XXXI)/0R.296 
page 14 


after detailed discussions with the World Bank, recommendations which 
emphasized that the Agency had an important role to play in assisting 
developing countries in planning and implementing their nuclear power 
programmes. His delegation hoped that those recommendations would be adopted 
in full and that the Agency would take them into account in preparing its 
programmes, particularly those on financing, which was one of the main 
obstacles facing developing countries. 


39. The Agency had participated actively in UNCPICPUNE, which had been held 
from 23 March to 10 April 1987 at Geneva; documents had been presented there 
dealing with various aspects of international co-operation, and different ways 
of strengthening it had been discussed. Despite the absence of agreement on 
universally acceptable principles of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and on ways of strengthening that co-operation, 
there was no doubt that the Conference had been an important step forward. 
40. His delegation considered that the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS) was the appropriate forum for continuing the examination of 
principles of international co-operation within the Agency and urged that CAS 
should resume its work as soon as possible. He welcomed the efforts made by 
CAS since its establishment in 1980 and was pleased that it had been able to 
agree on measures to establish an emergency and back-up system and measures 
concerning the revision of nuclear material supply agreements from which 
countries could already benefit. It should be emphasized in that connection 
that the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy presupposed a 
stable, equitable and non-discriminatory supply of nuclear materials. 
41. Egypt, as a developing country, attached great importance to the 
Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities. It considered that 
the Agency and the advanced countries had a special responsibility to help 
developing countries to keep pace with technical developments and to take 
advantage of the considerable potential of nuclear energy, whether for 
agriculture, medicine, industry or energy production. The steady increase of 
recent years in the resources of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund was very welcome, as was also the decision taken by the General Conference 
at its twenty-ninth session to increase those resources by 12% each year. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 15 


42. Egypt and the majority of developing countries had benefited from the 
assistance provided by the Agency in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
training and the transfer of advanced technology. Egypt was particularly 
interested in assistance activities which aimed to increase the number of 
qualified personnel able to implement peaceful nuclear programmes. It hoped 
that the Agency would provide it with increased assistance in that area in 
future. 
43. Where the Regular Budget was concerned, it was essential to authorize 
an annual rate of increase for the promotional activities, since they were 
becoming increasingly important, particularly for the developing countries. 
44. His delegation considered that the Agency's safeguards system made a 
significant contribution to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
therefore urged that it be strengthened. The system, as was well known, had 
serious gaps which were detrimental to its effectiveness, particularly in view 
of Israel's and South Africa's refusal to place all their nuclear facilities 
under safeguards in accordance with the many decisions taken by the Agency's 
General Conference and the United Nations General Assembly and Security 
Council. The nuclear activities of those two States gave cause for serious 
concern in the international community in general, and in African and Arab 
countries in particular. Their nuclear facilities should be placed under 
Agency safeguards because that was essential for international peace and 
security. 
45. In that connection, Egypt advocated the denuclearization of the 
Middle East and since 1984 had been proposing the establishment of a 
nuclear-free zone in that part of the world. The United Nations General 
Assembly had adopted several resolutions along those lines, the last of which 
had been unanimous. Egypt also considered that Africa should be declared a 
nuclear-free zone. 
46. At its present session, the General Conference would examine the 
question of South Africa's nuclear capabilities in the light of the many 
resolutions adopted at previous sessions. Those resolutions had not provoked 
any reaction on the part of the racist regime in Pretoria, which persisted in 
its obstinacy and continued to defy international laws and practices, as well 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 


page 16 


as all the resolutions of the United Nations and the Agency. That situation 
was a source of permanent concern to African States, in view of the aggressive 
nature of the South African regime and the dubious aims of its nuclear 


activities, and seriously jeopardized peace and security in the region and in 
the world. In June, the Board of Governors had decided that it was necessary 
to take a firm stance with regard to that regime and had adopted a 
recommendation that the General Conference should suspend South Africa from 
the exercise of its rights and privileges as a Member State of the Agency in 
accordance with Article XIX.B of the Statute. His delegation joined 
delegations from African States in supporting the recommendation and urged 
Member States which had not yet done so to cease all forms of nuclear 
co-operation with the South African regime and, in particular, to cease all 
transfers of fissionable material and all transfers of technology that could 
contribute to the development of its nuclear weapon capability. 


47. At its special session, the General Conference had referred to the 
Board of Governors several proposals submitted by a number of Member States so 
that the Board could examine them and submit a full report. Egypt had 
participated actively in the consideration of those proposals at the Board's 
meetings in December 1986 and February, June and September 1987 and wished now 
to reaffirm its position on them. First, it fully supported the proposals 
relating to the prohibition of armed attacks against nuclear facilities and to 
the sharing of nuclear-safety-related information submitted by Mexico on 
behalf of the Group of 77. The question of prohibiting armed attacks against 
nuclear facilities had been examined in detail during previous sessions of the 
General Conference; it was now essential to adopt internationally binding 
measures to protect facilities from any armed attack or terrorist action, 
since the consequences of such attacks would not be restricted to the States 
on the territory of which the facility was located, but were likely to spread 
to other States and even other regions. In its resolutions, the United 
Nations General Assembly had emphasized on several occasions the need to 
strengthen international efforts aimed at concluding an international 
agreement prohibiting such attacks. That necessity had been underlined, on 
the basis of an Egyptian proposal, by the Third NPT Review Conference, too. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 17 


It had also been reaffirmed in resolutions of the Agency's General Conference. 
Thus, the time had come to take the necessary measures in conjunction with the 
other international institutions involved. 


48. Secondly, Egypt supported the efforts made by the Agency, both 
individually and in co-operation with the other international organizations 
concerned, to discuss the co-ordination, planning and implementation of 
intervention measures in the case of radioactive contamination. It welcomed 
the efforts aimed at establishing intervention dose levels, particularly for 
foodstuffs. In that context, it believed that the establishment of 
international safety standards for the distribution of food products must be a 
matter of international responsibility. It was quite unacceptable that food 
products considered unfit for human or animal consumption in the industrialized 
world should be exported to the Third World. That was why Egypt was requesting 
the Agency, as well as the other international organizations concerned, to 
take measures at the international level to ban the export of such products. 
49. Thirdly, Egypt endorsed the efforts to prepare a binding international 
instrument on international nuclear liability, and supported the Board's 
decision concerning the harmonization of the Vienna and Paris conventions on 
civil liability for nuclear damage, a question which should be followed up and 
examined attentively. 
50. Egypt, convinced of the importance of nuclear energy, had set up a 
programme for the construction of power plants. After the Chernobyl accident, 
like many other States, it had been forced to review its programme in order to 
establish all the necessary safety guarantees. The Agency could undoubtedly 
provide considerable support and assistance to his country in that area so 
that it could use that important source of energy for its economic and social 
development. 
51. Egypt wanted an impetus to be given to its existing activities in the 
field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which related to the training of 
personnel, the transfer of technology and the improvement of local expertise 
to enable it to participate in reactor construction, radioactive waste 
management and quality assurance. Furthermore, Egypt was encouraging the use 
of nuclear power for the development of industry, medicine and agriculture and 
supporting national radiation protection programmes. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 18 


52. In conclusion, he wished to congratulate the Agency on its thirtieth 
anniversary, to commend it for its remarkable work and for the assistance it 
had provided to Egypt, and to emphasize that the Agency was a unique model of 
excellence and efficiency within the United Nations system. 
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXXI)/799, Add.l and 2) 
53. The PRESIDENT announced that the General Committee had recommended 

that the General Conference include in its agenda all the items listed in the 
provisional agenda contained in document GC(XXXI)/799. With regard to the 
supplementary items proposed by Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic in documents 
GC(XXXI)/799/Add. 1 and 2, the delegations of those countries had agreed to 
merge them without materially changing their substance, and so the General 
Committee was recommending that the agenda include an item entitled "Israeli 
nuclear capabilities and threat". 


54. The General Committee recommended further that the items be allocated 
for initial discussion as indicated in document GC(XXXI)/799, and that the 
item entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat" be discussed in 
plenary meeting. 
55. It also recommended that the order in which the items appeared in 
document GC(XXXI)/799 be retained, the item entitled "Israeli nuclear 
capabilities and threat" being included immediately after the item entitled 
"General debate and annual report for 1986", and the other items being 
renumbered accordingly. 
56. 
It was so decided. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
(GC(XXXI)/799) 
57. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had authorized him 
to inform the General Conference that it recommended fixing Friday, 
25 September 1987, as the closing date of the thirty-first regular session and 
Monday, 19 September 1988, as the opening date of the thirty-second regular 
session of the General Conference, which would be held in Vienna. 
58. 
It was so decided. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 19 


COMMUNICATION RECEIVED BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL FROM NICARAGUA 
(GC(XXXI)/INF/253) 


59. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee recommended to the 
General Conference that it accede to Nicaragua's request not to apply to it 
Article XIX.A of the Statute during the thirty-first regular session of the 
General Conference. 
60. It was so decided 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1986 (resumed) (GC(XXXI)/800 and Corr.l) 


61. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) wished, on the occasion of the Agency's 
thirtieth anniversary, to express his congratulations to the Agency's 
Secretariat, which had carried out excellent work under the guidance of three 
successive Directors General. 
62. During the past thirty years, the Agency had succeeded in promoting the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy and in preventing the diversion of nuclear 
materials for military purposes. As a result, nuclear techniques were now 
widely used throughout the world - in medicine, biology and agriculture, for 
food preservation, in hydrology, industry and many other useful applications 
and, in addition, there were 397 power reactors in service. All the same, 
that period had also been marked by disappointments and setbacks, the most 
important of which had been the accidents at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl, 
as well as the Israeli military attack against Iraq's Tamuz reactor. 
63. The growth of nuclear power production had slowed down appreciably 
throughout the world. The annual report published by the Agency in 1974 had 
foreseen that, in the year 2000, there would be an installed nuclear capacity 
of 4.45 x 10 MW. That figure was 17 times higher than the actual nuclear 
capacity installed. The Agency's latest forecasts were lower by about 90% 
than the 1974 forecasts and by 45% than those of 1980. The reasons for that 
rapid decline were closely linked with factors such as safety, security, 
economy, waste management, radiological hazards and human failure. Moreover, 
the radiological consequences of Chernobyl and their political implications 
had seriously shaken confidence in nuclear power. Such confidence could not 

GC(XXXI)/0R.296 
page 20 


be regained by hasty action or exaggerated reaction. The situation called for 
cool examination of what needed to be done to improve safety standards, taking 
into account the following considerations. 


64. Nuclear power was an essential source of energy for the world in 
general and for developing countries in particular. That energy sector had 
problems of its own, however, and had suffered serious setbacks as a result of 
severe accidents. 
65. The availability of fossil fuels and the current state of the oil 
market did not militate in favour of growth of nuclear power, even if safety 
standards were raised. 
66. The public's hostility to nuclear power was the result of nuclear 
testing and the feverish arms race. It would therefore never be possible to 
regain public confidence entirely without a complete prohibition of nuclear 
weapons tests as a first definite step towards an ultimate stop to the nuclear 
arms race. It would not be possible really to guarantee safety and security 
until all nuclear weapons had been finally eliminated. 
67. Any deliberate armed attack against a nuclear facility was a 
safety-related question. No safety measure could be complete without an 
international consensus on the prohibition of armed attacks against nuclear 
facilities. 
68. Scientific and technical work should be conducted with a view to 
improving safety. The Agency should continue to intensify its activities in 
that field, and it should continue to receive from the principal energyproducing 
countries the support it needed to carry out all the approved 
activities efficiently. 
69. It was not enough to take note of the results obtained by the Agency in 
the field of safety. The countries concerned should undertake, in one way or 
another, to implement the NUSS Codes, otherwise that type of activity would be 
little more than a theoretical exercise. 
70. Nuclear safety was not an objective in itself, but an integral part of 
the technology of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. For that reason, it 
could not take on its full significance without a strengthening of 

GG(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 21 


international co-operation aimed at loosening the restrictions imposed on the 
flow of material, equipment, technology, information and services within a 
framework of effective and acceptable non-proliferation arrangements. 


71. His delegation regretted to note that the United Nations Conference for 
the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy (UNCPICPUNE) had dashed the hopes which had been placed in it and that 
the considerable effort invested over the years in the preparatory work had 
come to nothing. The only positive conclusion of the Conference had perhaps 
been that the Agency should continue to play an important role in promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In Iraq's view, that conclusion had 
prevented the Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) from directly falling 
victim to the Conference. He hoped that, thanks to concerted efforts on the 
part of Member States, CAS would be given a new start. 
72. Since 1979, the General Conference had been considering the case of 
South Africa, in particular its racist policies and its nuclear capabilities. 
After some years of indecision, the Board of Governors had finally recommended 
that the General Conference suspend South Africa from the exercise of its 
rights and privileges of membership. His delegation urged all delegations 
participating in the General Conference to support that recommendation. 
Whatever might happen, Iraq would not bend to threats and pressures aimed at 
weakening its support for the just cause of the African people. Care must be 
taken to avoid a repetition of the manoeuvres which, at previous sessions of 
the General Conference, had prevented the necessary decisions being taken with 
regard to a similar regime, that of Israel, which occupied a place of its own 
among Member States. In the first place, it was the only regime which had 
been condemned for having committed the only known crime of deliberate armed 
aggression against a nuclear facility under international safeguards, namely 
the Tamuz reactor in Iraq. Secondly, it was the only regime of which the 
Security Council had demanded that it submit all its nuclear facilities to 
Agency safeguards. 
73. Israel was deploying, either alone or in collaboration with South 
Africa, a feverish activity in the non-peaceful utilizations of nuclear 
energy, and there was scarcely any doubt that it had acquired nuclear 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 22 


weapons. Various sources throughout the world had confirmed that Israel had 
definitely resolved to provide itself with a nuclear arsenal. That policy had 
consisted not only in resorting to illegal means to obtain materials which 
could be used to produce nuclear weapons and in shrouding its main 


installations in the most absolute secrecy, but also in setting up a dangerous 
nuclear programme which was disturbing the Middle East and even the 
Soviet Union. The latest facet of that programme, according to revelations in 
the Sunday Times in October 1986, had been the deployment of Jericho-II 


intermediate-range missiles which could be equipped with nuclear warheads and 
were capable of hitting most Arab countries and the Soviet Union. That state 
of affairs had led the Soviet Union to warn Israel against the serious 
consequences which the deployment of those missiles could have for world peace 
and security. Israel was about to start a proliferation of nuclear weapons in 


the region and would bear full responsibility for all the dangerous 
repercussions which such proliferation would inevitably have for peace and 


security throughout the world. Iraq therefore urged the General Conference to 
exert all the necessary pressure on Israel to make it comply with the relevant 


resolutions adopted by the United Nations Security Council and General 
Assembly as well as by the General Conference itself. The least that could be 


done was to deprive Israel of every form of nuclear co-operation until it 


agreed to renounce the possession of nuclear weapons and to place all its 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 


74. Despite the difficulties arising from the war which the Islamic 
Republic of Iran had forced upon it for seven years and the Israeli armed 
attack against its safeguarded nuclear reactor, Iraq was still resolved to 
develop and promote its programme for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The 
results obtained in 1986 by the Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission and by its 
scientists and engineers were set forth in detail in an annual report which 
was available on request. In that context, he thanked the Agency and its 
specialized Departments for the valuable assistance and services they had 
provided to his country, particularly in connection with two long-term 
projects. In addition, Iraq co-operated with the Agency in other fields 
(e.g. joint research contracts, establishment of radiation monitoring 
networks, food irradiation). 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 23 


75. In conclusion, he took pleasure in announcing that his country had 
already signed the two Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency 
Assistance, although it considered that the scope of those Conventions was too 
restricted. 
Mr. Avendano (Ecuador) took the Chair. 


76. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland), speaking first on behalf of the 
delegations of Switzerland and Liechtenstein, expressed gratitude to the 
Agency for the excellent work it had accomplished through its unceasing 
activities over the past 30 years, during which it had shown itself worthy of 
the confidence which States had always placed in it. In the implementation of 
safeguards, the co-ordination of safety and radiation protection and the 
provision of assistance to developing countries, the Agency was more than ever 
playing a central and unique role. 
77. Continuing on behalf of the Swiss delegation only, he said that the 
consequences of the events at Chernobyl continued to dominate the nuclear 
power scene, both in Switzerland and in the Agency. However, the discussion 
phase was gradually being superseded by a phase of concrete action and 
decision-taking. 
78. Those concrete actions related primarily to the field of safety. The 
detailed examination of the supplementary safety programme carried out in 
November 1986 by an expert group had certainly been extremely useful. His 
delegation would be in favour of repeating that exercise at appropriate 
intervals. 
79. The review of documents should be continued permanently in order to 
define the safety standards which every nuclear facility operator must meet. 
However, his delegation would wish the respective roles of the NUSS documents 
on the one hand, and the documents and views put forward by INSAG on the 
other, to be more clearly defined. 
80. With regard to the Agency's work in connection with the operation of 
nuclear facilities, his delegation considered that the Incident Reporting 
System (IRS) and the Operational Safety Review Teams (OSARTs) contributed much 
to safety. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 24 


81. Turning to the question of liability for damage caused by nuclear 
accidents, he said that his country supported all efforts which might improve 
the present situation. It gave high priority to the Agency's co-operative 
effort with the Nuclear Energy Agency of OECD aimed at preparing a joint 
protocol to harmonize the Paris and Vienna Conventions. None the less, it 
seemed appropriate also to examine questions relating to international 
liability for damage resulting from a nuclear accident. 
82. A point which Switzerland had particularly at heart was the 
co-ordination of the Agency's activities with those of other international 
organizations. It was important to be sure that the initiatives launched, 
particularly in the field of radiation protection, did not overlap. The joint 
project between the Agency, WHO and UNEP on the evaluation and management of 
risks from power and industrial systems was a good example in that respect. 
83. On the subject of radiation protection, he recalled that Switzerland 
had launched an initiative with WHO aimed at the international harmonization 
of radiation protection measures in the case of a nuclear accident which might 
lead to decisive progress if it found sufficiently wide support among the 
governments and organizations concerned. 
84. As to the other main activities of the Agency, both technical 
assistance and co-operation and safeguards had received much financial 
support. The safeguards budget was now showing a tendency towards 
stabilization, but it should in no case take second place to technical 
co-operation and assistance, because public acceptance of nuclear power 
depended greatly on the effectiveness and credibility of safeguards. 
85. With regard to the budget as a whole, his country adhered firmly to the 
principle of zero real growth. That principle, however, should be applied 
with some flexibility in order to allow the Agency to deal with unexpected 
developments such as those of 1986. His delegation was convinced that it 
would be possible to carry out the supplementary safety programme within the 
constraints of zero growth, apart from a slight overrun to make due allowance 
for commitments undertaken during the special session of the General 
Conference. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 25 


86. In order to achieve that aim, it would be necessary to concentrate on 
the three mainstays of the Agency's activities, namely safety, technical 
assistance and co-operation, and safeguards. Before undertaking any work 
outside those fields, a detailed cost-benefit analysis should be carried out 
by the Agency. A dynamic equilibrium between those three mainstay activities 
was essential for the proper operation of the Agency. 
87. As to the Agency's cash-flow crisis, he understood the very serious 
economic difficulties of a large number of countries in the Third World, but 
he nevertheless deplored the extremely late payments by many Member States. 
That failure to respect obligations in public international law not only 
jeopardized the execution of approved programmes and budgets and the 
credibility of the Agency, but also established an undesirable precedent for 
other international organizations. 
88. Turning to his own country's policy on nuclear energy, he recalled 
that, on the bilateral level, Switzerland had signed a co-operation agreement 
with the People's Republic of China and an agreement with the Federal Republic 
of Germany on the harmonization of civil liability systems in the event of a 
nuclear accident. 
89. The approval procedures for the peaceful use of plutonium foreseen by 
the laws of certain nuclear material supplier countries continued to trouble 
the Swiss authorities. There remained much to be done to render those 
procedures more predictable and practical, in view of the large quantities of 
separated plutonium which would exist in many countries in the 1990s. 
90. On the internal level, an expert group had been entrusted with 
examining various scenarios including the abandonment of nuclear power. Those 
scenarios would serve as a basis for judgement on two popular initiatives, the 
one demanding a ten-year moratorium on the construction of any new nuclear 
facilities, the other a final shutdown of all existing nuclear power plants by 
the end of their lifetime at the latest. In addition, the Swiss Government 
was preparing a draft constitutional article to extend the public powers' 
competence in the field of energy policy. A total revision of the law on the 
peaceful use of atomic energy and on radiation protection was at present under 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 26 


preparation, and a programme aimed at improving certain aspects of radiation 
protection and information as well as public warning mechanisms was already 
largely under way. 


91. The Swiss Government had recently proposed to Parliament the 
ratification of the two conventions adopted in September 1986 by the General 
Conference at its special session. With regard to the Convention on Early 
Notification, Switzerland hoped that the question of the notification 
threshold would soon be settled. His Government, for its part, had decided 
that the Agency and Switzerland's neighbouring countries would be informed of 
any nuclear accident at the same time as the Swiss cantons. It would be 
desirable for all Members of the Agency to adopt analogous procedures. 
Finally, he indicated that the five operating nuclear power plants were 
contributing about 40% of electricity production in Switzerland, that their 
safety records were good, and that their reactors had achieved an average 
availability of 82.7%. In the older plants, substantial safety-related 
modifications had been undertaken. Where research was concerned, he announced 
that the two existing institutions - the Federal Institute for Reactor 
Research and the Nuclear Research Institute - would be merged with, it was 
hoped, synergistic effects. 
92. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) said that, subject to parliamentary approval, 
his delegation supported the Agency's draft budget for 1988 as submitted by 
the Board. It also supported the target of US $38 million for voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) in 
1988, and he was pleased to announce that Norway had pledged to pay its share 
of that target. 
93. His delegation had already, on several occasions, stressed that a 
certain balance must be maintained between the regulatory and promotional 
functions of the Agency. Over the past years, appreciable growth had been 
seen in the technical assistance supplied by the Agency, particularly from 
TACF resources. His delegation had supported that expansion, but there had 
been no analogous increase on the regulatory side. After the Chernobyl 
accident, the Agency had somewhat expanded its safety-related activities 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 27 


through the supplementary nuclear safety programme. His delegation welcomed 
the increase foreseen under that heading in the draft Regular Budget for 
1988. Given the Agency's important role in re-establishing confidence in 
nuclear safety, he considered that the proportion of resources devoted to 
nuclear safety and radiation protection should be kept roughly at the present 


level for several years. 


94. It was of fundamental importance for all countries to have a reliable 
safeguards system. Although the Department of Safeguards might probably be 
able to make further rationalization efforts, there was no doubt that the 
quantities of nuclear material and the number and complexity of new facilities 
under safeguards would continue to increase and that, for several years 
already, the Department had been facing serious budgetary constraints. His 
delegation wished to underline that the safeguards budget must correspond to a 
level of activity sufficient to maintain the reliability and credibility of 
the system. 
95. He congratulated the Director General and the Secretariat on the 
flexibility they had shown after the Chernobyl accident. The Agency appeared 
to have accomplished its main tasks for 1986 and carried out its normal 
programme while at the same time absorbing that totally unforeseen extra 
work-load. 
96. His delegation attached considerable importance to the Agency's 
co-ordination efforts in the fields of nuclear power and the fuel cycle. The 
exchange of experience through publications, symposia, etc. was useful to all 
Member States. In that context, he wished also to mention the INIS system, 
which was working extremely well. 
97. The growth rate of technical assistance had been very high, showing 
clearly that the present financing system gave good results and that there was 
no need to modify it for the time being. He hoped that the use of a two-year 
programme cycle would allow better utilization of the available resources and 
would lighten the Secretariat's work-load. At present there seemed to be too 
many small projects; increasing the proportion of regional and interregional 
multi-year projects would also ease the Secretariat's task. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 28 


98. Since Chernobyl, the Agency had considerably expanded its safety 
activities, in particular by very quickly setting up an effective and wellbalanced 
supplementary safety programme; his delegation welcomed those 
activities and particularly approved of the trend towards intensifying 
assistance to national regulatory organizations. 
99. A remarkable achievement of the Agency had been the preparation of the 
NUSS Codes, which must now be revised and kept up to date. The aim must be to 
attain nuclear safety standards which were as high as possible in all 
countries. The NUSS Codes were useful as models, and Member States should be 
encouraged to accept them voluntarily as minimum standards, as the Director 
General had suggested in his opening statement. 
100. It seemed that human error had been one of the principal causes of the 
Chernobyl accident. In that case, as in earlier accidents, the operators' 
training had proved deficient. The Agency should encourage national 
regulatory authorities and electricity producers to improve the training of 
nuclear power plant operating personnel. In that context, an international 
mechanism for the accreditation of operator training programmes could be 
useful. According to experience gained in Norway with the OECD Halden reactor 
project, such accidents could apparently be prevented by the appropriate use 
of computers at the man-machine interface. 
101. The Chernobyl accident had brought serious consequences for Norway, 
where vast stretches of land had been contaminated by radioactive fallout. It 
had been necessary to undertake a detailed study of the course of the accident 
and on the way in which the Norwegian authorities had reacted, and to present 
proposals for improving the state of preparedness. The Government had set up 
several committees, in particular an interministerial committee of senior 
officials which was to recommend the measures to be taken if such an accident 
occurred. 
102. His delegation welcomed the entry into force of the two conventions 
prepared by the Agency. Norway had been a party to both conventions for a 
year already. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 29 


103. As a supplement to the Convention on Early Notification, Norway had 
concluded bilateral agreements on that subject with Finland, the German 
Democratic Republic and Sweden, and it was negotiating analogous agreements 
with the Federal Republic of Germany, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union and 
the United Kingdom. 
104. Negotiations had also been started with a view to updating the 
1963 Mutual Emergency Assistance Agreement between the Nordic countries in 
order to make the provisions of that agreement compatible with those of the 
Convention on Emergency Assistance. 
105. Like several other countries, Norway was concerned about the dumping of 
radioactive wastes at sea. It was gratified by the extension of the moratorium 
on such action and considered that in future the sea dumping of radioactive 
wastes of whatever type should be avoided. 
106. The report of the World Commission on Environment and Development would 
be officially presented to the United Nations during the current session of 
the General Assembly by Mrs. Brundtland, Chairman of the Commission and Prime 
Minister of Norway. After its examination by the General Assembly, that 
report would be submitted to the various bodies and organizations of the 
United Nations system and to other international organizations, and Norway 
hoped it would lead to extensive discussions of principle which would 
contribute to modifying the policies and programmes of those organizations. 
107. His country considered it very important to ensure that the victims of 
a nuclear accident received appropriate financial reimbursement. The present 
liability system was not satisfactory and should be improved. The most urgent 
task seemed to be to harmonize the Paris and Vienna Conventions so as to give 
them the largest possible geographical scope of application. In that 
connection, his delegation fully supported the work aimed at preparing a joint 
protocol to the Paris and Vienna Conventions, and it hoped that such a protocol 
would induce a larger number of countries to accede to the Vienna Convention. 
108. His delegation had noted with satisfaction that in 1986, as in earlier 
years, the Secretariat had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the 
diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material - or the 
misuse of facilities or material subject to safeguards. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 30 


109. Norway was pleased to learn that Colombia, Malawi, Trinidad and Tobago, 
and the Yemen Arab Republic had become parties to NPT in 1986. It also noted 
with satisfaction the conclusion of a full-scope safeguards agreement between 
Albania and the Agency. On the other hand, it regretted that the negotiations 
on safeguards between South Africa and the Agency had made no progress. 
Nevertheless, his delegation did not support the proposal to suspend South 
Africa from the exercise of the rights and privileges of membership in the 
Agency. For his Government, the principle of universality of international 
organizations was of fundamental importance. 
110. Mr. KANGAI (Zimbabwe) said that his country was determined to 
co-operate fully with the Agency, which played a vital role in attempting to 
halt the nuclear arms race and promoting nuclear safety and the peaceful use 
of radioisotopes. He noted with pleasure that the Agency had achieved 
considerable success in carrying out its objectives, and Zimbabwe was 
gratified at the increased importance which it accorded to safety-related 
work. As Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, Zimbabwe was resolutely 
against the pursuit of the arms race by the great Powers and against the 
unimaginable consequences which would result from the deliberate use of 
nuclear weapons. The fact that the effects of a nuclear war would extend well 
beyond the frontiers of the belligerents gave mankind the moral right to 
protest against the nuclear policies of the great nuclear Powers. Zimbabwe 
felt that the considerable sums which were devoted to nuclear weapons research 
and development could serve to mitigate many of the problems which humanity 
faced. It was absurd that people should starve while billions of dollars were 
spent on weapons of mass destruction. His country appealed to the Soviet 
Union and the United States to show a spirit of compromise in their arms 
reduction talks and welcomed the agreement on intermediate-range nuclear 
missiles which had recently been announced. That was an extremely important 
step in the right direction, and it was to be hoped that it would be followed 
by the complete abolition of such weapons. 
111. Zimbabwe was directly threatened by the civil and military nuclear 
facilities of South Africa, and its fundamental opposition to the policy of 
apartheid in South Africa automatically made it the target for unprovoked 
attacks by that racist and hostile neighbour. His country was extremely 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 31 


concerned to see that South Africa had not submitted its nuclear facilities to 
Agency safeguards. The South African Government, it was true, had signed and 
ratified the Convention on Early Notification and the Convention on Emergency 
Assistance, but the declaration attached to its instrument of ratification 


indicated clearly that it was not prepared to recognize the authority of the 
United Nations Council for Namibia. That attitude could be motivated only by 
sinister purposes, and it was hard to see why South Africa should continue to 
be a Hember of the Agency when it showed such disregard for the resolutions of 
the United Nations General Assembly and of the Agency's General Conference. 
That was why it was important to support the recommendation of the Board of 
Governors immediately to suspend South Africa from its rights of membership. 


112. Zimbabwe noted with pleasure the spreading awareness within the Agency 
of the importance of technical assistance, particularly for the developing 
countries. Although it had only recently been admitted to the Agency, 
Zimbabwe had already obtained certain benefits. 
113. His country had a number of laws on the import, handling and use of 
radioisotopes, but there were some loopholes, especially where waste disposal 
was concerned. Attempts were being made to remedy that situation with the 
Agency's assistance. Radiation protection was a high-priority area for 
Zimbabwe, and a manpower training programme in that field was being conducted 
with the Agency's assistance, the objective being to be able to hold such 
courses locally. 
114. The possibility of receiving assistance from the Agency had been 
welcomed enthusiastically throughout the country, and numerous requests for 
assistance had been submitted in various fields. It was also hoped that a 
national standards laboratory would be established, which was of particular 
importance because Zimbabwe already had a nuclear medicine centre. 
115. Mr. MARAVALL (Spain) said that his country welcomed the success 
achieved by the Agency in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
maintaining the non-proliferation regime, activities which were mainstays of 
the Agency and contributed to the economic and social development of the 
international community. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 32 


116. In Spain, the development of the nuclear industry had made it possible 
to achieve an acceptable degree of energy diversification and autonomy, to 
acquire the technological basis for building a nuclear power plant with a 
national component approaching 90%, and thus to transfer experience to other 
countries. 
117. Spain believed that nuclear energy could help to resolve the energy 
problems of developing countries and to improve the standard of life in those 
countries through its applications in medicine, agriculture and industry. 
Spain was prepared to collaborate in that direction by providing the necessary 
technical assistance. Moreover, it had always respected the Agency's 
principles, regarding both non-proliferation and technical assistance, in its 
nuclear programmes. 
118. The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons remained one of the principal 
concerns of the Spanish Government. In that connection, he informed the 
General Conference that his Government had decided to accede to the NPT. In 
fact, the Treaty had already been ratified by the Congress of Deputies and was 
shortly to be ratified by the Senate before being countersigned by the King of 
Spain. 
119. Turning to nuclear safety, he said that an OSART mission would be 
carried out at his Government's request in November and December 1987 at the 
Almaraz nuclear power plant. His country believed that such missions could 
contribute to the gradual harmonization of operating practices in different 
countries, as they would permit an exchange of knowledge and experience 
between nuclear power plant operating personnel which could not but improve 
nuclear safety in the world. 
120. He recalled that Spain was in favour of the harmonization, by a joint 
protocol, of the Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of 
Nuclear Energy and the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear 
Damage, as it believed that to be the most effective way of applying both 
instruments simultaneously. However, no legal instrument could be effective 
if it was not widely accepted, and in that respect, he recalled that the 
General Conference, in its resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/431, had expressed the 
hope that Member States would give consideration to adhering to the Vienna 
Convention. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 33 


121. Outlining Spain's achievements in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
since the thirtieth session of the General Conference in 1986, he said that 
the nuclear power situation in Spain on 1 January 1987 had been the 
following: eight power plants with a total gross capacity of 5815 MW had been 
in service, and two power plants with a total gross capacity of 2023 MW had 
been under construction. In 1986, Spain's nuclear power output had reached 
37 457 GWh, which meant an increase by 33.6% over 1985, and the share of 
nuclear power in the total electrical output had increased to 30.9%, as 
against 23.4% in 1985. Spain's production of uranium concentrate had been 
254 tonnes, or an increase by 7% over 1985, and the quantities of natural and 
enriched uranium forecast had been delivered, representing an increase by 16% 
over 1985. In nuclear fuel fabrication, the new plant at Juzbado, which had 
been taken into service in 1985, had reached its normal production rate. The 
country's uranium reserves were currently estimated at 32 917 tonnes 


3 8 


122. The first general plan for radioactive waste management had been 
prepared in 1986. It would have to be approved each year by the Government on 
the basis of the proposals of a public enterprise which dealt with such 
questions. The total volume of waste to be managed was estimated at roughly 
3 


270 000 m of low- and medium-level waste and about 6000 tonnes of spent 
fuel. The strategy adopted for the spent fuel was temporary storage on-site 
followed by centralized intermediate storage while awaiting the availability 
of a final disposal site in a deep geological formation, which was expected 
for the first quarter of the next century. The total cost of waste management 
was estimated at about 750 000 million pesetas (constant 1986) and was to be 
financed by the establishments producing the waste. 


123. Nuclear research in Spain was conducted partly by the electricity 
companies, which were mostly private enterprises, and partly by a public body, 
CIEMAT, whose activities were divided between three fields: nuclear 
technology, radiation and environmental protection, and basic research. Where 
the last-named was concerned, Spain was working on an important research 
project on fusion energy financed partly by the Commission of the European 
Communities. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 34 


124. Research and development work in the fields of nuclear power and 
radiation protection related mainly to the operation of Spain's nuclear power 
plants. 
125. In conclusion, he reaffirmed his country's wish to co-operate with the 
Agency, whose efforts to spread the peaceful uses of nuclear energy deserved 
support from all countries, and announced that Spain's laboratories and 
nuclear research installations were open for collaboration with all countries. 
126. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that during the past thirty 
years Member States hsd benefited greatly from the promotional and regulatory 
activities of the Agency and that the scientific and technical exchanges 
achieved through expert meetings at the Agency and through its publications 
had been of considerable value to them. Without the Agency's safeguards 
system, international peaceful nuclear co-operation between States would have 
been practically impossible, without its nuclear safety programmes such 
co-operation would scarcely have been responsible, and without its technical 
co-operation programmes the peaceful applications of nuclear energy would have 
remained out of reach of many countries. By its Statute and its role in the 
application of NPT, the Agency had contributed to the preservation of world 
peace. 
127. Mankind had discovered, developed and shared the benefits of peaceful 
nuclear energy, but it had also become more aware in many countries of its 
risks and dangers, particularly after the Chernobyl accident. Governments 
were making efforts to keep those risks within acceptable limits by updating 
their nuclear safety programmes and improving their non-proliferation 
strategies and their nuclear waste management practices. 
128. The public should be kept fully informed of all those activities, and 
also of the remaining hazards as compared with those inherent in other 
technologies. That was a permanent challenge for both governments and the 
Agency. 
129. After reiterating his Government's support for the Agency and its 
Statute, he said that the Netherlands were firmly convinced that the Agency 
should not involve itself in political problems which had no direct bearing on 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 35 


its mandate. It was in the nature of a United Nations organization that all 
countries could be full members, whatever their political, economic or social 
system. In the particular case of the Agency, it was essential that the 
countries which had a direct interest in nuclear energy should participate in 
its work. If they were excluded therefrom, in one way or another, it was 
certain that the Agency's usefulness would diminish. That was why the 
Netherlands opposed any proposal aimed at suspending any country whatsoever 
from the exercise of its rights of membership. 


130. During the preceding year, the Chernobyl accident had drawn attention 
to the potential hazards of nuclear energy and had aroused considerable 
interest in nuclear power plant safety. Although the radioactivity had 
diminished since then, as had to a great extent the initial anxiety, the fact 
remained that reactor safety and radiation protection deserved constant 
attention. His Government supported the priority attached to those areas in 
the Agency's programme. 
131. In the Netherlands, the accident had prompted the launching of studies 
on the safety of existing power plants, particularly in those areas where 
lessons could be drawn from Chernobyl: reactivity accidents, human behaviour, 
containment response in a severe accident, fire protection, etc. His country 
welcomed the Agency's initiative to convene or sponsor meetings at which 
various subjects relating to safety could be discussed by experts and 
supported its role in the exchange of information on safety-significant 
incidents which had occurred in nuclear power plants throughout the world. In 
close collaboration with NEA/OECD, the Agency could help Member States to draw 
lessons from the incidents reported to the IRS, a system whose potential was 
not as yet being fully utilized. 
132. His country was satisfied with the OSART and NUSS programmes. It 
regretted that proposals to have the NUSS Codes accepted as internationally 
binding nuclear safety standards had not so far received sufficient support. 
Every State should accept the Codes as minimum standards and notify the Agency 
that it undertook to respect them. Further steps should be taken in that 
direction. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 36 


133. His country welcomed the Agency's efforts to update the Codes of 
Practice and would provide its full contribution towards the publication of 
revised Codes in summer 1988; those Codes would then serve as a basis for his 
country to promulgate its own regulations and guidelines. The Agency should 
continue helping Member States to incorporate the NUSS documents in their 
national regulations. The Netherlands attached great importance to the 
question of a document on safety principles for nuclear power plants. 
134. The Netherlands Government was gratified at the progress achieved so 
far in perfecting international nuclear liability arrangements. It should be 
possible in the coming months to draft a joint protocol to the Paris/Brussels 
and Vienna conventions on international civil liability in the nuclear field; 
that protocol could then be adopted at a diplomatic conference in the second 
half of 1988. In that context, the question of State liability for nuclear 
accidents with transboundary consequences should be examined carefully. 
135. Following the Chernobyl accident, his country had undertaken to review 
thoroughly its policy of expansion in the nuclear power sector. That review 
related not only to the safety of the two existing nuclear power plants, but 
also to the role of the source term in the evaluation of serious accidents. 
The consequences that might arise from such accidents for public health, the 
environment and the economy would be analysed so that definite conclusions 
could be reached as to the hazards they represented for the public and for 
society. On the basis of those studies and on that of advice from external 
experts, the Government would, probably by early 1989, make a decision on 
whether or not to build further nuclear power plants in the Netherlands and, 
if so, where. Since an additional production capacity of 6000 MW was required 
in the public sector by the year 2000, difficult decisions would have to be 
taken during the two years to come. 
136. His country agreed with the Director General that it was desirable to 
co-operate regionally in establishing waste storage facilities, particularly 
for the final disposal of nuclear wastes, and it considered that his 
suggestion concerning the possibility of supplier countries taking back their 
waste deserved careful scrutiny. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 37 


137. The Almelo enrichment plant had obtained, in March 1987, authorization 
to increase its capacity from 1000 to 3500 tonnes so that it could comply with 
its contractual obligations; that showed the success of Urenco's marketing 
efforts and the role which the Almelo plant played within the tripartite 
co-operation with the Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom. 
138. The fact that various negotiations on disarmament and associated 
on-site verification provisions seemed to be leading to concrete results gave 
new importance to the Agency's safeguards system. In that context, the 
agreement in principle between the United States and the Soviet Union on the 
elimination of intermediate-range nuclear weapons was an important stage in 
the arms control negotiations between East and West. 
139. His delegation noted with satisfaction that, according to the 
safeguards statement contained in the annual report, the Agency had again not 
detected any anomaly which would indicate the diversion of a significant 
amount of safeguarded nuclear material. In the foreseeable future, the number 
of nuclear facilities under safeguards would continue to grow. However, the 
budget for 1988 was no higher than that for 1987, apart from the 0.6% increase 
for the supplementary nuclear safety and radiation protection programme, and 
that tendency would probably continue in the coming years. Growing 
verification responsibilities raised a serious problem in the context of zero 
budget growth, and the Netherlands fully shared the concerns expressed by the 
Director General. 
140. His country would maintain and, if possible, strengthen its support for 
the Agency's technical assistance projects, in particular those on the use of 
radioisotopes in agriculture, food preservation and medicine. In 1987, the 
Netherlands Minister of Development Co-operation had decided to study the 
possibility of encouraging the use of food irradiation techniques in certain 
developing countries. 
141. Mr. JAMALUDDIN (Malaysia), announced that his country would 
continue to support the Agency, which had emerged unscathed from the 
challenges it had been forced to take up in accomplishing its functions and 
tasks. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 38 


142. Although they were highly specialized fields, nuclear science and 
technology did not differ fundamentally from other human activities, contrary 
to what many people still thought. In fact, the atom had entered daily life. 
It played an important role in public affairs, and the nuclear debate had 
acquired a world dimension. Scientists must therefore resist the temptation 
to retreat behind the supposed neutrality of science, especially in the case 
of nuclear science, which was complex in that the technological problems were 
linked with problems of a moral, economic and social nature. 
143. Malaysia believed in the principle of equality of States in the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, but that doctrine unfortunately 
conflicted with political realities. 
144. Among the main controversial aspects of nuclear energy, it seemed worth 
mentioning the relationship between that form of energy and the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and the problems inherent in the long-term management of 
nuclear waste and in nuclear terrorism and sabotage. The question of nuclear 
disarmament was a responsibility of all nations, for the world must ensure its 
own survival. Unfortunately, many economies were at present heavily dependent 
on military expenditure and economic considerations seemed to override 
questions of survival. 
145. His delegation considered it more important to reduce international 
tension, in particular by guaranteeing adequate resources for all countries, 
than to adopt policies which could only marginally delay their ability to 
acquire nuclear weapons. The world needed energy and would continue to need 
it. 
146. The Agency had a role to play in that context. Malaysia recognized 
that the Agency had contributed much to making nuclear energy serve peace, 
health and prosperity in the world, particularly in the developing countries, 
through its technical assistance and co-operation programmes. 
147. It was gratifying that, after the accident at Chernobyl, the Agency and 
its Member States had immediately taken measures to restore the public's 
confidence in nuclear energy. His country in that context welcomed the 
adoption of the Convention on Early Notification and the Convention on 
Emergency Assistance, which it had recently signed. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.296 
page 39 


148. There was no doubt that nuclear safety and radiation protection were of 
concern to all countries. In that connection, his country considered it 
extremely important to have very high standards of safety. In addition, it 
was necessary to co-operate internationally to protect nuclear facilities 
against any armed attack or act of terrorism. Malaysia shared the general 
view that the Agency could carry out technical studies on the radiological 
consequences that might arise from such attacks. That would rapidly lead to 
an international agreement to prohibit armed attacks or to prevent terrorist 
acts against nuclear facilities. 
149. As a nuclear accident anywhere was a nuclear accident everywhere, all 
States had a moral obligation to communicate to others any information which 
might reduce the risk of accidents in nuclear installations. In that context, 
it was important to share information not only on the consequences of 
accidents, but also on the means of avoiding them. The Agency certainly had a 
role to play in that area. 
150. The contamination of foodstuffs was one of the serious consequences of 
any nuclear accident, in both the short and the long term. It was unfortunate 
that certain strongly contaminated foodstuffs had been exported to countries 
lacking adequate facilities and resources for monitoring them. Strict control 
of radioactivity levels in foodstuffs was of primordial importance. Past 
experience had shown that intervention dose levels varied considerably from 
one country to the next. An effort at harmonization was therefore necessary. 
The Agency should give priority to the examination of that question in 
co-operation with international organizations such as FAO and WHO. 
151. Malaysia supported the Agency's efforts to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, but deplored the fact that it had not been possible to 
conclude an agreement on universally acceptable principles for international 
co-operation in that area and on the appropriate means for promoting such 
co-operation. That was all the more deplorable for Malaysia in view of its 
policy of industrialization on the basis of science and technology. 
152. His country realized that the speed of technological evolution had 
brought about changes in modern society which were no less profound than those 
of the industrial revolution. Those changes offered great challenges and 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 40 


opportunities, in the field of nuclear energy as in others. Efforts to 
increase technological autonomy must be supported by international 
co-operation. Those who bore political responsibility should also keep 
abreast of the latest technical means for satisfying long-standing needs. It 
was only quite recently that Malaysia had embarked upon the applications of 
nuclear science and technology and, in particular, on the industrial 
applications of radiation and radioisotopes, and the assimilation of those 
modern techniques by industry and agriculture was under way. The Agency had 
supplied positive support through projects responding to national needs, and 
Malaysia would continue to support those projects. Fifteen years previously, 
it had launched a co-ordinated effort to promote the uses of nuclear energy by 
establishing a specialized centre whose task was to prepare long-term 
programmes for the development and utilization of that form of energy. In 
that endeavour, it had received considerable assistance from the Agency in the 
form of expert services, training courses, technical assistance and research 
contracts. In return, it had hosted a number of seminars and workshops 
organized by the Agency. 


153. Questions relating to the acceptance of nuclear energy were of great 
importance in a democracy. In particular, opposition to nuclear weapons could 
turn into opposition to anything nuclear. In order to safeguard the 
applications of nuclear science and technology, the Malaysian Parliament had 
in 1984 passed a law on nuclear energy licensing to the preparation of which 
the Agency had contributed much. 
154. Finally, Malaysia noted that the nuclear field was a subject of major 
concern throughout the world. However, it appeared more and more clear that 
the risks inherent in nuclear energy did not constitute the principal 
problem. On the contrary, it seemed that the fears inspired by that form of 
energy resided less in the risks which were peculiar to it than in the 
advantages which could be drawn from it. 
155. Malaysia preached observance of the Agency's principles where the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy were concerned. It was hostile to any effort 
aimed at establishing standards contrary to the established principles. Any 
group which sought to substitute its own needs for universal ones deserved 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 41 


condemnation in the same way as any country or government which flagrantly 
violated universal standards. Finally, it was important to restore confidence 
between the nuclear-weapon States, for their lack of mutual understanding 
indicated a much deeper disagreement on the question whether the nuclear 
option constituted a brief interlude in the history of mankind or whether, on 
the contrary, it was an important source of energy in the long term. 


156. Mr. CONSTELNA (Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission - IANEC) 
said that since 1959 IANEC had served as a forum for discussing co-operation 
between national bodies responsible for nuclear matters in Latin America and 
the Caribbean. The work of IANEC had essentially consisted in promoting the 
techniques for the peaceful use of nuclear energy by means of courses, seminars 
and round tables, for which it had drawn upon the technical competence of the 
principal centres in the region. Special attention had been accorded to the 
use of radioisotopes in agriculture, industry and hydrology at centres in 
Argentina, Chile and Colombia. It was worth pointing out also the results of 
an evaluation of geological formations favourable to the presence of uranium 
in the Andes, which had been carried out for the regional programme of 
evaluation of uranium-bearing regions by the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute 
in collaboration with the Nuclear Energy Commissions of Argentina, Colombia, 
Bolivia, Ecuador and Venezuela. 


157. Recently, a great impetus had been given to scientific and technical 
information on nuclear matters by patronizing the services of the Brazilian 
Nuclear Information Centre. 
158. At present, after a short period of retrenchment, the activities of 
IANEC were gathering momentum again. The Consultative Committee's task was to 
determine the specific needs of the region with regard to nuclear 
applications, particularly in the areas of agriculture, industry, public 
health, nuclear safety and radiation protection, spreading of nuclear 
techniques and training in those techniques, and nuclear information. The 
Consultative Committee would soon be studying technical reports in which the 
principal fields of interest would be better defined and, at the next regular 
session, a programme would be adopted on the basis of the established 
priorities. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.296 
page 42 


159. Given the importance attached to studies of the nuclear legislation and 
regulations of countries in the region, the Commission was also about to 
relaunch the work of its Legal Committee. 
160. With regard to nuclear information, there were plans to use 
telecommunications services to expand the assistance offered by the Brazilian 
Nuclear Information Centre. 
161. In view of that question's importance for the countries of Latin 
America and the Caribbean, it had been decided to conduct a comparative study 
of the legislation in force concerning food irradiation and to establish a 
collection of standards for the licensing of irradiation facilities and 
procedures. The Executive Secretariat had been requested to carry out a study 
aimed at preparing a general model for licensing standards which could be made 
available as an indicative model to national bodies responsible for nuclear 
matters. 
162. That summary description of IANEC's activities was intended to help 
intensify co-operation between IANEC and the Agency; such co-operation had 
occurred on many occasions in the past and had recently taken the form of 
joint organization of activities under the ARCAL programme. 
163. The members of IANEC were firmly resolved to collaborate very closely 
with the organizations which were active in the nuclear field, and more 
especially with the Agency, not only because of the experience and knowledge 
which the Agency had accumulated, but also because it was thought that, in 
Latin America and the Caribbean, IANEC's experience might help the Agency to 
provide Member States of both organizations with services for which they had a 
direct need. 
The meeting rose at 7 p.m. 



%i>L# 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 


March 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1987 at 10.5 a.m. 


President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 
later: Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


General Debate and annual report 
for 1986 (continued) 1 - 160 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Federal Republic of Germany 1-17 
United Kingdom of Great Britain 


and Northern Ireland 18 -28 
Guatemala 29 -38 
France 39 -68 
Argentina 69 -85 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 86 -93 
Poland 94 -110 
Sweden 111 -120 
Belgium 121 -141 
Saudi Arabia 142 -144 
Commission of the European 


Communities 145 -152 
Agency for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 153 -160 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 5 October 1987. 


[**] GC(XXXI)/818. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-1080 
2366e/0264e 



GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1986 (GC(XXXI)/800 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. ZILLER (Federal Republic of Germany) said that 1987 had 
brought the celebration of the thirtieth anniversary of the Agency's 
foundation - a memorable anniversary for several reasons. First, the Agency 
was an international organization which had evaluated, promoted and monitored 
a new source of energy and the use of new energy technology virtually from its 
beginnings to its present stage as a mature technology. Secondly, it was a 
United Nations organization which had dealt exclusively with the issues and 
problems of a single technology and its applications. Thirdly, support for 
the Agency had been general and world wide, despite conflicting interests that 
might exist between its current 113 Members, and its political and technical 
competence was fully recognized. 
2. The outstanding reputation enjoyed by the Agency throughout the world 
was based on its successes. Over the past thirty years it had struck the 
sometimes difficult balance between promoting and checking nuclear power - its 
two primary tasks and the two most important elements of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Despite widespread scepticism, there 
had been no increase in the number of countries possessing nuclear weapons in 
the past twenty years - a fact to which the Agency's safeguards had made a 
considerable contribution. The importance of nuclear power and its use in 
developing countries had increased continuously as a result of steadily 
increasing funds and of enhanced efficiency in the execution of the Agency's 
technical co-operation projects. More recently, as a result of the Chernobyl 
disaster, the Agency had succeeded in creating the basic conditions for 
improving nuclear safety on an international level, thus establishing a 
precondition for restoring lost confidence in the safety of nuclear power. 
3. He wished to convey the congratulations and the gratitude of the 
Federal Republic of Germany both to the Agency as an entity and to its present 
and former staff members who, with their high qualifications and personal 
commitment, had contributed to the Agency's successful work, and to their past 
and present Directors General. 
A. In the debate on nuclear energy policy following the events at 
Chernobyl, the Federal Government had advocated the continued use of nuclear 
power with the highest possible safety standards and had stressed the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 3 


following consideration. Since the development of renewable sources of energy 
had not yet produced new options for energy supply in the Federal Republic to 


replace nuclear power in the foreseeable future, nuclear energy protected the 
non-renewable reserves of fossil sources of energy; if the Federal Republic 
and other countries gave up nuclear power, competition for fossil energy 
sources would greatly increase with adverse effects, in particular on many 
Third World countries; greater use of fossil fuels would drastically increase 
environmental pollution. For an industrial country like the Federal Republic, 
nuclear power also had considerable technological and economic significance. 
Those arguments had ultimately convinced the general public and the outcome of 
the general elections at the beginning of 1987 and of three other state 
elections seemed to have proved that a clear majority continued to support the 
nuclear power option. The Federal Government continued to adhere to the 
concept of the closed nuclear fuel cycle. For the long-term development of 
nuclear energy it supported advanced reactors, both the fast-breeder and the 
high-temperature reactor. 


5. The Agency had performed an excellent job in 1986, in particular in the 
field of nuclear safety. The Federal Government had noted with satisfaction 
the prompt elaboration of the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency, and their speedy entry into force after being signed 
by more than 60 nations. It called upon all Member States to continue to use 
their best efforts to ensure the closest possible international co-operation 
in that important area. 
6. His Government wished to emphasize the need for a satisfactory solution 
to the problem of international nuclear liability. It welcomed the 
establishment of an IAEA/NEA working group to harmonize the Paris and Vienna 
Conventions on Nuclear Liability and hoped that its work would soon be 
successfully completed as a first step towards improving international nuclear 
liability. Special mention should be made of the Supplementary Nuclear Safety 
Programme drawn up by the Agency Secretariat with promptness, circumspection 
and a sense of perspective. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 4 


7. His Government also attached great importance to the Agency's ASSET, 
RAPAT and OSART missions and had asked for three OSART missions to be carried 
out at reactors in the Federal Republic. The two previous inspections had 
fully justified the confidence placed in the safety of German nuclear 
installations by the Federal Government and by a large proportion of the 
general public. He hoped that the great demand for OSART missions from all 
regions would continue. The integrity and technical competence of the 
Agency's teams guaranteed that the results of such inspections would be of 
great benefit to operators and government authorities. 
8. The Federal Government appreciated the Agency's activities in the field 
of nuclear safety because they strengthened the population's confidence that 
the highest possible safety standards were being or would be applied to 
nuclear power on the basis of the responsibility of each government and in the 
framework of understanding and co-operation between countries. 
9. His Government was pleased to note that in 1986 the Agency had again 
concluded that there was no evidence of any diversion or misuse of nuclear 
material under safeguards. While, however, that result was accepted by the 
international community because of its trust in the Agency's technical 
performance and political judgement, the Federal Government still considered 
that further improvement in safeguards concepts was necessary in order to 
enhance the credibility of the safeguards system still further, so as to avoid 
safety and radiation protection problems in their application and to make the 
best possible use of human and financial resources which at present could not 
be increased. There were two areas in particular where improvements could be 
achieved. First, the definition of safeguards targets, on which his country's 
competent authorities were endeavouring to continue their dialogue with the 
Agency with a view to defining more realistic safeguards targets so that under 
normal operation, even of a complex type of plant, and with a reasonable 
volume of inspection work, those targets could be achieved in practice. 
Secondly, the further development of safeguards technology, to which his 
country would continue to contribute through its safeguards support programme 
by providing cost-free experts, developing safeguards concepts with the 
assistance of expert plant operators and demonstrating their feasibility under 
real operating conditions. However, the success of international inspection 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 5 


work depended not only on the specific measures he had just described but 
essentially on mutual trust between operators of nuclear installations, 
government supervisory authorities and the Agency and its inspectors. 


10. The fact that all nuclear-weapon States had meanwhile placed, or had 
indicated their intention of placing, some of their facilities under Agency 
safeguards within the framework of voluntary offer agreements was of paramount 
importance and an essential contribution to enhancing the credibility of the 
safeguards system. His Government therefore called upon all nuclear-weapon 
States to include more installations of advanced technology than hitherto in 
order to increase the value of such voluntary offers. 
11. All interested countries should have access to the technologies for the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Agency was the very institution able to 
implement programmes for the peaceful use of nuclear power and nuclear 
technology tailored to the needs of developing countries, and the realization 
of technical assistance projects would continue to be one of its most 
important tasks. His country appreciated the further progress achieved in 
that field. Available funds had again been increased - mainly by voluntary 
contributions from countries demonstrating their goodwill - while planning and 
realization of technical co-operation projects had been improved. His country 
was confident that the evaluation activities had helped to secure that success 
and would be grateful for further efforts by the Secretariat to evaluate 
projects. 
12. His country attached the greatest importance to technical assistance 
and had always provided considerable funds for footnote-a/ projects, 
fellowships, training courses and so forth in addition to contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACfc') . In 1986 it had contributed 
more extrabudgetary funds than any other Member State and it would continue to 
do its best. 
13. He was pleased to inform the Conference that, subject to Parliamentary 
approval, his country could again pledge its full share of the target in the 
forthcoming year and also provide additional extrabudgetary support for 
fellowhips, experts, equipment, training courses, scientific meetings and 
co-ordinated research programmes. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 6 


14. He was particularly pleased to announce that his Government would be 
able to make a considerable extrabudgetary contribution, before the end of the 
year, towards expanding the training facilities at the Seibersdorf Laboratory, 
which would further improve its valuable services to developing countries. 
15. The Federal Government was deeply concerned to find that the Agency's 
successful work was in jeopardy during its anniversary year, through an 
imminent violation of the principle of universality, which the Federal 
Government held in high esteem as a prerequisite for the functioning of a 
worldwide organization and because its application was the only way to 
facilitate critical debate and the mutual influence of all States which used 
nuclear energy. The Agency's work was also jeopardized as a result of a 
serious increase in the backlog of contributions to the budget. In view of 
the situation, his Government urged all Member States to use their best 
efforts to ensure that the Agency could continue to function in the years to 
come. 
16. The Federal Government hoped that the present session of the General 
Conference would be able to concentrate fully on the tasks proper to the 
Agency without interference from irrelevant external influences and wished it 
a successful conclusion. 
17. In the desire that the Agency, which was so important for the 
co-existence of peoples, would be able to carry on its well-established and 
generally recognized activities in the future, his Government wished to renew 
its commitment to vigorous support for the Agency and its objectives. 
18. Mr. PARKINSON (United Kingdom) commended the Agency on its 
thirtieth anniversary: during the past three decades, the IAEA had become one 
of the most effective United Nations agencies, and its work was of vital 
importance for world peace and international nuclear safety. Its solid 
achievements resulted from a tradition of close co-operation, and one could 
only hope that it would continue along that path, as it would be most 
unfortunate if the Agency were side-tracked by devisive political debates on 
issues that had little to do with the objectives set out in its Statute. He 
paid a tribute to the leadership provided by the Director General and to the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 7 


dedication of the Agency's staff - the high esteem in which the organization 
was held throughout the world was a monument to their work. 


19. His country was lucky enough to be rich in natural fuels, but the 
policy of successive governments had been not to rely entirely on a single 
source of energy. Nuclear power development had begun in the United Kingdom 
even before the Agency had been founded, and at present, about 20% of the 
country's electricity came from nuclear power: that figure would rise to 25% 
as more stations were commissioned in the near future. An independent public 
enquiry of unprecedented rigour had resulted in permission being granted for 
the construction of the United Kingdom's first pressurized-water reactor at 
Sizewell: no other nuclear installation had had to demonstrate its economic 
justification and operational safety under such tough scrutiny. An 
application for the planning of a second pressurized-water reactor had now 
been made, and would be followed by similar applications in the near future. 
20. In developing nuclear power, a free country must have the support of 
its people. One of the challenges facing his Government was to convince the 
public of the merits of nuclear energy and to allay its fears about the 
risks. The consensus was moving perceptibly towards support for nuclear power 
development, largely because it had been convincingly demonstrated that the 
expansion of the nuclear power industry was accompanied by a concern for 
safety which, combined with the existence of a strong and independent 
regulatory body, prevented disaster from arising, either from design faults or 
from human error. 
21. His Government's new policy of placing the State-owned electrical 
industry under private ownership was part of a broad programme designed to 
promote efficiency and thereby to benefit customers, taxpayers, investors and 
employees alike. Although a decision had not been taken on the future 
structure of the electrical industry, it was highly unlikely that it would be 
sold off in a block, and methods of splitting it up and introducing 
competition were being examined. Some reports suggested that by placing the 
electrical industry under private ownership, the Government would lose control 
over the implementation of its nuclear policy. Any such contention must be 
rejected as false. The aim of the measure was to render electrical supply 
more efficient, more competitive, yet equally secure. Nuclear power had a 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 8 


vital role to play in that endeavour, and the benefits to be derived from it 
were in no way affected by the transition to private ownership. 


22. The three arguments for a nuclear programme were valid for State-owned 
industry as well as for private enterprise: diversity in generation should be 
secured in order to ensure security of supply, fossil fuels were a finite 
commodity and should be treated as such, and cheaper methods of producing 
electricity should be developed. It was also clear from recent experience 
that safety was not affected by whether a power station was owned by the State 
or a private company, but was rather determined by the people who operated it 
and by the design and effectiveness of the regulators. It was clear, 
therefore, that his Government's nuclear safety standards would in no way be 
lowered by the decision to turn the electrical power industry over to private 
ownership. 
23. His Government's programmes for the development of nuclear power could 
not be considered in isolation: in the nuclear world, no country was an 
island, as the tragic accident at Chernobyl had shown. That was why 
international co-operation was essential, and what made the work of the Agency 
so important. One of the most important aspects of that work was in respect 
of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
24. Non-proliferation clearly depended upon the political will and 
commitment of individual States, but international safeguards could also play 
a key role in maintaining public confidence in the system. His Government 
regarded the development of those safeguards as one of the Agency's 
priorities, and would continue to provide practical support for such 
endeavours. 
25. Although his Government was determined to prevent the spread of nuclear 
weapons, it would not wish the developed world to keep peaceful nuclear 
technology for itself. That was why it would continue to support the TACF. 
In addition to its pledged contribution of US $1.8 million for 1988, it would 
make an additional contribution for worth-while projects in countries which 
had signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 9 


26. Turning to aspects of the Agency's safety programme to which his 
Government attached particular significance, he said that the expanded safety 
programme agreed on in the aftermath of Chernobyl was an admirable example of 
how the Agency could meet new challenges, and the United Kingdom would 
continue to play an active role in its activities. His Government welcomed 
the revision of the Codes of Practice in the Nuclear Safety Standards and 
applauded the intention to make the revised Codes sufficiently flexible to 
accommodate not only different types of reactors, but also different national 
regulatory systems. It was to be hoped that as many States as possible would 
adhere voluntarily to the principles of the Codes: the more widely accepted 
they were, the more valuable they would be. 
27. His delegation supported the work done by the International Nuclear 
Safety Advisory Group (1NSAG) to develop general principles for nuclear safety 
that were applicable to all types of reactors. It supported the Agency's 
OSART missions, and was providing expert assistance for them. Indeed, his 
Government would formally invite an OSART mission to review operational safety 
at a nuclear power station in the United Kingdom as further evidence of its 
determination to maintain the highest possible safety standards and the most 
stringent procedures. 
28. The United Kingdom believed that, properly controlled, the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy offered great benefits to mankind. The Agency's work was of 
immense importance and had the United Kingdom's full support. It was to be 
hoped that the next thirty years would be as fruitful as the past thirty years 
had been. 
29. Mr. CASTILLO CONTOUX (Guatemala) expressed his Government's support 
for the Agency's programme in the area of nuclear applications which, by transfer 
of technology through the Agency, was contributing increasingly to improving the 
quality of life in his country. With regard to applications of nuclear energy, 
Guatemala's policy was to lay greater emphasis on techniques which were useful 
and could promote economic and social development. Thus, important advances had 
been made in the health sector, where, after becoming fully operational, the 
nuclear medicine unit had started the production of the main radiopharmaceuticals 
and, from March 1987, also the production of radioimmunoassay kits in order to 
reduce costs and to extend the service to more patients. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 10 


30. Considerable progress had been achieved also in other areas such as 
commissioning of the X-ray fluorescence analysis laboratory, non-destructive 
testing, agriculture and animal husbandry, where Guatemala had acquired the 
capability for carrying out research and teaching and offering certain 
services. It had held several training courses, including a regional seminar 
on recent progress in nuclear data acquisition and systems analysis. It was 
proud that its nationals had been sent as instructors by the Agency and that 
it had been requested to host fellows, scientific visits and regional events. 
His country's policy was to repay the assistance received by making available 
its modest experience to other countries with the same level of development. 
31. In that connection, he wished to express his gratitude to the 
United States Government, which had supplied extrabudgetary assistance for the 
project on the secondary dosimetry laboratory, to the Governments of 
Argentina, Chile and Colombia for their collaboration and also to other 
countries whose contributions had made it possible to finance regional 
projects under the ARCAL programme. 
32. The infrastructural support for activities in Guatemala would be 
strengthened immensely by the new and modern facilities for the laboratories 
of the Directorate General of Nuclear Energy, the civil engineering work for 
which was starting. 
33. On the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the Agency, he wished 
to make a brief comment on its principal activities in fulfilment of its 
objectives, which were to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world and to ensure that 
the assistance provided by it was not used in such a way as to further any 
military purpose. 
34. He reiterated Guatemala's support for and confidence in the Agency's 
safeguards system since it was the appropriate means of ensuring 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, which at present constituted the 
greatest threat to the very existence of mankind. 
35. The technical assistance and co-operation programme was undoubtedly the 
basic activity which had benefited a large number of developing countries and 
provided them with resources to implement their national programmes. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 11 


36. In the area of technical co-operation, an important mechanism for 
regional development was the ARCAL programme. Guatemala therefore strongly 
supported it and wished to express its appreciation of the hard work done by 
the officials of that programme in overcoming the numerous difficulties faced 
during its co-ordination. 
37. Before concluding he was pleased to announce that, as in the past, his 
Government was pledging itself to make a voluntary contribution to the TACF 
for 1988. 
38. Lastly, he paid a tribute to the Director General and the Secretariat, 
thanks to whose efforts the Agency had successfully carried out its mandate 
during the preceding years and, he was confident, would continue to do so in 
future. 
39. Mr. CAPRON (France), speaking on behalf of his Government and his 
delegation, warmly congratulated the President on his election, welcoming him 
not only as a scholar and an industrialist of international repute, but also 
as a friend of France and of Europe. The President had lent impetus to 
programmes of European co-operation and Italy's participation in such 
programmes owed much to his determination, foresight and personal prestige. 
He (Mr. Capron) was convinced that, under the President's authority, the 
General Conference would make good progress and reinforce the solidarity of 
the Agency's Member States. 
40. In every society, no matter how different, anniversaries brought back 
memories. The international community had founded the Agency with the 
intention of making available to all countries, whatever the level of their 
development, the prodigious resources of a new energy source while ensuring 
that it would be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. Though a simple 
enough concept, the Agency's double task had been particularly difficult to 
accomplish because everything - the delicate nature of the technologies 
involved, the vast industrial interests at stake, the strategic importance of 
any energy policy, the high degree of State involvement - combined to make 
the nuclear area (or so one would think) most elusive to the authority of an 
international organization. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 12 


41. The Agency was therefore universally welcomed as an exemplary 
institution, almost unique in the history of international relations; more 
than one hundred States had agreed to surrender part of their sovereignty in 
order to allow everyone to benefit from the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
In fact, there was no country on earth possessing a nuclear installation, no 
matter how small, which had not accepted, at least in part, the IAEA's 
presence on its soil. The Agency's thirtieth anniversary was an occasion on 
which to appreciate that remarkable success. 
42. In fact, that very success meant that shrewd judgement was required in 
the application of obligations and duties. Safeguards were necessary when 
they fulfilled their purpose, but it was necessary to guard against 
unjustified or superfluous constraints which, if applied indiscriminately, 
would only be seen as an instrument of unacceptable pressure. Not only was 
such an attitude ineffective, it was even contrary to the aim envisaged: logic 
and experience had shown that forcing States to accept requirements 
incompatible with their sovereignty was tantamount to inciting them to embark 
on programmes of national self-sufficiency, and therefore to dispense with 
international safeguards. 
43. What was needed, therefore, was the wisdom to maintain a balance 
equally distant from insufficient vigilance and emphatic interventionism. 
Truly, the path was a narrow one, but it had the virtue of uniting all parties 
in a common effort to realize a hope shared by most countries: that the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy would make an inestimable contribution to the 
development of all societies. 
44. Mr. Jacques Chirac, Prime Minister of France, speaking at the General 
Assembly of the United Nations in September 1986, had recalled that such was 
France's consistent policy. France would continue, Mr. Chirac had said, to 
help countries interested in sharing the benefits which the civil applications 
of nuclear energy could bring, so long as appropriate international controls 
were available to ensure that no diversion took place. France wanted to steer 
clear of both excessive constraints and "laissez-aller" attitudes, since it 
was certain that one and the other would be equally conducive to international 
nuclear disorder and would be incompatible with the consensus which only the 
Agency's credibility and authority could guarantee. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 13 


45. Such a consensus had enabled the Agency to face up to exceptional 
situations. In that connection, everyone could recall the exemplary manner in 
which negotiations had been carried out after the Chernobyl accident the 
previous year, negotiations which had produced in a remarkably short time the 
conclusion, signing and implementation of the two Conventions on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident and Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency. 
46. Also, only that consensus would enable the Agency to overcome those 
financial difficulties which, were they to continue, risked influencing the 
Agency's activities, undermining its credibility and tarnishing the image of 
nuclear energy. 
47. If the spirit of consensus was to be maintained in the longer term, it 
would be necessary to respect the balance between the Agency's two main 
functions, promotion of nuclear energy and verification of its peaceful use: 
the two functions were complementary and merited equal attention. It should 
not be forgotten that nuclear development would be inconceivable for most 
Member States without outside assistance with materials, equipment, exchanges 
of technology and training. Such exchanges would be impossible without the 
establishment of a climate of confidence founded on a system of mutually 
acceptable safeguards, which, accordingly, served the interests of nuclear 
development. 
48. The same principle applied to nuclear safety, an area which had 
occupied much of the Agency's attention, especially during the last year. 
Nuclear energy could not develop without rigorous safety measures which, in 
turn, were the best gauge of nuclear development. His delegation was pleased 
to note that the Agency had now recognized that the establishment of 
obligatory international nuclear standards was not realistic. France had 
always had strong reservations on the matter, for fundamental reasons: that 
sort of responsibility could only be exercised by those who, alone, had the 
right to command and be obeyed - the Member States. France attached 
importance to international co-operation on safety matters, the objective of 
which was to help States, if necessary, to discharge their national 
responsibilities more effectively. Within the Agency, the Operational Safety 
Review Team (OSART) missions were an excellent example. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 14 


49. Consensus among the Agency's Members also required that the different 
sensibilities within the organization - corresponding to the reality of today, 
not the reality of 30 years ago - should be reflected as faithfully as 
possible within the policy-making bodies. For France, and for many other 
Member States, that was a statement of fact and not an assertion of any 
claim. Adherence to that principle would favour the Agency's authority and 
help to uphold its credibility. 
50. If the Agency's great tasks were to be carried out, if it was to be 
available and helpful to all - then, clearly, there was no lack of work to be 
done. The Agency should therefore not endanger its vital missions by 
venturing onto a terrain full of pitfalls. At thirty, one was still 
considered young, but it was often precisely at that time that one had to take 
care in choosing one's future path. Accordingly, it was a matter for 
satisfaction that the Agency had no ambitions to become a forum for 
disarmament. On the other hand, it would be a pity, especially at the present 
time, to see politics assume rights within an institution which hitherto had 
wisely kept away from direct responsibility in that area. 
51. The Agency's Statute was the common wealth of its Members, and its 
misuse was contrary to everyone's interests. It was common knowledge that an 
institution which used the Statute on which it was founded for purposes other 
than those for which it had been set up would be putting itself in a perilous 
situation. That applied to any attack on the Agency's principle of 
universality, from which it would be dangerous to depart and which France 
would defend, no matter what the State whose legitimate rights were being 
unjustly questioned. It also applied to the safeguards system, which was 
fundamental to confidence in international nuclear relations and which could 
not be allowed to be used for punitive purposes. Finally, it applied to a 
tendency by some to associate the civil uses of nuclear energy with a threat 
to peace and safety. Such an analogy would be fatal to the smooth running of 
the Agency. A departure from the Agency's Statute in any of those directions 
would be all the more regrettable since there was much to be done in future 
years which would require the co-operation of all. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 15 


52. One of the present generation's main responsibilities was to guarantee 
a secure, reliable and inexpensive source of energy by the beginning of the 
next century; that was a condition for peace in a world bound, according to 
the forecasts available, to become increasingly overpopulated and more and 
more a prey to demographic imbalances. The task was far from simple and it 
required close international co-operation. 
53. Far from being a transitional form of energy, nuclear energy would be 
called on to play an ever-increasing role. Traditional fuels, while still 
important, were subject to known limits: coal reserves could perhaps last for 
several centuries, but coal itself was a pollutant and its transportation and 
desulphuration costly. World oil reserves could perhaps last another 35 years 
at the present rate of consumption, but oil had the great disadvantage of 
being unevenly distributed in the world and was therefore subject to 
unpredictable price fluctuations. Natural gas was subject to even more 
onerous logistic limitations than oil. 
54. By contrast, the world's uranium reserves could last at least a 
millenium, thanks to the possibility of using fast reactors when the need 
arose. From the point of view of environmental protection, nuclear power 
plants gave off hardly any noxious wastes; indeed, in France a substantial 
reduction in environmental pollution had been observed, directly linked with 
the growing role of nuclear energy in the provision of electricity. Financial 
studies of nuclear energy had clearly spoken in its favour. It was an 
independent source of energy, economically competitive, and a positive 
influence on the environment: those were the reasons why France had chosen 
nuclear energy. 
55. In its nuclear energy programme, France's objective was to improve the 
performance of its installations steadily, at reasonable cost, while 
guaranteeing an excellent safety record; for that, long-term planning with 
optimum resources management was essential. 
56. Application of the principles he had outlined permitted certain 
conclusions to be drawn. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 16 


57. As at 1 September 1987, France's nuclear power programme involved 
64 units - already installed, under construction or on order - with a total 
capacity of 64 GW(e); 50 of those units (46 233 MW(e)) were within the 
national grid, and, of those, 44 (43 785 MW(e)) used PWR reactors (10 reactors 
of 1300 MW(e)). 
58. The reactors, on average 5 years old, had achieved an availability 
coefficient of 80% during the previous 12 months, without notable incidents. 
Generation of electricity from nuclear sources in 1986 had represented 69% of 
total production, equal to 29% of France's primary energy requirements, i.e. 
56 million Toe (tonnes-oil-equivalent). 
59. Long-term plans had led to the study of new, less expensive, more 
available and flexible PWR-type reactors, while still concentrating on fast 
reactors as a necessity for the future. The transient difficulties which were 
being encountered with fast breeders were not abnormal for such a new area, 
and should not obscure the objective, which was economic competitiveness. He 
was convinced that such an objective could be attained with present 
technological capabilities, and within a reasonable time. 
60. Within the reactor programme, much attention was being given to 
research in the field of nuclear safety, much of which was carried out in 
co-operation with partners abroad, notably within a European framework. An 
excellent example was the co-operation between France and Germany which 
benefited from ten years' experience. 
61. In connection with the fuel cycle, the long-term goal of optimizing 
resource management had led France to undertake an active programme of 
research and development on laser enrichment, the results of which looked 
promising for the future. 
62. The same principles applied to France's plans for the construction of 
reprocessing plants, the advanced technology he had mentioned being considered 
the best approach to the back end of the fuel cycle. Direct storage of 
irradiated fuel did not, in France's opinion, seem to be the best solution, 
from any point of view - good management of nuclear fuel resources, waste 
disposal or non-proliferation. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 17 


63. The excellent results obtained by the reprocessing plant in La Hague 
supported and reinforced France's point of view. Furthermore, France was not 
alone in acknowledging the importance of reprocessing, since countries such as 
Japan, Great Britain and the Federal Republic of Germany had taken similar 
steps. 
64. France's waste management policy was of course linked to its decision 
in favour of reprocessing, since future generations must be able to take over 
their heritage without excessive constraints. With that aim in mind, France 
was in the process of constructing a new facility for storing low- and 
intermediate-level waste and was looking for suitable sites for the storage of 
highly radioactive wastes. 
65. Aside from considerations relating to energy matters, or economics and 
politics, which dictated the energy policy chosen by each individual country, 
France was convinced that nuclear energy was of paramount importance not only 
for France but for Europe as a whole: it afforded advantages not just in terras 
of energy independence but also in research, in overall technological 
capacity, and in industrial potential. Thus far, co-operation had been vast, 
diversified and had produced results about which everyone had had cause to be 
pleased: one need call to mind only CERN, nuclear fusion, Eurodif or 
Superphenix. Thanks to those efforts, which France intended to continue, 
European countries would have, within the international community, a vital 
role to play in those areas. 
66. During the 30 years of the Agency's life nuclear energy had spread 
across the world through the most different societies. The problems which its 
development posed were now better understood and could be tackled more and 
more effectively thanks largely to international co-operation and an increased 
exchange of information between nations. 
67. Nuclear energy had become an industrial reality of considerable 
importance, supplying the world with the equivalent of twice the amount of 
petroleum produced by Saudi Arabia and the equivalent of the USSR's coal 
production. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 18 


68. France was convinced that its confidence in the development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy would continue to be shared by many countries, 
and that the Agency, strong in its authority, would contribute to that. The 
Agency could rest assured that France would fully support its efforts in that 
direction. 
69. Ms. PEREZ FERREIRA (Argentina) said that although her country's 
current difficult economic position had led to a reduction in the pace of its 
nuclear construction operations, the postponement of new undertakings and a 
reassessment of priorities, that should in no way be seen as a drop in the 
overall priority accorded to its nuclear programme. On the contrary, 
Argentina was still striving toward a level of advance in nuclear technology 
which would make it independent in its decision-making on matters of nuclear 
power. In that connection, priority was still accorded to the production of 
the basic materials necessary for its fuel cycle and to keeping up trained 
manpower resources in that vital area. 
70. Despite the country's economic difficulties, nuclear power had 
continued to gain importance in Argentina. The country's two operational 
nuclear power plants had performed highly satisfactorily, accounting, in 1986, 
for 13% of the total electric power generated, and currently almost 20% of 
primary consumption. Basic and applied research were also proceeding well, as 
shown by the success achieved - almost simultaneously with that achieved by 
the world leaders - in the field of superconductivity at the Bariloche Nuclear 
Centre. 
71. Speaking on the occasion of the thirty-seventh anniversary of the 
establishment of his country's National Atomic Energy Commission (CNEA) the 
previous May, the Argentine President had said that the future development of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy called for realism and creativity, 
confidence in one's own strengths and objectivity in analysing the situation. 
In response to those demands, Argentina was now seeking to stimulate increased 
private sector participation in the CNEA so as to enable it to fulfil present 
and future tasks with less dependence on government funds. 
72. With regard to international co-operation, Argentina had once again 
been very active over the preceding year. Despite its economic difficulties 
it had continued, and even intensified, its work under the Agency's technical 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 19 


co-operation programme. It had once again provided a large number of 
experts - the largest from a developing country - to the Agency, while a 
significant number of Agency fellows from developing countries on all 
continents had received training in Argentina. Her country had once again 
given Agency-sponsored courses, namely, the "Interregional post-graduate 
course on radiation protection and nuclear safety", in its seventh consecutive 
year in Buenos Aires, the "Food irradiation course", related to the ARCAL 
programme, and the "Interregional course on the consequences of radiation


induced embrittlement on pressure vessel integrity", being held for the first 
time in a developing country. Finally, Argentina had put at the Agency's 
disposal the "Post-graduate course on nuclear engineering" at the University 
of Buenos Aires, for training Agency-sponsored professionals. 


73. Argentina continued to support and actively participate - mainly as a 
donor - in the ARCAL programme, which, in little over two years, had provided 
the region with eleven projects and a further two in the process of 
incorporation. The number of participating countries had risen to 13, while 
the total funds allocated to the programme had increased by 31.4% from 1985 to 
1986, thanks mainly to a considerable increase in contributions from 
Latin American countries and extra-regional donors, within its current 
budgetary limits, the Agency should give the greatest possible support to that 
successful programme. 
74. Argentina continued, within the framework of the Organization of 
American States (OAS), to give its support to the Inter-American Nuclear 
Energy Commission. In that connection, she noted that her country was for the 
seventh consecutive time providing a "Course on metallurgy and materials 
technology", as well as opening to the OAS the "Post-graduate course on 
nuclear engineering" for training professionals sponsored by that body. 
75. On the bilateral level, Argentina co-operated with friendly nations on 
all continents. It was linked to a number of them by 18 co-operation 
agreements in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the most recent 
of which had been signed with Cuba and Guatemala. Particularly satisfactory 
and mutually beneficial had been its co-operative activities with Algeria, 
Brazil, France, India, Iran, Peru and the Federal Republic of Germany. Of 
those, its co-operation with Brazil stood out as a particular example of 
reciprocal confidence and of a shared desire for a better future. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 20 


76. The Agency's safeguards system represented the best means of ensuring 
that all peoples could - as they indeed should - benefit from the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, without the necessary materials being diverted into 
nuclear weapons. She noted with satisfaction that the Agency had once again 
been able to confirm that there had been no diversion of materials under 
safeguards. 
77. At the same time the safeguards system could only remain viable and 
credible if it were allowed to retain its voluntary character, which would be 
distorted by any attempt to impose it against the sovereign will of a Member 
State. Nor could a consensus resolution in the present forum alter the 
voluntary nature of a country's decision to submit its nuclear facilities and 
materials to Agency safeguards; and to an even lesser extent could it render 
obligatory the so-called total safeguards, which did not exist in the Agency's 
Statute. Only a State's voluntary adherence to an international instrument 
establishing such an obligatory arrangement could render it legally binding. 
Argentina did not consider as valid any decision by a governing body of the 
Agency which sought to impose such an arrangement on a Member State, whatever 
the reasons invoked for so doing. 
78. Also in connection with safeguards, she pointed out that Argentina had, 
the previous week, conditioned its approval of the Agency's Annual Report 
for 1986 as a means of expressing its disagreement with the continual and 
increasing use, in the chapter relating to safeguards, of terminology whose 
proper place was in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons an 
instrument to which a number of Member States, Argentina included, were not 
party. That attitude was not intended to hinder transmission of the Report to 
the General Assembly of the United Nations, but rather to make clear her 
country's protest against an unacceptable attitude on the part of the 
Secretariat. 
79. Her delegation praised and strongly supported the Agency's work in the 
areas of nuclear safety and radiation protection, particularly as demonstrated 
in its response to the Chernobyl accident. It also supported the expanded 
nuclear safety programme, noting in particular that - as the Chernobyl 
accident had shown - human actions were capable of invalidating the purpose 
and effectiveness of safety systems. Nuclear power plants should be further 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 21 


automated through the introduction of operating programmes so designed as to 
minimize the effects of potential human operating error. At the same time, 
operators should be trained to an even higher level. She supported the 


Secretariat's proposal to conduct additional studies on the man-machine 


interface and to promote a true "safety culture" among Member States. 


80. Also in connection with nuclear safety, she recalled that it had been 
Argentina which, at the twenty-seventh regular session of the Agency's General 
Conference, had submitted the draft which, with co-sponsorship from a large 
group of Member States, mainly Latin American, had eventually become 
resolution GC(XXVIl)/RES/407, in which all Member States were urged to make 
every possible effort for the adoption of binding international rules 
prohibiting armed attacks against any nuclear installation devoted to peaceful 
purposes. Subsequently, at the twenty-ninth regular session of the General 
Conference, Argentina had actively promoted the draft which was to become 
resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/443, and which reiterated the same terms. 
81. With regard to the sharing of nuclear-safety-related information, 
Argentina, being both a recipient and supplier of nuclear technology, was 
fully in accordance with such an initiative, and gave its fullest assurance 
that it would share any available nuclear safety information relating to 
installations supplied by it, without any conditions above and beyond those 
agreed under contract. In that connection, her country firmly believed that 
all supplier States should provide similar assurances. 
82. As to the NUSS documents, the revised Codes should be generally 
acceptable to all Member States and should represent adequate safety 
standards, bearing in mind that there might be supplementary requirements in 
respect of certain Member States and that the level of adherence to the Codes 
should be both voluntary and flexible and should depend on the sovereign will 
of each Member State. 
83. With regard to the activities of the Committee on Assurances of Supply 
(CAS), she noted with regret that the predictions made by the Governor from 
Argentina before the Board of Governors the previous February had come true. 
Owing mainly to the fact that the Committee had been unable to complete its 
work in time for it to be of use to the United Nations Conference for the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 22 


Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy 
(UNCPICPUNE), that conference, however much one might try to disguise the 
fact, had ended in failure. Argentina shared the view of the Group of 7 7 that 
within CAS there was not, nor had there ever been, the political will 
necessary to reach agreement on the principles of international co-operation 
for the assurance of nuclear supplies. She reiterated her delegation's doubt 
over the usefulness of maintaining CAS if there was no will to compromise in 
the search for a reasonable balance between all the different points of view. 


84. Turning to the Agency's technical assistance activities over the 
previous year, she praised the steps taken to obtain maximum benefit from the 
limited resources available. Her delegation was, however, concerned at the 
situation whereby the utilization of extrabudgetary resources donated by 
certain Member States remained conditional upon adherence to a particular 
treaty, in open violation of the spirit of the Agency's Statute. It was 
concerned, too, at the continued validity of the Revised Guiding Principles 
and General Operating Rules to govern the provision of technical assistance by 
the Agency, which contained a number of conditions that Argentina continued to 
view as unacceptable. Modifications would hopefully be introduced in the 
future. 
85. Expressing her delegation's satisfaction at the positive results 
obtained in other programmes, notably in those related to agriculture, food 
and the biological and physical sciences, as well as at the work performed by 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, she nevertheless 
felt it necessary to sound a note of concern, since a number of those 
programmes - all promotional in nature - were still, despite their being a 
very useful form of technical assistance to developing countries, being cut 
back in real terms in the interests of maintaining near-zero real growth in 
the Agency's budget. That aim - which was shared by her delegation - should 
be pursued through the introduction of economies in the implementation of the 
safeguards programme, where clear excesses still persisted, for example, in 
the application of safeguards to materials and installations for peaceful 
purposes belonging to nuclear-weapon States and to certain non-significant 
installations in a number of Member States. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 23 


86. Mr. VISHNEVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
Agency's thirtieth anniversary had received wide publicity in the Ukraine, 
where it was recognized that the Agency played a vital role in ensuring that 
nuclear energy was used only for peaceful purposes and in furthering the cause 
of nuclear non-proliferation. The Agency should be recognized by all 
countries as the proper forum for seeking agreement on those subjects. 
87. New efforts to halt the arms race were essential to both regional and 
global stability, and in that connection the Agency's safeguards system was a 
unique achievement, as it had resulted in numerous sovereign States consenting 
to the application of international inspections to their nuclear activities. 
The goodwill which had made such a system possible could also lead to progress 
in disarmament and build up confidence that obligations assumed under 
international agreements would be fulfilled. In that regard the Ukrainian SSR 
shared the disquiet of the international community at the nuclear ambitions of 
such countries as South Africa, Israel and Pakistan, ambitions which 
threatened peace and security. 
88. The Soviet Union had proposed to the 1986 special session of the 
General Conference a programme of action for international co-operation in 
safe nuclear power development. The need for such co-operation had been 
highlighted by the accidents at Chernobyl and elsewhere, which had shown the 
danger of nuclear energy when out of control. The consequences of the 
deliberate destruction of nuclear installations would be no less dangerous, 
and therefore the Ukrainian SSR supported all measures to prevent attacks on 
nuclear targets and nuclear terrorism in any form. 
89. All countries, particularly those with a nuclear capability, and all 
international organizations and social forces with an interest in creating a 
comprehensive system of international security needed to co-operate in seeking 
the safe and peaceful use of nuclear energy and the elimination of nuclear 
weapons from our planet. The 27th Congress of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union had put forward a proposal, co-sponsored by the Socialist 
countries and supporters of the non-aligned movement, for such a system of 
international security which had met with wide approval. Recognizing that 
nuclear weapons were a great evil and a threat to mankind, the Soviet Union 
had made new proposals for the reduction and ultimate elimination of such 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 24 


weapons, for the reinforcement of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, and for a 
complete ban on nuclear weapons tests, in the hope of opening the way to a 
world free of nuclear weapons. As the General Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party, Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, had emphasized in a 
recent article, there was a need to reflect on how, in furthering the process 
of disarmament, to reach agreement on ways to maintain security with 
substantially lower levels of non-nuclear weapons. Those questions were 
addressed in the proposal for an international system of peace and security 
put jointly to the United Nations by the Soviet Union and other Socialist 
countries. Such a system would undoubtedly reinforce the authority of the 
United Nations and the Agency. 


90. The Ukrainian SSR supported all the Agency's activities, but 
particularly supported its technical assistance programme, and to that end 
would be contributing an amount equivalent to US $482 600 to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1988, in addition to its contribution to 
the Regular Budget of the Agency. While on the issue of finance, he wished to 
mention that in answer to the Agency's appeal for prompt payment of 
contributions, the Ukrainian SSR had paid its contribution for the second half 
of 1987 in October, and, beginning in 1988, contributions would be paid each 
April and October. 
91. The research institutes of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences were 
successfully continuing and expanding their co-operation with the Agency, and 
the Ukrainian SSR was taking an active part in the international exchange of 
information on nuclear science and technology and in the past decade had 
received nearly 800 experts from some 60 developing countries on training 
courses and scientific visits. 
92. The year 198 7 was seeing the tenth anniversary of nuclear power in the 
Ukraine; the four nuclear power plants operating there had during that period 
produced 232 000 million kilowatt-hours of electricity, or 16% of the total 
generated. The capacity of existing plants was to be increased further, and 
new plants built. 
93. Finally, while recognizing the role of the Director General and the 
staff of the Secretariat in ensuring that the Agency fulfilled its tasks, the 
Ukrainian SSR, as one of the earliest Members of the organization, emphasized 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 25 


the particular responsibility of the leading nuclear powers to ensure that 
nuclear energy served the interests of humanity. 


94. Mr SOWINSKI (Poland) congratulated the President on his election, 
which he considered to be an indication of Member States' recognition of 
Italy's contribution to the peaceful uses of atomic energy as well as an 
expression of esteem for the President and his achievements. 
95. He said that the thirtieth anniversary of the Agency called for due 
consideration to be extended also to events which had occurred before the 
previous year; it was true to say that the achievements of those years had 
been enormous, and that they had stemmed from Member States' awareness that, 
as the Director General had justly remarked, co-operation was a necessity and 
not a luxury. Indeed, the Agency's key achievement had been that it had 
become a trusted partner in combining the efforts of different States and of 
entire regions in jointly seeking ways to find peaceful and safe uses for 
nuclear energy. That Member States possessed such a competent, efficient and 
enterprising organization was a source of pride to all. 
96. The previous year had been an especially testing one for the Agency, 
but it had ridden out the difficulties and emerged from them with even greater 
authority. It had been a testing year also for the State bodies responsible 
for atomic energy, nuclear safety and radiation protection in the Agency's 
Member States; a wave of uncertainty about nuclear power had swept the world, 
but had mostly given rise to active measures to increase the safety of 
existing plants, those under construction and those at the planning stage. 
There could be no doubt that it was in the common interest for nuclear power 
stations to be accident-free. 
97. Poland was a country which had only recently started on the road to 
nuclear power; it had begun construction of its first nuclear power station, 
(four units of 440 MW each), at Zarnowiec, in 1982. In implementing its 
nuclear programme, Poland had been guided not only by economic, but by 
humanitarian considerations also. In fulfilment of a resolution passed by the 
Sejm in 1985, a decision had been taken during the current year as to the site 
of a second 4 GW station. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 26 


98. The law concerning the exploitation of nuclear power which had been 
passed by the Sejm the previous year, which regulated legal relationships in 
that regard, ensured that the health and property of the citizens of Poland 
were protected, as was their environment. The law made particular provision 
for an independent State body to oversee nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, and had been based on Agency guidelines. 
99. The NUSS documents defining basic nuclear reactor safety standards roust 
have an essential part in resolving to the good questions of nuclear power 
safety, particularly in countries which were only beginning to implement 
nuclear power development programmes. In that regard, he expressed his 
agreement with the Director General's assertion that an open demonstration on 
the part of the Agency's Member States of a desire to observe the 
recommendations contained in those documents would redound favourably in 
public acceptance of nuclear power, and Poland intended to act in that wise. 
100. Having resolved the question of liability for nuclear damage on its own 
soil by means of the aforementioned law, Poland considered it necessary to 
take steps to resolve the question internationally. Poland was prepared to 
accede to the Vienna Convention, but, as the Convention defined only civil law 
relationships, considered that there was a necessity to draft a convention on 
the liability of States for nuclear damage. 
101. Active steps on the part of the Agency concerning liability for nuclear 
damage could become yet another essential factor in public acceptance of 
nuclear power if coupled with such important measures as updating NUSS 
documents, increasing the activity of OSARTs and taking part in agreeing 
intervention levels. 
102. The attitude amongst broad sections of the public towards atomic 
energy, and nuclear power in particular, was, and would continue to be for a 
long time to come, emotional in nature; Poland was in no sense alone in being 
aware of the many complex reasons behind that attitude. Naturally, each 
country was dealing in its own way with matters affecting public opinon; none 
the less, Poland considered that, given the Agency's authority and experience, 
work on developing principles, methods and approaches to suitably influencing 
public opinion should be continued in that forum, and even intensified. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 27 


Despite the large volume of work that the Agency, other international 
organizations and individual countries had done over the year, many problems 
remained which were of concern to the public. Those were, firstly, the 
problem of protection in the event of sudden, unforeseen radioactive pollution 
of air, water, soils or foodstuffs; secondly, the problem of the final 
disposal of radioactive wastes; and thirdly, the problem of remote effects of 
radiation on the human body. Poland was well aware that it would be difficult 
to formulate any universal principles to solve those problems, and even 


impossible at the time of speaking; however, it considered the search for 
those principles and methods through the Agency to be useful and effective 
from the point of view of widely promoting atomic energy. 


103. He touched upon one of the aspects of the international nuclear power 
safety regime which Poland considered most important, and one which, according 
to the Statute of the Agency, deserved particular attention: Poland shared 
the opinion of the Director General that non-proliferation and disarmament 
were of paramount importance for world security and for the development and 
wide acceptance of nuclear power, and had always sought in its foreign policy 
to bring about those ends, both on the global and the regional, European, 
level. Indeed, the next few days would see the thirtieth anniversary of the 
presentation by Adam Rapacki, then Foreign Minister of Poland, of a plan to 
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Europe; that plan had been 
the precursor of designs for nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world, 
which were still the subject of discussion or which, as in the case of 
Latin America and, more recently, the South Pacific, had been implemented. 
Poland welcomed and supported the initiative in the South Pacific. 
104. The Soviet Union's initiatives towards liberating the world from the 
nuclear threat before the end of the twentieth century were of prime 
importance, and Poland could not but express its satisfaction at the recent 
achievement of agreement in principle by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of 
the Soviet Union, Mr. Shevardnadze, and the Secretary of State of the United 
States of America, Mr. Shultz, to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear 
missiles. That agreement gave hope for further and faster progress on 
disarmament. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 28 


105. The President of the Polish Council of State, Mr. Jaruzelski, had in 
May of 1987 put forward a plan to increase security in Europe by reducing 
armaments and building confidence in the centre of the continent, its most 
sensitive part and the part with the highest concentration of nuclear 
weapons. The plan provided for the withdrawal from Central Europe of jointly 
agreed forms of both nuclear and conventional weaponry with a view to reducing 
the threat of armed conflict in Europe, including the threat of surprise 
attack. Reducing the quantity of war material was closely linked in the 
latest Polish initiative to far-reaching confidence- and security-building 
measures, and also to a strict system of monitoring. It seemed that the 
experience of applying Agency safeguards might well be taken into account in 
working out such a system. 
106. The wealth and diversity of the Agency's programme both in nuclear 
safety and radiation protection and in atomic energy applications indicated 
how many problems were yet to be resolved. The United Nations Conference for 
the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy (UNCPICPUNE) had demonstrated the great interest of States in widely 
applying nuclear techniques in various areas of life and the economy, and new 
ways to apply atomic energy were still appearing, for example, in 
environmental protection; in recent years, a new trend had been the 
development in some countries of nuclear techniques to neutralize sulphur 
dioxide and nitrogen oxides in fossil fuel combustion gases. Poland could 
reveal with pleasure that, thanks to Agency assistance, a programme of that 
kind was to be developed there; Poland was prepared to put it into effect 
either on a regional or an interregional basis. 
107. After the accident at the Chernobyl reactor, Poland had decided to give 
potassium iodide as a prophylactic measure to those under sixteen years of 
age; thyroid exposures had been cut severalfold as a result. It had been 
remarked, however, that the prophylaxis might itself be severely detrimental 
to health, and it had therefore been decided that detailed data on the effects 
of potassium iodide on the body would be collected in a large-scale, 
multi-year study of children, young people and adults. Any information about 
or from the experiment would be willingly shared with the Agency, if it so 
desired. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 29 


108. Poland had noted with satisfaction that there had recently been an 
increase in the Agency's activities to promote atomic energy, symptomatic of 
which had been the search for new fields in which atomic energy and nuclear 
and radiation technology might be applied, as well as the elaboration of 
improved forms of technical co-operation and assistance; it considered worthy 
of note the Director General's proposal as to the Agency's readiness to 
provide its Member States with information and data on all aspects of the use 
of nuclear energy. Poland was interested in receiving such information and 
therefore gave its warm support to the proposal. 
109. The record level of technical assistance resource utilization in 1986 
was a good example of the Secretariat's organizational ability; however, 
complete success was largely dependent on Member States and on their 
fulfilling their obligations. Poland, despite its economic difficulties, was 
attempting - to the limit of its abilities - to meet its obligations, and was 
prepared to expand its activities to the benefit of the Agency by: holding 
courses, seminars and training courses; increasing its participation in 
regional and interregional programmes; increasing the number of fellows; and 
by passing on to develping countries its experience in organizing, and 
providing a technical base for, measurements of radiation levels in the 
environment and in various materials and products, including foodstuffs. 
Poland was willing to consider any other wishes expressed by the Secretariat 
or by developing countries. 
110. Poland considered that the existing system for financing technical 
assistance was the best possible, and indicated that it would, in accordance 
with the obligations which it had accepted, pay its voluntary contribution in 
1988 in national currency; it gave its assurance also that it would continue 
actively to participate in the Agency's valiant efforts to promote the 
manifold peaceful and safe uses of atomic energy to the good of humankind. 
111. Mr. ALER (Sweden) said that one of the crucial tasks before the 
world community was to preserve the global natural resources and to develop 
them for the benefit of all peoples. Modern technology had too often been 
utilized on an industrial scale without due regard to the consequences to 
health and environment. At the special session of the General Conference 
in 1986, the Swedish Minister for Environment and Energy had stressed that the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 


page 30 


current problem was not lack of knowledge but lack of political detennination 


to secure the introduction of new technologies already available for a more 
economical use of natural resources and for cleaning up the environment. That 
was also the main conclusion reached by the World Commission on Environment 
and Development in the Brundtland report. It was of crucial importance that 
all specialized agencies of the United Nations establish close collaboration 


in order to mobilize without delay the scientific and technical resources of 
Member States and thus secure the implementation of the programme of change 
which was inevitable for the survival of mankind. 


112. The Swedish Government had recently presented to Parliament proposals 
on Sweden's future energy policy, which in many respects reflected the views 
presented in the Brundtland report. Parliament had previously decided that 
nuclear energy, which was providing half of the electricity production in 
Sweden, would be phased out by the year 2010, and as a consequence of the 
Chernobyl accident, the Swedish Government had decided that the phasing out 
should be accelerated. In 1988 the Government would present a development 
programme for energy conservation and new energy supplies, inter alia, in 
order to reduce the use of electricity for heating purposes. It should be 
possible to close down two of Sweden's power reactors in the middle of the 
1990s. Work on waste management was proceeding according to plan. 
113. It was natural that the work of the Agency during the past year had 
been concentrated on efforts to implement the enhanced nuclear safety 
programme. The annual report and the nuclear safety review for 1986, as well 
as the report by the Board of Governors to the General Conference showed 
clearly that much remained to be done in order to reach the necessary standard 
of safety that was a prerequisite for a continued reliance on nuclear power. 
Unless radical improvements were made, the probability of a major accident 
remained higher than acceptable. Public confidence in nuclear power was not 
altered by the fact that other industries might represent larger risks. 
Public confidence could be regained only by an improved record of safe 
performance by the nuclear industry. 
114. His country noted with satisfaction that the Conventions on Early 
Notification and the Convention on Emergency Assistance had entered into 
force, but it was still essential to ensure that the highest standards of 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 31 


safety were achieved in national programmes. It was not sufficient to apply 
new fundamental principles to new installations. It should be mandatory to 
re-examine periodically all existing installations and their performance in 
the light of contemporary standards and to prescribe remedies whenever 
necessary. Sweden was applying that policy to its own programme. 


115. The resolutions passed unanimously by the General Conference at its 
special session in 1986 demonstrated that improved safety was essential for 
the future use of nuclear power. It was therefore with deep disappointment 
that Sweden noted the reluctance of many countries to give the Agency the 
resources it required for the enhanced nuclear safety programme and to make a 
radical overall reassessment of programme priorities. It was essential that 
the Agency should be able to fulfil its function to establish a common basis 
for national safety regulations. In other areas, such as improved measures 
for physical protection and agreements on liability, the primary responsibility 
for further progress rested with Member governments. 
116. The other fundamental condition for a continued utilization of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes was the effective prevention of all diversion for 
military purposes. The safeguards system of the Agency provided the necessary 
verification of national undertakings. However, the only way to establish a 
sustainable policy was to establish the principle of universal application of 
Agency safeguards to all peaceful nuclear activities in all States. The 
confidence placed in the reliability of the Agency's safeguards made it 
imperative that the Agency's resources be sufficient to meet its growing 
obligations and that safeguards inspections in the nuclear-weapon States 
should be given a high priority. 
117. An increasing share of the Agency's resources was devoted to its 
technical assistance and co-operation programme. It was particularly 
satisfying that applications of nuclear technology in the fields of research, 
medicine and agriculture as well as radiation protection were being developed 
in collaboration with other UN organizations. Sweden not only supported the 
increased target for voluntary contributions to the TACF but had also 
increased its own extrabudgetary contributions. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 


page 32 


118. The financial limitations imposed by many Member States had to be taken 
into account in the planning of future programmes. To some extent, the Agency 
could rely on increased extrabudgetary contributions, and it might also be 
possible to make further savings. However, the time might have come for a 
more fundamental reorganization in order to give the Secretariat the greater 
flexibility required to follow the rapid changes taking place in the national 
programmes. 
119. The strong wish of Member States to be able to participate more directly 
in the activities of the policy-making organs, particularly the Board, was 
reflected in the proposals for a change of Article VI of the Agency Statute. 
There should be continued consultations in order to find a more satisfactory 
distribution of seats on the Board. There might also be a need to review the 
rules governing the work of the Board and its committees in order to give all 
Member States improved possibilities to follow questions of special interest. 
120. In conclusion, fundamental changes had taken place in the global 
perspectives during the 30 years of the Agency's existence. His delegation 
was convinced that the Agency would continue to help in building confidence 
across borders and thus contribute to peace and well-being in all States. 
121. Mr. de la BARRE D'ERQUELIMES (Belgium) said that in the context 
of the Agency's thirtieth anniversary it was worth recalling that the Agency 
had devoted itself to promoting co-operation between Member States with due 
regard to the importance of safeguards, ensuring that the activities under its 
auspices were carried out for declared purposes. It was imperative to avoid 
any modification in the specific character of the Agency, as was reflected in 
its Statute, which was related to promoting the peaceful use of the atom. 
During those thirty years the Agency had demonstrated the quality of its work, 
in particular in the areas of radiation protection, safety of nuclear 
installations and nuclear applications in developing countries. That was why 
Belgium appealed to all States not to allow extraneous political considerations 
to upset the Agency's satisfactory functioning or to jeopardize its future. 
He was concerned at the tendency to link the participation of certain States 


to constraints which were not envisaged in the Statute: for example, 
non-acceptance of full-scope safeguards could not be a reason for the 


exclusion of a State. 



GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 33 


122. The Agency must maintain its unique role under the Statute in the area 
of safeguards, which it was invited to apply and were not imposed. That role 
was accepted by almost all States and should be continued without detriment to 
the principle of universality and without discrimination among Member States. 
In its relations with the Agency, Belgium had always abided strictly by the 
Statute and would do so in future. 
123. It was regrettable that a number of countries which played an important 
role in the nuclear field by producing a major part of its electricity from 
nuclear power, by supplying technical assistance, by making sacrifices in the 
form of accepting safeguards and, needless to say, by contributing to the 
Agency's budget were not, or were almost never, represented on the Board of 
Governors. The Agency's specific character required that the legitimate 
interests of those countries should be taken into account. 
124. After the founding of the Agency, Belgium, as a supplier of uranium, 
had been a member of the Board at the rate of one year out of two. In spite 
of its dominant position at present among countries most advanced in nuclear 
technology, it was too often unrepresented on the Board and its main 
committees and other bodies like the Scientific Advisory Committee. Only an 
amendment of Article VI of the Statute would enable Belgium to take its place 
on the Board more frequently and to assume responsibilities related to its 
commitment in the area of nuclear energy by sharing its rich experience most 
effectively. He therefore attached great importance to the ad hoc working 
group, which should continue its work with a view to arriving at positive 
conclusions. 
125. His country had recently had occasion to share its experience by 
actively participating in UNCPICPUNE and especially, though not exclusively, 
in the work of the committee on nuclear technology and applications. The 
statement of Belgium and that on behalf of the European Community had stressed 
the Agency's pivotal role in exchange and transfer in the area of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
126. The decision of Spain, which occupied a prominent place in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, to join NPT was very encouraging, especially as it had 
been taken after the Third NPT Review Conference. That made all the more 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 34 


deplorable the position of States possessing or building important facilities 
from the standpoint of safeguards which had not found it politically possible 
to follow Spain's example. Wherever the Agency had been invited to apply 
safeguards, it had done so efficiently and it was for States to make use of 
its services. Unless all facilities in all States were under Agency 
safeguards, one of its main objectives - contributing to peace by fostering 
confidence between States - would not be attained. 


127. As regards the important question of nuclear civil liability, he noted 
with pleasure the Board's decision to accelerate harmonization of the Paris 
and Brussels Conventions with the Vienna Convention, and in that connection, 
called upon States which had not signed one of those conventions to do so. 
128. In the area of technical co-operation Belgium had given considerable 
support to the IAEA/FAO project on the biological control of the tsetse fly in 
Nigeria, and hoped other projects would be as successful as that project. 
However, the decision to participate in technical assistance projects was a 
sovereign prerogative of States, the limited resources available being a major 
constraint in that regard. 
129. Of such projects, those relating to radioisotopes were important, and 
continuity in the production of radioisotopes in research reactors and their 
use in developing countries should engage the attention of the nuclear world. 
He recalled that the Belgian Institute of Radioisotopes was active in the 
production and marketing of those isotopes. 
130. As to research programmes relating mainly to power applications, his 
Government had taken into account two factors in imposing budgetary 
restrictions - the country's critical economic situation and the general 
stagnation in nuclear programmes. The Nuclear Energy Research Centre had had 
to curtail its programmes, to concentrate its activities and to reduce staff. 
Moreover, it had been decided to stop the operation of the BR3 power plant and 
to continue that of the BR2 material testing reactor. 
131. Referring to the nuclear power plants in Belgium, he pointed out that 
nuclear power had accounted for 6 7.2% of the total electricity generated or 
2 out of 3 kWh in 1986. The utilization rate had remained high at 77.3% in 
spite of prolonged shutdowns for ten-yearly review of four out of eight units. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 35 


132. The experience gained in the sphere of efficiency and operational 
safety of power plants and public acceptance of nuclear power in Belgium, 
where the density of nuclear plants was the highest in the world, were 
significant factors which the Agency should take into account. 
133. The foregoing information clearly indicated Belgium's willingness to 
participate even more actively in the work of the Agency and its policy-making 
organs. 
134. As to the Agency's Annual Report for 1986 contained in document 
GC(XXXI)/800, he observed that activities relating to energy, electric system 
and nuclear power planning seemed to have been pursued without considering 
that there had been no general recovery in the form of orders for new power 
plants or construction. Staggering of activities in that sector would have 
enabled the programmes on safety and spent fuel management to be implemented 
without departing from the recommended zero growth. For that purpose, 
rigorous selection criteria should continue to be applied to activities. 
135. The Agency should confine itself to the nuclear sector and should not 
be concerned with solar and wind climatology or non- radioactive pollution of 
the marine environment. 
136. While the Agency was eager to co-operate with other United Nations 
institutions and international bodies, it was not clear from the annual report 
for 1986 which organization was carrying out which activity. 
137. He welcomed the growth of promotional activities as part of technical 
co-operation. Belgium would continue to accept fellows in that area in its 
universities and research centres. 
138. As to the safety of nuclear installations, his country which had the 
highest density of nuclear power plants, was making its expertise available to 
the Agency and fully supported its activities. 
139. In the area of safeguards, he was concerned at the diversity of 
approaches applied to mixed-oxide (MOX) fuel fabrication plants. Since the 
Agency had not followed the normal channel of convening expert working groups, 
as had been done in the case of enrichment and reprocessing plants, Belgium 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 36 


did not feel itself bound by the advice of the Standing Advisory Group on 
Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) on MOX plants and, in spite of that advice, 
considered that, for it, the only reference document was INFCIRC/153. 


140. The Nuclear Research Centre at Mol was pleased to participate in the 
network of safeguards analytical laboratories. 
141. In order to improve the implementation of safeguards, his country had 
continued its support programme and participated in the third training 
programme for junior professionals from developing countries by accepting ten 
trainees at its research centre and nuclear facilities. 
142. Mr KATTAN (Saudi Arabia) said that the Agency had played a very 
important role in the 30 years since its establishment. Knowledge about 
nuclear energy had developed considerably and it was widely used in the fields 
of health, agriculture and industry. Furthermore, nuclear power plants were 
producing about 15% of the world's electricity and would probably achieve 20% 
by the year 2000. 
143. The development of nuclear energy could only be useful if properly 
controlled through improved nuclear safety and improved radiation protection. 
Safety codes should be revised by the Agency and adopted by Member States. 
The activities of the OSART teams and the Incident Reporting System were also 
very important. The accidents at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl had 
highlighted a number of important safety aspects and in particular had shown 
that it was important to guard against human error. The preparation of the 
Convention on Early Notification and the Convention on Emergency Assistance 
within the space of a few weeks was a remarkable achievement and his 
delegation was convinced that the Agency would also be able to adopt other 
conventions provided the necessary political will was present. Another 
important aspect of safety was nuclear waste management and it was essential 
to find solutions to the problems of high- and medium-level waste. Saudi 
Arabia was in the process of developing the possibility of using nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes and the Agency's assistance was very valuable in 
providing adequate training courses. The Director General's initiative in 
setting up a high-level group of experts in order to help developing countries 
to establish their own nuclear energy programmes was very welcome and it was 
to be hoped that those recommendations would be implemented in the near future. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.297 
page 3 7 


144. The threat of the repetition of an attack on a nuclear power plant in 
the Middle East by Israel was a possibility which prevented countries in the 
region from making use of nuclear energy in the same way as was done in other 
regions. The international community should do everything possible in order 
to establish legal measures covering the possibility of attacks on nuclear 
power plants, whatever their form, since an attack would have the same effect 
as the Chernobyl accident or an even worse effect. It was to be hoped that 
the Middle East would be declared a nuclear-weapon-free zone, but 
unfortunately that seemed unlikely in view of the nuclear arms that were 
present in the region. Nevertheless, the Agency should do everything possible 
to ensure that the Middle East did not become an area of nuclear conflict. 
145. Mr. MANIATOPOULOS (Commission of the European Communities), 
speaking on behalf of the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), noted 
that the Agency played a key role in facilitating the development of nuclear 
energy. The Community was particularly conscious of that role, since its 
dependence on the contribution of nuclear energy to its overall energy 
supplies continued to grow significantly each year. By 1990, nuclear power 
stations in those member States of the Community that had opted for nuclear 
power programmes should be able to provide more than 35% of electricity demand 
and meet about 15% of total energy demand in the Community. By 1995, it was 
likely that up to 40% of electricity in the Community would be generated from 
nuclear energy. 
146. The Community was celebrating its own thirtieth anniversary, since the 
treaties which had set up both the European Atomic Energy Community and the 
European Economic Community had been signed in Rome in March 1957. Under 
those two treaties, the six founder members of the Community, and subsequently 
the six other members, all twelve of which were also Members of the Agency, 
had transferred to the Community certain responsibilities previously exercised 
by government. In the nuclear field, those responsibilities included 
research, health and safety, supply and safeguards. In all those fields, 
co-operation between the Community and the Agency was very important. 
147. In the field of nuclear fission, nearly all EURATOM's research and 
development effort was focused on the safety and security of nuclear plants 
and materials and on the protection of populations and the environment against 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 38 


the possible effects of nuclear radiation. Research expenditure on nuclear 
fission and radiation protection under the Community's 1987-1991 programme in 
the overall field of research and technological development would amount to 
474 million ECU. 


148. The European Community's research programme in the field of controlled 
thermonuclear fusion continued to place the Community at the forefront of 
worldwide fusion research. Work at the Joint European Torus (JET) site in the 
United Kingdom had led to a world record value for the so-called "fusion 
product". The Next European Torus (NET), the second stage of the Tokamak 
programme, had reached the predesign stage and it was hoped that detailed 
design could begin in 1990-91. The possibility of worldwide collaboration on 
the conceptual design of such a next step (named ITER) was also being actively 
explored; there would be collaboration between the four major fusion 
programmes in the world (EC, USA, Japan, USSR) under the auspices of the 
Agency. 
149. The Community nuclear research programme covered a wide field and 
helped to improve the cost effectiveness of Member State research programmes. 
It ensured a continuity of effort by covering periods of 4-5 years and 
provided the stability for major research initiatives, thereby demonstrating 
the validity of a multinational approach. Research was carried out in one or 
more of the Community's four research establishments (in Belgium, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Italy and the Netherlands), and in Member State research 
institutions, or through co-ordination between Community and Member State 
programmes. The Community continued to affirm its readiness to co-operate 
more widely with the Agency. 
150. Discussions were in progress in the European Community on Community 
adhesion to the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and to 
the Convention on Assistance in the case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency. The Community's Council of Ministers was examining a proposed 
Community system of rapid exchange of information in cases of abnormal levels 
of radioactivity or of a nuclear accident. The Council was also discussing a 
proposal to establish a system whereby specific limits for radioactive 
contamination of foodstuffs could be speedily introduced, if necessary, in the 
event of a nuclear accident. The Community had received considerable 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 39 


assistance in that area from scientific experts of international 
organizations, particularly the Agency, and the Community looked forward to 
continuing that collaboration. 


151. The Community was the only region in the world where two international 
safeguarding authorities collaborated together on their mutual responsibilities. 
The Agreements made between the Agency, the Community and its member 
States had laid down a secure basis on which the Community and the Agency 
worked together to ensure that safeguards were applied with due effectiveness 
on all nuclear material subject to those Agreements. The Community would 
continue to strive to consolidate its joint endeavour in the safeguards field. 
152. It was a specific task of the European Community to establish relations 
with other countries and international organizations to foster progress in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The level of reliance on nuclear energy in 
certain member States of the Community necessarily brought with it not only 
levels of expertise, but a willingness to support other countries, 
particularly developing countries, keen to explore the possibilities of 
acquiring and exploiting nuclear technology. The Community was in a position 
to help and advise on all stages of preparation and development of a nuclear 
power programme. Under its various agreements with developing countries, 
substantial Community resources had been used to extend electricity 
transmission and distribution networks. The Agreement made in 19 75 between 
the Agency and the European Community could constitute a significant 
instrument to reinforce the contribution of the Community to the Agency's 
technical assistance activities. 
153. Mr. STEMPEL PARIS (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America) said that the tenth regular session of the General 
Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America (OPANAL), held in Montevideo, Uruguay, had reached important 
conclusions, some of which related closely to the co-operation between the 
IAEA and OPANAL. 


154. Resolution 217(X) extended thanks to the Agency's Director General for 
his efforts in connection with the negotiation of safeguards agreements with 
OPANAL member States and expressed the hope that a formula could be found for 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 


page 40 


safeguards agreements with countries in the Latin American and Caribbean area 


to be concluded in accordance with the Tlatelolco Treaty, between the Agency 


and the States concerned. In that connection, operative paragraph 3 of the 


resolution indicated that the Government of Argentina had announced that it 
had taken up negotiations with the Agency in 1979 aimed at concluding a 


safeguards agreement conforming to the provisions of the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
With that in mind, he had asked the OPANAL Commission of Good Offices to 
arrange a seminar or workshop to discuss the difficulties which had prevented 
certain countries in Latin America, in particular those which were not parties 
to NPT, from concluding safeguards agreements pursuant to Article 13 of the 
Tlatelolco Treaty. The Commission of Good Offices had unanimously supported 
the proposal, emphasizing that the seminar should be at the polytechnical, not 
political, level and should be attended by all States in Latin America and the 
Caribbean interested in the matter, and that the Agency's co-operation would 
be indispensable. The seminar would be held in Mexico City, and it was hoped 
that the widest possible international participation would be achieved so that 
a formula for a safeguards agreement acceptable to all could be found. 


155. Through its resolution 220(X), paragraphs 6-8, the General Conference 
had welcomed the progress of the Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the 
Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America (ARCAL), 
expressed the hope that all countries in the zone of application of the Treaty 
would participate in it, and asked him to continue consultations with the 
Agency's Director General with a view to OPANAL contributing to the ARCAL 
programme. In that connection, he requested the Director General to permit 
OPANAL representatives to participate as observers in ARCAL working sessions 
where general programmes or activities were discussed at a senior level. 
156. Operative paragraph 1 of resolution 223(X) requested the OPANAL 
Council, with the support of the competent international organizations, to 
investigate ways, including a possible additional protocol to the 
Tlatelolco Treaty, to prevent radioactive contamination by prohibiting the 
deposition of radioactive waste and other radioactive materials in the oceans 
adjacent to the continental and island areas of Latin America and the 
Caribbean within the definitive zone of application described in Article 4(2) 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty. Such an effort was necessary because little or no 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 41 


knowledge had existed at the time of the drafting of the Tlatelolco Treaty 
about certain consequences of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, such as 
those which had been seen following recent accidents in nuclear facilities and 
those due to the dumping of radioactive wastes in continental seas. 


157. Article 7 of the Treaty of Rarotonga contained very stringent 
provisions regarding the dumping of radioactive wastes in the South Pacific 
Nuclear Free Zone. Similarly, there had been attempts to amend the London 
Dumping Convention so as to prohibit the dumping not only of high-level but 
also of lower-level wastes; and in any case, there was a moratorium on the sea 
dumping of any radioactive wastes dating from 1983. Moreover, there existed a 
convention relating to the protection of the natural resources and environment 
of the South Pacific region with two additional protocols, one for the 
prevention of radioactive waste dumping in the area covered by the convention, 
the other providing for co-operation in dealing with emergencies due to 
contamination. 
158. Another task entrusted to the Secretariat of OPANAL by its General 
Conference was the drafting of an additional protocol to ensure that peaceful 
nuclear explosions were carried out in accordance with the radiation 
protection regulations and standards accepted by the international community. 
The General Secretary of OPANAL had pointed out that, both in the Agency and 
in scientific circles, it was considered impossible, in the present state of 
technology, to distinguish a peaceful nuclear explosion from one of another 
nature. Although Article 18 of the Tlatelolco Treaty granted its parties the 
right to carry out such explosions under the strict control of both OPANAL and 
the Agency, the Agency's Director General had made it clear that such 
supervision could be exerted only under the guidelines for that purpose 
published in document INFCIRC/169. It was therefore possible that the 
safeguards agreements to be negotiated under the Tlatelolco Treaty would 
recognize such a right, but would make the exercise of that right subject to 
technological advances which would allow a distinction to be made between a 
nuclear explosion for peaceful purposes and one for other purposes. 
159. Turning to other matters, he expressed the OPANAL member States' 
gratification at the announcement by Brazil that it had acquired a 
technological capability for the production of enriched uranium and that the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.297 
page 42 


Aramar Experimental Centre at Ipero, 100 km from Sao Paulo, would commence 
operations in 1988. In that connection, he welcomed the fact that the 
President of Brazil had stressed that his country had no intention of using 
its knowledge for warlike purposes and would be bound by the Tlatelolco 
Treaty; moreover, it had been Brazil which had proposed to the United Nations 
General Assembly the creation of a South Atlantic peace and co-operation 
zone. The time now seemed ripe for the zone of application outlined in the 
Tlatelolco Treaty to be fully established, and he hoped that goal would be 


reached in the shortest possible time for the sake of life and peace in the 


area. 


160. In conclusion, he congratulated the Agency, on behalf of OPANAL, on its 
thirtieth anniversary and paid tribute to the valuable contribution to the 
cause of peace and security between nations which it had made during the 
period since its foundation. He wished it similar success in its noble 
efforts for the future as well. 
The meetina rose at 1.5 p.m. 



i fl.f %. 

I 

WJ 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 

March 1988* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 


on Wednesday, 23 September 1987 at 3.30 p.m. 


President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 
later: Mr. MAIORSKY (Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics) 


Item of the 
agenda**


6


[*] A provisional 
[**] GC(XXXI)/818. 

CONTENTS 


 General debate and annual report 
for 1986 (continued)


Statements by the delegates of: 


Ghana
Israel
Brazil
Czechoslovakia
Austria
Viet Nam
Indonesia
Costa Rica
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic
Philippines
New Zealand
Morocco
Portugal
Mongolia
United Arab Emirates
Greece


 Paragraphs 
1-163 


1 -14 
15 -28 
29 -36 
37 -49 
50 -62 
63 -73 
74 -82 
83  89 
90 98 

 99 -106 
107 -117 
118 -133 
134 -140 
141 -146 
147 -152 
153 163 


version of this document was issued on 18 November 1987. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-1395 
2520e/02 75e 



GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1986 (GC(XXXI)/800) (continued) 


1. Ms. ARYEE (Ghana) expressed her gratitude to the Austrian 
Government for the excellent facilities placed at the disposal of the General 
Conference, and, on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the Agency, 
took the opportunity of congratulating the founders, the Director General and 
the staff of the Agency on their contributions to the organization's success. 
Without taking stock of the activities of the Agency over the last 30 years, 
as one would be tempted to do on such a momentous occasion, she would confine 
herself to touching on certain broad areas of the organization's work. 
2. The safeguards system applied by the Agency was a confidence-inspiring 
mechanism which had achieved a large measure of success. It was encouraging 
to note that many Member States, including the superpowers, were now willing 
to submit some or all of their nuclear installations to Agency safeguards. At 
the same time her delegation remained concerned at the continuing failure of 
some parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) to submit their facilities 
to Agency inspection in accordance with their Treaty obligations. That 
situation should be put right with the utmost urgency. 
3. As the Director General himself had said in his opening statement, 
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament were the ultimate goals to 
which all States subscribed. Although the number of signatories had 
increased, the Ghanaian delegation considered that the nuclear-weapon States 
should take positive steps to reduce their arsenals, or agree to renounce the 
use thereof, in order to encourage States which were not yet party to the 
Treaty to accede to it. 
4. In that connection she welcomed the agreement in principle between the 
United States of America and the Soviet Union to conclude a treaty which would 
ultimately eliminate medium- to long-range nuclear missiles. It was equally 
encouraging that the two countries were considering large reductions in their 
strategic nuclear armament. Like all peace-loving developing countries, Ghana 
wished to urge the two superpowers to accelerate the process of achieving a 
world free from nuclear weapons. 
5. Until 26 April 1986 most people had never heard the name Chernobyl. 
The accident had shown that radiation knew no national boundaries, and had 
emphasized the need for an effective international early warning system. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 3 


Among the numerous reactions to the events at Chernobyl there was the 
inevitable one of opposition to nuclear power. Fortunately, the consequential 
action taken under the auspices of the Agency had ensured greater confidence 
in the future of nuclear energy. Accordingly, increasing emphasis would now 
be placed on the need to ensure operational safety at nuclear facilities, and 
her delegation commended the useful work performed by the Agency's Operational 
Safety Review Teams (OSARTs), and welcomed the expansion and strengthening of 
the Agency's Incident Reporting System. 


6. The adoption, also in 1986, of two important conventions, the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, 
demonstrated the spirit of co-operation that could exist between sovereign 
States, provided that goodwill was there. That spirit of goodwill which 
States had so vividly manifested on the occasion of Chernobyl and at the 
subsequent adoption of the two conventions should be maintained in dealing 
with any other problems of a similar nature. 
7. The Agency's performance in delivering technical assistance had been 
substantially satisfactory. Larger resources had been made available for 
projects under the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF), but it 
nevertheless remained essential to establish a system of financing which was 
predictable and also ensured a steady increase in the volume of funds 
available for provision of technical assistance. Her delegation wished to 
call upon developed donor countries to recognize their essential role in that 
important area of Agency activity. 
8. She wished to take the present opportunity to reiterate her 
Government's support for the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme. Ghana, which was prepared to place its facilities at the Agency's 
disposal for regional, interregional or other training courses, was pledging 
the sum of $6000 to the TACF for 1987. 
9. Like every organization, the Agency had to evolve and adapt to changing 
situations. The question of amending Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, which had 
been the subject of discussion in the Agency's policy-making organs for a good 
decade, needed to be seriously addressed. Considering the numerical 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page A 

representation of the areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia on 
the Board of Governors, it would appear unjust to continue denying additional 
seats to those two areas. Her delegation called upon all groups to exhibit 
political goodwill in facilitating the implementation of proposals aimed at 
redressing the balance. The establishment of a link between amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 and revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole tended to 
complicate what were two clearly distinct issues. 


10. Ghana's domestic nuclear programme firmly demonstrated its commitment 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The applications of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes at present receiving special attention included agriculture 
and medicine. 
11. The Ghanaian delegation considered that, in spite of the abundant 
evidence of the nuclear capability of the racist regime in South Africa, 
little had been done to stem the tide of nuclear build-up in that country. It 
should not be necessary for her to enumerate the vari ous grounds clearly 
justifying the taking of positive action against the Pretoria regime. It had 
emerged unmistakably from the discussions in the Board of Governors in 
February and June 1987 and from the contents of document GC(XXXI)/807 that 
South Africa was not about to abandon its intransigence and adopt reasonable 
conduct or behaviour. What could one say for a regime which terrorized its 
majority black population, embarked on a systematic programme of economic and 
political destabilization of neighbouring States and consistently ignored 
resolutions by the United Nations General Assembly and the Agency? The 
attitude of the South African regime had confirmed how wise the General 
Conference had been to adopt resolution GC(XXX)/RES/468 at the thirtieth 
regular session. The time had now come for the Agency to take specific 
measures with regard to South Africa's membership of the organization. 
12. Even if South Africa was now claiming that it wished to sign NPT, that 
circumstance - contrary to what some governments might believe - did not solve 
the immediate problem facing the General Conference, which went far beyond 
mere signature of NPT. Ghana would begin to believe in the sincerity of South 
Africa when that country placed all its nuclear facilities under full-scope 
Agency safeguards, unconditionally and spontaneously. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 5 


13. Ghana was likewise most concerned at the nuclear co-operation between 
South Africa and Israel and by the development of the latter's nuclear 
capability, and likewise by the potential danger which that capability 
represented for the other countries of the Middle East, which were already 
embroiled in conflicts. It was essential for Israel to abandon the nuclear 
option, to accept the denuclearization of the Middle East and to live in peace 
with its Arab neighbours. 
14. In conclusion, she wished to express her delegation's gratitude to the 
Agency for the assistance received by way of equipment, fellowships, expert 
and scientific visits, traineeships, research contracts and so on. Ghana was 
determined to make the maximum use of the opportunities annually afforded by 
that assistance. On the threshold of the twenty-first century, Ghana trusted 
that the Agency would retain its effectiveness and that mankind would 
collaborate in the establishment of a world freed from the dangers of a 
nuclear holocaust. 
15. Mr. PELEG (Israel) recalled that on the occasion of the thirtieth 
anniversary of the Agency's establishment the Minister of Foreign Affairs of 
Israel, Mr. Shimon Peres, had addressed to the Director General a message in 
which he paid tribute to the excellent work done by the Secretariat in 
discharging its multiple functions and in trying to maintain the integrity of 
the Agency. The Israeli Foreign Minister had also expressed the wish that the 
Agency should continue to be guided by the terms of reference entrusted to it 
thirty years before. 
16. The twentieth century had been the century of oil. Nevertheless, the 
events of the preceding two decades had indicated that it was dangerous to 
rely exclusively on fossil sources of energy, which were not inexhaustible and 
which had environmental drawbacks. That had underlined the need to develop 
alternative sources of energy, and nuclear energy had played an important part 
in that respect, the efforts put forth during the past decades to promote the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy having favoured its introduction in many 
countries. However, recent years had seen a slowdown in its development - for 
economic and ecological reasons. Additional constraints had been imposed by 
nuclear accidents, and safety had emerged as a vital issue. The adoption at 
the recent session of the General Conference of two conventions intended to 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 6 


strengthen international co-operation in the field of nuclear safety could be 
regarded as a response to that situation. The Israeli Government took the 
view that those measures represented a first step on the way to restoring the 
confidence of the international community in nuclear energy: that was why it 
supported the Agency's initiatives aimed at learning the lessons from the 
nuclear accident of 1986, with a view to improving reactor safety and the 
procedures and the international co-operation required for dealing with severe 
nuclear accidents in the future. 


17. The Agency should also lead the way in the effort to incorporate the 
latest developments in artificial intelligence into the control rooms of 
nuclear facilities. The complex processes occurring in a power station during 
fast-developing transients imposed very high levels of stress on the operating 
personnel, not only during the initial stages of an accident but also during 
the longer-lasting processes of diagnosis and selection of the course of 
action to be followed in the case of a complex accident. 
18. The concepts of small and medium-sized power reactors embodying passive 
safety features, which had been proposed in recent years, should be used as 
the basis for seeking a viable short-term solution for the developing 
countries. The Agency could also play a major role in directing integrated 
efforts toward simplifying nuclear reactor designs. In addition to the 
generation of electricity it was also possible to use nuclear energy for 
desalination of water, a growing shortage of water resources being ever more 
acutely felt in numerous countries. He believed that the Agency had a role to 
play in that field also. 
19. The financial problems which the Agency was facing meant that it was 
much more difficult for it to discharge effectively its international 
obligations and its important technical functions. That being so, it was 
essential that the numerous and valuable activities which required the General 
Conference's attention should not be neglected in favour of political issues 
which could only hamper the work of the Conference and ran counter to the 
Agency's Statute. It was therefore most regrettable that, in spite of the 
present financial stringency, Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic had seen fit 
once again to put a purely political item on the agenda. It would seem that 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 7 


narrow political interests were more important than the future of the Agency, 
and those delegations which had sponsored the inclusion of item 7 on the 
agenda were inviting the Israeli delegation to take the floor on a redundant 


issue, whereas it would have preferred to intervene on other matters. He 
would therefore proceed immediately to offer his remarks on item 7 of the 
agenda, also because, owing to the celebration of the Jewish New Year on 
24 and 25 September, his delegation would be unable to participate in the 


Conference's discussions on that item. 


20. The irrelevance of item 7, and of the draft resolution which would 
undoubtedly be submitted on the subject, already emerged from the explanatory 
memoranda presented by Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, which were no more 
than a rehash of a long series of sensationalist reports and books published 
during the past three decades, and which had already been repeatedly quoted at 
the United Nations and the Agency. The arguments of Iraq also relied almost 
entirely on a series of purely political resolutions adopted by various United 
Nations bodies. None of that fell within the Agency's competence. 
21. The sponsors of the item had attempted to justify it by claiming that 
Israel's activities constituted a genuine nuclear threat, and on the strength 
of that the Iraqi delegate had launched into a political diatribe which had 
nothing whatever to do with the work of the Agency. Under those conditions, 
the Conference could find itself discussing other political issues such as the 
war between Iraq and the Islamic Republic of Iran. As far as threats were 
concerned, the real and immediate one proceeded from that war, a war which had 
cost hundreds of thousands of lives and in which chemical weapons had been 
used. In addition, the Syrian Arab Republic was engaged in building up its 
chemical warfare capability, and Iraq had boasted that it had developed a 
missile with a range of over 615 km. 
22. The Iraqi and Syrian initiatives should be rejected for several 
reasons. Firstly, the Agency was an autonomous international technical body, 
accepting instructions from its Board of Governors and General Conference and 
not from the General Assembly of the United Nations, as was clear from 
Articles II and III of the Statute and Article I, paragraph 2 of the agreement 
governing the relations between the United Nations and the Agency. To compel 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 8 


the latter to comply with the resolutions of the United Nations, as Iraq and 
the Syrian Arab Republic were attempting to do, would jeopardize the 
independent status of the Agency - whose objectives were defined by its 
Statute as being essentially functional and not political - and all the more 
so because the United Nations resolutions in question were of a very specific 
nature. 


23. Furthermore, the matter had been repeatedly discussed in the past, with 
the General Assembly of the United Nations considering it since the year 1979, 
thanks to the narrow and partisan attitude of Iraq. The Secretary-General of 
the United Nations had already published two reports on the subject, from 
which no precise conclusion could be drawn. At a press conference held in 
June 1987 the Secretary-General had stated that the United Nations had no 
proof that Israel possessed an atomic weapon (press communique SG/SMM016). 
Nevertheless, the item was still on the agenda for the forty-second session of 
the General Assembly. Neither had the statement prevented Iraq and the Syrian 
Arab Republic from wanting to make the subject a permanent feature of the 
agenda at the Agency's General Conference: if they got their way, the Agency 
would waste its time and resources instead of pursuing its important 
scientific and technical functions. 
24. The General Conference resolutions mentioned in the explanatory note by 
Iraq concerned the issue of the Iraqi reactor, and not item 7 of the agenda. 
It should be recalled that at its 1985 session the General Conference had 
decided to close the discussion on that item by adopting resolution 
GC(XXIX)/RES/443, recognizing that Israel had satisfied the requirements of 
resolution GC(XXVIII)/RES/425. In 1986, with a similar draft resolution 
before it, the General Conference had decided that it was an important issue 
requiring a decision by a two-thirds majority - whereupon the sponsors had 
withdrawn their draft. It was certainly not logical to raise the matter again 
in connection with Israel. 
25. The issue furthermore constituted unacceptable discrimination against 
Israel. Many countries throughout the world had a proven nuclear capability 
and were free to conduct their programmes without any questions being asked. 
The only pertinent issue was the declared policy of successive governments of 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 9 


Israel: firstly, Israel would not be the first country to use nuclear weapons 
in the Middle East; secondly, Israel supported the principle of nort 
proliferation and believed it necessary to establish a nuclear weapon-free 
zone in the Middle East along the lines laid down by the Tlatelolco and 
Rarotonga Treaties; thirdly, it was Israel's firm policy to have no relations 
with South Africa in the nuclear field. 


26. It should also be recalled that there was no statutory link between 
membership of the Agency and the application of safeguards. The General 
Conference could not compel Member States to submit all their nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards, since the Statute laid no such obligation 
upon them; if such an obligation existed, numerous States Members of the 
Agency should have been called upon to fulfil it. Safeguards agreements 
could be concluded only if the States concerned so wished, as provided in 
Article III.A.5 of the Statute and as the Board of Governors had recognized 
in 1976. Each Member State was sovereign in that respect and it was up to it 
to decide whether to conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
27. The present situation in the Middle East and neighbouring areas gave 
rise to concern in view of the growing dangers of proliferation involved. 
Thus, India, Pakistan and certain Arab States which were not party to NPT had 
not submitted all their nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards - and neither 
for that matter had the Syrian Arab Republic, which was nevertheless a party 
to the Treaty. As for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, also a party to NPT, it was 
the only country to have gone shopping for nuclear weapons, and Colonel Qadhafi 
had recently called upon the Arab countries to consider doing the same. It 
was scarcely reassuring to witness such defiance of the control measures 
designed by the international community in a region so unstable as the 
Middle East. Israel was in favour of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in the Middle East, on the basis of arrangements freely modelled on the 
provisions of the Tlatelolco Treaty, as was attested by its consistent 
statements, its voting record and its own initiatives in that direction. 
Unfortunately, all its proposals had been rejected by various Arab states, 
most significantly by the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 10 


28. The Iraqi and Syrian initiatives were thus clearly an attempt to turn 
the Agency into an instrument of political warfare against Israel, whereas the 
decisions taken by the General Conference at its two preceding sessions left 
no doubt that a great many Member States desired that political issues should 
not be discussed. The General Conference should therefore decide not to 
re-open a useless and potentially damaging debate and instead to stay within 
the framework of the Statute. The Agency should be allowed to concentrate on 
the purely technical obligations and responsibilities which it was statutorily 
called upon to undertake. It faced problems of substance and urgency and it 
was in the interests of all Member States that the Agency should be in a 
position to carry out its work under the best possible conditions. Efforts 
should be made to ensure that at future sessions of the Agency's policy-making 
organs no extraneous issues were introduced. That was why the General 
Conference had a duty to reject the Iraqi and Syrian exercises. 
29. Mr. ALVES (Brazil) said that his Government appreciated the work 
done by the Agency during its thirty years of existence. Regarding the 
activities in the field of nuclear safety which it had undertaken during the 
past twelve months, special mention should be made of the excellent results 
obtained in a short time with the evaluation of the Chernobyl accident, and 
the measures taken thereafter to strengthen international co-operation in that 
domain. That effort should of course be continued, but in a balanced manner 
taking into consideration other equally important areas of the Agency's work, 
such as technical co-operation and safeguards. In that connection his 
delegation urged the need for a balanced budget and expected that the 
supplementary activities in the nuclear safety sphere undertaken during the 
past year would be reconsidered after they had reached their objectives. 
30. Turning to safeguards, he had pleasure in confirming the agreement 
between the Brazilian Government and the Agency to hold a regional training 
course on national nuclear materials accounting and control systems at which, 
for the first time, the safeguards document INFCIRC/66/Rev.2 would receive 
proper attention. The Brazilian Safeguards Laboratory was performing useful 
work by training experts from Brazil and neighbouring countries in methods and 
techniques for measurement and control of nuclear materials, in co-operation 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 11 


with institutions in the United States of America and the Federal Republic of 
Germany. The work of the Laboratory was being progressively co-ordinated with 
the Agency's system for nuclear materials measurements. 


31. Brazil wished to thank the Agency's Secretariat for the high-quality 
technical assistance which had been provided and for the high rate of 
implementation of the projects assigned to Brazil. In particular, the 
Brazilian Amazon Project (BRA/0/010) had just benefited from a substantial 
grant pledged by the Swedish Government. He was also grateful for the 
fellowships offered by the Agency to Brazilian experts. Regarding the 
Agency's training programme, he wished to reaffirm Brazil's intention to 
continue accepting trainees from any part of the world. Brazil's contribution 
to the TACF for 1986 had been paid in full and the contribution for 1987 would 
be made available punctually. In spite of budgetary and financial constraints, 
his Government's voluntary contribution for 1988 would be 5% higher than that 
for 1987. 
32. On the subject of the Brazilian nuclear programme, he recalled that he 
had, the previous year, stated his country's commitment to develop nuclear 
energy in the public interest, and that he had at that time also referred to 
his Government's decision to continue co-operation with the Federal Republic 
of Germany, particularly in the financial sphere, while taking account of the 
readjusted schedule for implementation of the programme in accordance with 
the present economic constraints. A five-year investment programme now being 
proposed included the allocation of resources for completion of the Angra 2 
and Angra 3 power plants. With regard to bilateral co-operation with 
Argentina, which covered a wide range of projects, he was pleased to report 
that that had been strengthened thanks to the joint declarations signed by 
Presidents Raul Alfonsin and Jose Sarney in December 1986 in Brasilia and in 
June 1987 in Viedma, reaffirming the strong commitment of both countries to 
the promotion of all peaceful applications of nuclear energy and to close 
co-operation for that purpose. It was in that framework that a working group 
on nuclear policy, composed of members of the two governments and their 
respective national nuclear energy commissions, had been meeting approximately 
every four months, either in Brazil or in Argentina. After 
President Jose Sarney had been invited to visit the nuclear facilities at 



GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 12 


Pilcaniyeu in Argentina, the working group on nuclear policy had met at 
Bariloche for the purpose of seeking areas in which the nuclear programmes of 
the two countries could further complement each other. 


33. It had always been the policy of the Brazilian Government to pursue 
nuclear development on the one hand by means of international co-operation and 
transfer of technology and on the other hand through the development of local, 
autonomous technology. Experience was showing that those two approaches 
yielded good results. In that connection the President of Brazil had just 
announced a most important technological breakthrough in the nuclear fuel 
cycle: Brazilian scientists and technicians had, without any assistance from 
abroad, mastered the technology of uranium enrichment by centrifuging. That 
remarkable achievement had been secured through technical and scientific 
co-operation among Brazilian universities and research institutes, and with 
the indispensable support of Brazilian private industry. The short-term goal 
of the new enrichment installations was to produce uranium enriched up to 20%, 
so as to ensure the continuous and efficient operation of research reactors, 
as well as to increase national production of radioisotopes and radiation 
sources, in order to meet the growing national demand. 
34. In his speech on 4 September, President Jose Sarney had emphasized the 
determination of Brazil to have free access to all forms of scientific 
knowledge in strict accordance with the overall priorities established. His 
Government insisted on the right of all countries to unrestricted access to 
that knowledge, without which the world would be divided into groups of 
suppliers and of importers of high technology. The President had also 
recalled the peaceful purposes of the Brazilian nuclear programme and had 
restated the long-standing policy of Brazil to promote all the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy for the benefit of society. Those commitments, which had led 
to Brazil's active participation in the establishment and in the work of the 
Agency, would certainly be respected by all, just as his Government respected 
the internal concerns of all countries and their commitment to the peaceful 
uses of the atom. 
35. Brazil had consistently defended non-discriminatory policies aiming at 
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, and he recalled that Brazil had 
been one of the group of 18 nations given a mandate to draft an international 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 13 


treaty to that end. The negotiations held at that time had led, in 1965, to 
the approval by the United Nations General Assembly of a resolution containing 
a set of principles to which Brazil fully subscribed, for they respected the 
sovereign equality of States. According to the resolution to which he had 
referred, the treaty to be proposed should not permit any country to promote 
the dissemination of nuclear weapons, whether that country were a nuclear 
Power or not. That set of principles had been incorporated in the Tlatelolco 
Treaty, which had been signed, ratified and strictly applied by Brazil in 
elaborating its national nuclear policy. In the United Nations and in other 
fora Brazil had always supported measures aiming at complete disarmament on a 
non-discriminatory basis. At the last session of the United Nations General 
Assembly his Government had also taken the initiative in submitting a draft 
resolution, co-sponsored by many delegations and approved by a large majority 
of countries, the purpose of which was to establish a South Atlantic Zone of 
Peace and Co-operation, free from nuclear weapons. 


36. Finally, Brazil continued to lend full support to the Agency's 
safeguards system. Safeguards constituted an effective means for the 
prevention and control of nuclear proliferation whenever they resulted from 
sovereign negotiations and were applied in strict accordance with the Statute 
of the Agency, namely on a non-discriminatory basis and binding on all 
countries. 
Mr. Maiorsky (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) took the chair. 


37. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia) said that the Agency, whose thirtieth 
anniversary had been commemorated in Czechoslovakia on 29 July, had under 
frequently difficult conditions achieved a performance which gave grounds for 
contemplating its future with optimism and confidence. The experience of the 
past thirty years showed that the development of nuclear energy, whether for 
power generation or not, was closely connected with effective international 
co-operation conducted in an atmosphere of confidence and mutual understanding 
between States and of respect for the principle of non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
38. His Government was gratified to note progress in, for example, the 
Soviet-United States negotiations on elimination of medium-range and tactical 
missiles from Europe, showing that there was no real obstacle in the way of a 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 


page 14 


constructive dialogue which would contribute to the reinforcement of security 


in Europe and throughout the world and which would make it possible to speed 
up all aspects of the disarmament process. That improvement had been 
confirmed by the conclusions of the recent meeting of the Soviet and United 
States Ministers for Foreign Affairs, which had represented a definite 
contribution to solving the problems of security in Central Europe - a matter 
of vital importance for Czechoslovakia. Every country could and should play 
an active part in carrying out the essential task of mankind, which was the 
prevention of war, whether nuclear or non-nuclear. 


39. Czechoslovakia and the German Democratic Republic had jointly put 
forward the idea of creating a denuclearized corridor 150 km wide in Central 
Europe. Czechoslovakia was a strong advocate of respect for existing 
denuclearized zones and the establishment of new ones in northern and southern 
Europe, and also in South-East Asia or the Korean peninsula. 
40. Turning to a review of the Agency's activities during the past 
thirty years, he wished to place particular emphasis on the results obtained 
by the Agency the preceding year, a year which had been extremely difficult 
and certainly exceptional. Czechoslovakia, which was thoroughly aware of that 
situation, was most satisfied with the Agency's achievements as described in 
the annual report and commented on by the Director General in his statement. 
41. He wished to congratulate the Agency's Secretariat and the Director 
General on their extremely positive attitude to implementation of the USSR's 
programme for introduction of an international regime governing the safe 
development of nuclear power, and of other measures aimed at strengthening 
international co-operation in the area of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, adopted at the special session of the General Conference held the 
previous year. Czechoslovakia was one of the States Members of the Agency 
which had begun to apply the Conventions on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident and on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency. Those two conventions, concluded under Agency auspices, were 
convincing evidence of the interest which the international community and 
States had in joint action to promote the safe development of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 15 


42. In that field Czechoslovakia was actively applying other measures to 
bring about an overall solution of the problems of international safety in the 
nuclear sphere, in particular the implementation of the programme of OSART 
missions. The results obtained highlighted the value of the services offered 
by the Agency under that programme, and the interest which Member States 
manifested in those missions. Czechoslovakia was therefore prepared to 
collaborate in that work not only by making its experts available for OSART 
missions but also by admitting missions to its own nuclear power plants. 
Czechoslovakia was likewise ready to participate actively in a wide exchange 
of information under the various technical programmes of the Agency. In that 
connection he wished to inform the General Conference that his Government 
would be offering to host in Czechoslovakia an Agency symposium on quality 
assurance in nuclear power plant operation, to be held in 1989. 
43. The Czechoslovak delegation was keenly interested in improving the 
Agency's safeguards system, which could play a significant role in 
strengthening international confidence, in the context of scientific, 
technical and commercial co-operation on nuclear matters. His Government 
believed that the irreplaceable international control system represented by 
safeguards should in future be based on rational and technically viable 
principles, avoiding unnecessary bureaucracy and theoretical speculations 
without relevance to real situations. It was in that spirit that 
Czechoslovakia was prepared to lend its aid and support to the Agency's 
safeguards activities, with particular emphasis on projects which contributed 
to improving the effectiveness of the safeguards system by simplifying the 
administrative formalities at inspections, so as to enable inspectors to 
devote more time to verification of nuclear materials. At its own nuclear 
power plants Czechoslovakia was preparing special technical devices and 
methods for the non-destructive control of nuclear materials, which it was 
going to offer to the Agency for the purpose of carrying out rapid and 
effective independent tests. His Government would like the Agency's 
Secretariat to consider organizing working seminars, which would enable 
experts from various countries regularly to exchange their experiences of 
inspection operations, to consider jointly how to make better use of the 
inspection facilities available to them, to examine the features of nuclear 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 16 


installations themselves for purposes of safeguards, and to study ways and 
means of reducing the volume of administrative procedures associated with 


inspections. 


44. He believed that safeguards obligations undertaken in the context of 
the nuclear non-proliferation regime were essential preconditions for the 
further development of genuinely peaceful nuclear exports and multilateral 
co-operation. In that connection Czechoslovakia was concerned at certain 
nuclear activities, particularly at various "hot spots" around the world, 
which were contributing to the horizontal and vertical proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. In particular his Government firmly condemned the defiant 
attitude of the racist regime in South Africa and its odious policy of 
apartheid, and urged that country to submit its nuclear programme to Agency 
safeguards, as it had been called upon to do for several years past by the 
resolutions of the Agency's General Conference and of the General Assembly of 
the United Nations. The dangerous development of South Africa's nuclear 
capability represented a flagrant contradiction of the basic objectives of the 
Agency's activities, particularly as regards the strengthening of the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime. 
45. At the last General Conference and at the recent United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE), he had had the opportunity to set forth 
in detail Czechoslovakia's plans involving the use of nuclear energy for 
implementation of a long-term programme of national socio-economic development. 
Those ambitious plans were well under way. With the commissioning of two new 
units of the Dukovany power plant the previous year, the share of nuclear 
energy in electricity generation in Czechoslovakia had considerably increased 
and now exceeded 26%. Czechoslovak experience of operation of nuclear power 
plants showed that nuclear energy was an exceptionally stable, reliable and 
safe source of power which would benefit the national economy and, thanks to 
the interconnection of power grids, would benefit certain neighbouring 
countries also. The safety and the reliability of Czechoslovak atomic power 
stations had even been recognized at international level, as attested, for 
example, by the periodical negotiations between Czechoslovak and Austrian 
representatives on the implementation, since 1982, of the agreement governing 
questions of mutual interest in connection with nuclear facilities. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 17 


46. Apart from the above-mentioned positive features, additional measures 
had been taken in Czechoslovakia, as in other countries, after the accident at 
Chernobyl in order more closely to supervise conformity with the nuclear 
safety provisions ensuing from the overall legislation, from the operating 
instructions and from the decisions of the Czechoslovak regulatory body. 
Particular attention had been paid to the work of operating staff, to stricter 
control of production and assembly processes, and to regular checks during the 
entire operational life of nuclear power stations. In view of the increased 
workload on the inspectors permanently assigned to nuclear power stations, the 
scope of the activities of the Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Commission's corps 
of inspectors had been considerably widened. 
47. In Czechoslovakia, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were not limited 
to the generation of nuclear power but comprised the development, production 
and application of isotopes and radiations in medicine, the food industry and 
agriculture. Production and utilization of radioimmunoassay kits was 
increasing by an average of 50% per year, in particular for the detection of 
infant hypothyroidism at national level and for other endocrinological, 
gynaecological and oncological examinations carried out using more than 
40 radioimmunoassay kits designed and manufactured in Czechoslovakia. With 
those kits it had also been possible to evolve a veterinary care system known 
as "Diskot", and to evaluate the quality of animal feeds and other agricultural 
products. In 1986 more than 260 herds, comprising 150 000 dairy cattle, had 
been thus checked. Those examples showed that Czechoslovakia was one of the 
countries for which nuclear energy as applied to the generation of electricity 
and to other peaceful purposes constituted an essential element of economic 
and social progress on the national and international levels. 
48. He indicated that his delegation supported the draft budget for 1988, 
which accorded with the Agency's objectives, and also the target of 
$38 million recommended for voluntary contributions to the TACF. In that 
connection he wished to inform the General Conference that his Government had 
decided to pay to the Fund in 1988 a sum corresponding to Czechoslovakia's 
assessed contribution to the Regular Budget. As in previous years, 
Czechoslovakia would continue to offer short- and long-term fellowships to 
specialists from the developing countries, to enable them to undertake 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 18 


advanced studies at higher educational establishments and research centres in 
Czechoslovakia. The specific results already obtained had confirmed the 
importance of seeking ways and means of rendering the various forms of 
technical assistance more effective. The system of financing technical 
assistance based on voluntary contributions," which left countries free to 
choose the level of their contribution and the currency in which it would be 
paid, remained a viable one and did not hamper the development of the Agency's 
activities in that field. 


49. Referring to the exceptional nature of the recent period and the 
difficulties which had marked it, he wished to congratulate the Agency's 
representatives and above all the Director General and the Chairman of the 
Board of Governors on their energetic and positive contribution to solving a 
number of complex problems which the Agency had been and still was facing. He 
also wished to thank the rest of the Agency's Secretariat, which had worked to 
strengthen and develop international co-operation in the peaceful and safe 
uses of atomic energy. 
50. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that the present session of the 
General Conference, which coincided with a major Agency anniversary, furnished 
an opportunity to review thirty years of competence and achievement in a 
sensitive field of international relations. Representing the organization's 
host country, his delegation wished to assure the Agency of Austria's 
continuing collaboration and its unvarying support with regard both to issues 
of substance and to the Headquarters arrangements. The present session 
likewise afforded the first opportunity to discuss and assess the development 
of the Agency's activities in the light of the views expressed and the 
decisions reached under the immediate impact of the Chernobyl accident and, in 
particular, during the special session of the General Conference. 
51. The main issue in that context was of course the future role of nuclear 
power in the world energy supply, and the Director General had devoted a large 
part of his introductory statement to that matter. He had expressly referred 
to Austria as a country which had decided not to opt for nuclear power, in 
contrast to other countries for which nuclear power was an increasingly 
important source of energy. The world population growth anticipated over the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 19 


next few decades would lead to an enormous increase in energy generation. 
Given the dangers of global warming, acidification and atmospheric pollution 
associated with fossil fuels and the limitations on renewable energy sources, 
the conclusion was drawn that recourse to nuclear power would be necessary. 
If that were so, the rejection of nuclear power by a particular country might 
be valid at its own national level, in view of that country's hydropower 
potential and ability to import energy, but would not be valid beyond that 


level. 


52. In that context, Austria considered that the issue of nuclear safety 
was less a reflection of fears which existed in the public mind than a genuine 
concern based on experience and reasoning. A continuing rise in the number of 
nuclear power plants operating on a global scale would increase the 
possibility of further accidents accompanied by large scale radioactive 
releases. Such accidents might be due to equipment failure, in spite of ever 
more stringent safety standards, to factors lying in the sphere of operator 
responsibility, or to external causes such as damage by armed attack. Since 
such a scenario would present numerous hazards over the next few decades, the 
essential issue was to find alternative solutions and to convert those 
numerous people who still believed that such alternatives did not exist. 
53. Everyone knew of the enormous material and intellectual efforts which 
had gone into the initial stages of nuclear energy development for military 
purposes, laying also the foundations for the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. A significant effort was at present still being made to continue the 
development of nuclear technology. Austria believed that it would be possible 
to find energy sources other than fossil fuels and power produced by nuclear 
fission, provided that a commensurate amount of material and intellectual 
effort were devoted to the task. His Government believed that it was quite 
natural for a Member State to review the objectives of the Agency in the light 
of historical events and of changes in values and priorities, without its 
loyalty to the organization and its active involvement in its work being 
impaired. The Austrian Government was therefore convinced that its views on 
nuclear power were not incompatible either with its estimate of the important 
role played by the Agency in present and future international relations or 
with its involvement in the Agency's activities. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 20 


54. In the world of today, in which nuclear power was a fact, the Agency 
was playing such an important role in the field of nuclear safety, 
non-proliferation and safeguards that its optimal functioning should be an 
overriding concern for all Member States. Austria welcomed the continuing 
expansion of the Agency's safeguards responsibilities. As the Director 
General had pointed out, the objective of safeguards in the form of an 
enhancement of confidence would only be achieved if the safeguards system were 
administered in a credible manner. If the Agency were not enabled to conduct 
its own research and development programme on novel safeguards techniques, it 
would have difficulty in adapting its safeguards provisions to new 
developments in nuclear power technology. Austria continued to believe firmly 
that the universal acceptance of NPT should lead to a maximum extension of the 
Agency's safeguards system. He had already emphasized that nuclear safety 
was, for Austria, the most crucial problem presented by nuclear power. His 
Government therefore unreservedly supported the Agency's work in the sphere of 
nuclear safety, such as the NUSS, OSART and INSAG programmes. 
55. With regard to the expanded nuclear safety programme at present being 
implemented, he acknowledged the need to accord greater priority to the 
nuclear safety issue, as had been recognized by the Agency's policy-making 
organs, although other delegations had been right in urging that more ambitious 
goals should be set for that programme by Member States. The traditional view 
that it was each State's sovereign responsibility to promulgate its own safety 
standards for nuclear power installations appeared to need reconsideration. 
The Austrian delegation supported the two Conventions on Early Notification 
and on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident, although they did not 
deal with the central question of nuclear safety, i.e. the prevention of 
nuclear accidents and of any other form of accidental release of ionizing 
radiation. Austria believed that the adoption of internationally binding 
nuclear safety standards, whose observance should be compulsorily supervised 
by the Agency in all countries having nuclear facilities, should be the 
central item of any expanded nuclear safety programme. 
56. It would also be important to prepare an international convention on 
State liability for damage caused by accidents at nuclear power installations. 
The adoption of clear-cut rules on international liability in that field and 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 21 


also of the generally accepted principle of State State compensation would 
certainly encourage governments to promote nuclear safety at national level. 
Such State liability should cover not only damage to health and property 
following direct exposure to accidentally released nuclear radiation but also 
damage resulting from measures required to protect the population from 
dangerous consequences such as contaminated foodstuffs. 


57. His delegation had noted with satisfaction that the method recommended 
by the Agency for defining the relevant intervention levels had been generally 
accepted and that WHO and FAO were now working for similarly acceptable levels 
within the framework of the Codex Alimentarius Commission. He likewise saw no 
objection to the conduct of preparatory work for an international liability 
convention to cover from the outset the question of compensation for damage 
resulting from the type of measure which most European countries had been 
forced to adopt after the Chernobyl accident. 
58. However, because of the opposition to the concept of such a convention, 
the Secretariat proposal to discuss the subject initially and tentatively at 
expert level within the framework of the Agency had not been adopted. His 
Government was puzzled by that opposition, and appealed to Member States to 
reconsider their position. The philosophy which at present prevailed in that 
field, as embodied in the Paris/Brussels and Vienna Conventions, i.e. the 
civil law approach limited to individual claims to damage directly resulting 
from accidental releases of radioactivity, reflected the realities of the 
interests in play, but was applicable only to States with comparable legal 
systems. 
59. Austria welcomed the establishment of a joint IAEA/NEA working group on 
the subject of harmonizing the Paris/Brussels and the Vienna Conventions and 
would take an active part in its deliberations. On the other hand, Austria 
was convinced of the need to establish immediately, without any period of 
waiting, an Agency working group on State liability in that context. In the 
light of what had been experienced the preceding year by a majority of 
European countries, there seemed to be no doubt about the need to settle the 
issue of State liability for nuclear facilities and, in particular, for 
large-scale transboundary releases of radioactivity from them. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 22 


60. Recognizing the true importance of nuclear safety in international 
relations, Member States should do more to meet the concerns of other 
countries in their region, in particular neighbouring States, with regard to 
the transboundary implications of nuclear power. The conclusion of bilateral 
agreements between neighbouring States in order to institutionalize 
consultation and information mechanisms could play a major role in that 
context. Austria had concluded such an agreement with Czechoslovakia, the 
application of which was giving satisfaction to both sides. In a few weeks' 
time a similar agreement would come into force between Austria and Hungary. 
That type of agreement, which was the result of speedy negotiations conducted 
in a spirit of confidence and understanding, was particularly significant 
because it extended its consultation and information arrangements to nuclear 
facilities throughout the territory of the two parties, and showed that actual 
experiences with the transboundary effects of a nuclear accident had rendered 
obsolete the previous concept of neighbourhood arrangements applying only to a 
very limited border area. 
61. Finally, with regard to the Agency's activities in the sphere of 
technical assistance and co-operation programmes dealing with sectors other 
than energy generation, the Director General had rightly stated that most 
developing Member States benefited chiefly from the programmes in non-power 
areas, such as the use of radiation and isotope techniques in agriculture, 
medicine, biology, industry and hydrology. Given the position which it had 
adopted regarding nuclear power, Austria naturally attached particular 
importance to the Agency's programmes in the areas of nuclear co-operation not 
concerned with power generation, areas which provided great benefit to both 
industrialized and developing countries. 
62. In that context he wished to recall that in addition to its annual 
contribution to the Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, 
Austria had in November 1986 promised to contribute the sum of US $750 000 in 
order to finance the extension of the training facilities at the Seibersdorf 
Laboratory, subject to the balance of the total cost of $2 million being 
provided from other sources, particularly by other donors. Since it appeared 
that the overall financing of that project was on the way to being assured, 
its implementation should begin shortly. In providing additional financing 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 23 


for Agency activities in the non-power areas of nuclear co-operation, Austria 
was demonstrating its support for that important aspect of the Agency's 
activities. 


63. Mr. LE BA CAP (Viet Nam) said that during its thirty years of 
existence the Agency had achieved substantial successes, particularly in the 
fields of international co-operation and assistance to the developing 
countries in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Vietnamese 
Government greatly appreciated the positive role played by the Agency, and 
welcomed the fact that since Viet Nam had become a Member of the Agency, 
ten years previously, its relations with the organization had progressed 
satisfactorily. The technical assistance projects had improved the material 
and technical conditions necessary for the development of nuclear science and 
technology, and the Agency's training programmes had raised the levels of 
skill of Vietnamese scientific and technical staff. 
64. With the assistance of the Soviet Union and of the Agency, the Triga 
Mark II reactor, which had been out of action for several years past, had been 
restarted in 1984 with an increased power of 500 kW. The reactor in question 
was used for the training of scientific and technical staff, for radioisotope 
production and for the activation analysis of geological, biological and 
environmental samples. The Agency had lent its scientific co-operation to 
expanding nuclear medicine facilities with the use of scanners and radioimmunoassay 
methods for the diagnosis and treatment of disorders of the 
thyroid, kidney and liver, among others. 
65. In agriculture, Viet Nam had carried out research work on the radiostimulation 
of the growth of maize and soya, and also on the improvement of 
certain cereal varieties by radio-induced mutagenesis using a 16 kCi research 
irradiator supplied by the Agency. Studies had been conducted on the use of 
radioisotopes in stockbreeding, in land improvement and in prospecting for 
underground water. Viet Nam considered that the technique of irradiation 
preservation of foodstuffs was of great interest for the purpose of reducing 
post-harvest losses. A multi-purpose 220 kCi cobalt-60 irradiation facility 
was in the course of construction under an Agency technical assistance project. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 24 


66. Turning to industrial applications, he said that, in addition to a nondestructive 
analysis technique being developed, Viet Nam was preparing to 
apply the radiotracer method, nucleonic control systems, radiation 
sterilization, and radiation treatment of materials. Preliminary results on 
radiosterilization of medical supplies and instruments had been obtained, and 
research was under way with a view to setting up a commercial-scale 
sterilization centre. 
67. Accompanying the non-power-generation applications of nuclear energy, 
Viet Nam had undertaken comparative studies on various energy sources with a 
view to demonstrating the need to introduce nuclear power, and had embarked on 
preparatory work for long-term energy planning, the drafting of regulations 
governing radiation protection and nuclear safety, and site selection for 
nuclear power plants. 
68. Viet Nam had undertaken to contribute to the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation activities. It had complied with the formalities 
necessary for accession to the Conventions on Early Notification and on 
Emergency Assistance drafted during the special session of the General 
Conference in 1986. Viet Nam, which was party to the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science 
and Technology, had taken the important decision to accede to NPT and had 
signed in 1981 a safeguards agreement relating to the Dalat 500 kW research 
reactor. 
69. Viet Nam intended to use atomic energy exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. It strongly supported any international effort aimed at 
progressively eliminating the threat of a nuclear war, particularly any action 
ensuring the safety of non-nuclear-weapon States. That was why it supported 
the important peace initiatives of the Soviet Union, the New Delhi message for 
a world without nuclear weapons, and the declaration of the Eighth Conference 
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries relating to nuclear 
disarmament. It likewise supported the initiatives to establish a 
denuclearized zone in South-East Asia and a zone of peace, co-operation and 
development in Asia and the Pacific. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 25 


70. At the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, held at Geneva in 
March-April 1987, the Vietnamese delegation had affirmed its support for the 
principles of equality, mutual respect, independence and sovereignty in the 
development and peaceful use of atomic energy. It was clear that the primary 
objective of the Agency was to assist the developing countries in implementing 
their peaceful nuclear programmes. Although those countries, which made up 
two thirds of mankind, possessed considerable national resources, a 
hard-working labour force, powerful intellects and brilliant civilizations, 
their economic backwardness prevented them from using the progress of 
technology, particularly nuclear technology, for developing their industry, 
agriculture and medicine, and for raising the standards of living of their 
populations and ensuring their energy supplies. 
71. Like other developing countries, Viet Nam would be facing numerous 
difficulties in promoting nuclear science and technology, but it hoped to 
succeed in that sphere with the assistance of the Agency and thanks to 
bilateral and multilateral co-operation agreements, and thus effectively to 
contribute to its national social and economic development. Viet Nam also 
desired to strengthen friendship, co-operation and mutual understanding 
between nations. In that connection it attached great importance to the 
Regional Co-operation Agreement for Asia and the Pacific, in which it intended 
actively to participate in order to dissipate the hesitations which still 
persisted in that connection. 
72. The peoples of the world desired peace, national independence and the 
expansion of their economies. The struggle against the warmongering and 
reactionary forces of the present age had the essential aim of preserving 
peace and international security, reinforcing friendship and co-operation 
between peoples, encouraging dialogue and detente, and favouring peaceful 
co-existence between countries with differing social systems. The foreign 
policy of Viet Nam was a policy of peace, friendship and co-operation. It was 
more important than ever to pursue the dialogue, to create a framework for 
peaceful co-existence in South East Asia, and to put an end to all aggression, 
intervention and external threats in the region in order to establish a zone 
of peace and stability. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 26 


73. Anxious to make its modest contribution to strengthening the Agency, 
Viet Nam trusted that the thirty-first regular session of the General 
Conference would yield fruitful results. 
74. Ms. SUDIRDJO (Indonesia) noted that in the present year the 
General Conference provided an opportunity to commemorate the thirtieth 
anniversary of the International Atomic Energy Agency, to reflect on the 
performance of the organization during the past three decades and to 
anticipate the further long-term contributions that it might make to the 
international community in accordance with its Statute. 
75. "The Agency shall seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world." That 
sentence, so often quoted during the last thirty years, reflected an ideal 
whose concrete manifestations were also - and justifiably - frequently 
mentioned, because they served as a reminder of the value of the Agency for 
the entire international community. As one of the most effective and 
efficiently managed organizations of the United Nations system, the Agency 
served as a model for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
76. Indonesia had joined the Agency at the outset in 1957, but even before 
that, in 1956, it had been involved in the activities leading to the 
establishment of the organization. In 1958, Indonesia had also had the 
privilege of providing the President for the General Conference, and likewise 
in that year it had first received technical assistance from the Agency. By 
affording that assistance to numerous countries, the Agency had greatly 
contributed to the development of nuclear technology in the fields of 
agriculture, biology, health, industrial applications, prospecting, mining and 
processing of radioactive materials, energy planning, and particularly in 
nuclear power surveys and studies. 
77. It should be noted that the number of technical assistance projects had 
continued to increase steadily, thanks to the dedication of the present 
Director General and his predecessors, and of the members of the Secretariat. 
While technical co-operation between developed and developing countries 
continued to be necessary, regional co-operation should also be promoted. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 27 


Indonesia had always attached great importance to the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA), which in June 1987 had been extended 
for the third time. 


78. Since the establishment of Indonesia's National Atomic Agency almost 
thirty years previously, six nuclear research centres had been set up in the 
country. The sixth, at Serpong near Jakarta, had been inaugurated in August 
of the present year. The commissioning tests of the principal facility at 
that centre, a 30-MW multi-purpose research reactor, would be completed by the 
end of the year. The reactor used low-enriched uranium fuel, which would be 
supplied by a fuel fabrication plant that had likewise become operational. 
Construction of the centre had been possible thanks to the assistance and 
co-operation of a number of friendly countries, and Indonesia was ready to 
share the facilities with other Member States. The Indonesian authorities had 
remained in close contact with the Agency at all stages of the establishment 
of the centre, and would continue to maintain that close contact in order to 
achieve optimum utilization of the facilities. In that connection it was her 
Government's intention to remain faithful to the spirit of the Final 
Declaration of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to NPT, held 
in 1985, which had reaffirmed the need further to promote international 
co-operation with a view to facilitating the fullest possible exchange of 
equipment, materials and scientific and technological information connected 
with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


79. In recent years, several energy studies had been carried out in 
Indonesia. In 1986, figures from previous nuclear power studies had been 
updated, and the economic justification for a nuclear power programme had been 
discussed. The conclusions had indicated an equivalence in coal and nuclear 
generating costs, but owing to the country's limited renewable energy sources 
and the prospect of increasing coal prices during the 1990s, it would seem 
that the establishment of the initial infrastructure for a future nuclear 
power programme would be fully justified for Indonesia. 
80. As was indicated in the annual report for 1986, one of the significant 
achievements in the Agency's programme was undoubtedly the setting up of a 
senior expert group on the promotion of nuclear power in developing countries, 
whose report had recently been published. The Indonesian delegation wished to 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 28 


congratulate the Secretariat on having completed the study in a relatively 
short time. It welcomed the recommendation by the exert group to promote 
closer co-operation with finance institutes, and urged the Secretariat to plan 
the implementation of the experts' proposals according to agreed priorities. 
The concern regarding the safety of nuclear power plants, initiated by the 
events at Three Mile Island in 1979, had become a crucial issue for everyone 
as a result of the accident at Chernobyl in 1986. In spite of those sobering 
events, there was no doubt that under normal operating conditions nuclear 
power generation was still to be considered a significant source of energy, 
acceptable both economically and environmentally. During the days following 
the Chernobyl tragedy, it quickly became evident that the Agency was the 
accepted and respected instance for initiating international assessment and 
action. The nuclear world had then proved itself to be united, in spite of 


its political differences. 


81. The annual report for 1986 had also comprehensively covered the 
Agency's activities on nuclear safety and radiation protection, which, in the 
wake of the Chernobyl accident, was wise and appropriate. Praise had also to 
be accorded to the Agency for having been able, with the assistance of Member 
States, rapidly to initiate remedial action, so as to limit the negative 
impact which the accident might have had on public opinion. The convening of 
the special session of the General Conference, followed by various special 
meetings on nuclear safety and radiation protection, appeared to have restored 
confidence in nuclear power. 
82. Now also appeared to be the time to reflect on future activities 
related to safety. It was obvious that emphasis needed to be placed on the 
prevention of accidents - an activity to which the Agency had been devoting 
attention for many years past. However, in view of the financial difficulties 
which weighed on the entire world, it would seem appropriate that the Agency 
should endeavour to draft a more balanced budget for the coming years, giving 
particular attention to higher priority activities. 
83. Mr. CONSTENLA (Costa Rica) said that the thirty-first regular 
session of the General Conference coincided with the thirtieth anniversary of 
the Agency and with an enhancement of the latter's activities in the peaceful 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 29 


and safe uses of radioisotopes and nuclear energy, a situation which the 
Costa Rican delegation welcomed. 


84. Thirty years had also passed since the establishment of the first 
National Nuclear Energy Commission in Costa Rica. Thanks to the Agency's 
support, nuclear activities benefiting the Costa Rican people had been 
intensified and diversified. That trend had had an indirect impact on the 
other countries of Central America, with which Costa Rica wished to share its 
know-how in the application of nuclear techniques. 
85. Costa Rica thus supported the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission 
(IANEC), which aimed at co-ordinating efforts to solve regional problems using 
nuclear techniques. Costa Rica was also participating in the ARCAL programme, 
which promoted nuclear development in areas of joint interest for the 
participating Latin American countries. 
86. In 1986, Costa Rica's national programme for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy had been strengthened, as attested by the substantial number of 
projects implemented in the areas of agriculture and stockbreeding, hydrology, 
radiation protection, applied nuclear physics, nuclear medicine and nuclear 
information. 
87. As a participant in the ARCAL programme, Costa Rica had organized the 
second joint FA0/1AEA meeting of the regional network for improving the 
reproductive management of meat- and milk-producing livestock in Latin America. 
88. The Costa Rican delegation approved the Agency's report for 1986, 
supported the organization's programme of work and paid tribute to the efforts 
of its staff. At the same time it trusted that the Agency would not waste its 
time and resources and would not jeopardize its prestige by taking up problems 
of a political nature which lay within the competence of the General Assembly 
and the Security Council of the United Nations. 
89. Costa Rica was a proponent of the universal character of the Agency and 
considered that the exclusion or discriminatory treatment of one of its 
Member States would have a negative impact on all. It trusted that, aware of 
the importance of its role, the Agency would remain unaffected by political 
influences foreign to its objectives. 

GC(XXXi)/OR.298 
page 30 


90. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that, 
at a meeting held at Minsk to mark the thirtieth anniversary of the Agency, 
the participants had noted that the organization had secured good results in 
the implementation of its statutory functions. Ever since its establishment 
the Agency had been playing an essential part in international co-operation 
for the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and was effectively collaborating in 
the promotion of international security by performing its control functions 
under the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The Agency had become a generally 
recognized centre for international co-operation and a significant scientific 
and political authority in the field of nuclear science and technology. The 
success of the special session of the General Conference had, once again, 
shown that the international community had available a reliable and effective 
mechanism for co-ordinating activities concerning the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. The special session had highlighted the general proposition that it 
was essential, at the present stage of development of nuclear energy, to 
expand and strengthen international co-operation in all areas of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, particularly that of nuclear and radiological safety. 
91. The Byelorussian SSR, like all the other socialist countries, was in 
favour of enhancing the authority and role of the Agency in solving the 
fundamental problems facing mankind. 
92. His delegation noted with satisfaction that the Agency activities to 
which it attached the greatest importance, namely the programmes on nuclear 
and radiological safety, safeguards, nuclear power, technical co-operation and 
the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) had been well planned and 
executed. Active support should be lent to the expanded nuclear safety and 
radiation protection programme designed to strengthen international 
co-operation in improving nuclear power safety. That programme covered the 
most topical aspects of the matter, ranging from the development of advanced 
systems and technologies to decommissioning of nuclear facilities. An 
international system for the overall monitoring of radiological safety could 
achieve a similar objective by using telecommunications satellites. 
93. It was likewise logical and necessary to organize, under Agency 
auspices, international co-operation to develop new-generation power reactors, 
whose safety would be enhanced thanks to experience and present knowledge, as 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 31 


had been proposed at the 1986 sessions of the General Conference. An 


international convention against nuclear terrorism in all its forms could make 


an important contribution to the safety of nuclear power. His delegation 


fully supported the move rapidly to draft and effectively to implement such a 


convention. 


94. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Agency's 
activities to supervise its application were of extreme importance for world 
security. During the last thirty years the Agency had evolved a sophisticated 
control system which guaranteed reliable and adequate inspection and 
information. Implementation of the safeguards programme had been improved by 
more complete automation and the use of computers at all stages of inspections 
and information analysis and treatment. However, his Government shared the 
concern expressed by the Director General regarding the lack of funds for 
further developing that extremely important aspect of the Agency's work. It 
was likewise essential to apply safeguards in connection with the supply of 
technical assistance in various forms, something which would in no way detract 
from the effectiveness of such assistance. International co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy had to be accompanied by effective Agency 
control. 
95. The Byelorussian SSR was gratified that the draft budget for 1988 had 
been prepared on the basis of a minimum increase in expenditure, thanks to the 
efforts of the Secretariat and of the Board of Governors, which had 
endeavoured to submit a balanced budget and to apply various economy measures. 
The priorities assigned to the Agency's programmes were on the whole correct 
and reflected the effort made to enhance productivity and efficiency. The 
Agency's financial difficulties, due to unprecedented indebtedness and to 
delays in the payment of their contributions by certain advanced countries, 
nevertheless remained a source of extreme anxiety. 
96. A substantial and ever-growing proportion of the Agency's budget was 
earmarked for expenditure under the technical assistance programme. Each 
year, the target laid down for voluntary contributions to the TACF increased 
by 12%, and the volume of the resources derived from the Regular Budget had 
also increased. His Government desired that growth to continue. The total of 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 32 


voluntary contributions to the TACF for 1988 was $38 million, constituting a 
clear success for the Agency. The present system of indicative planning 
figures had proved its worth, and ensured reliable and predictable financing 
for what was a vital Agency programme. The Byelorussian SSR regularly and in 
full paid its contribution to the B'und, the sum for 1988 amounting to the 
equivalent of $129 200 in national currency. 


97. Turning to the items of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, 
and of the revision of Article VI as a whole, the Byelorussian SSR believed 
that it would be unreasonable at the present time to change the composition of 
the Board of Governors, which could point to a long period of effective work. 
However, he did not deny the value of consultations and additional discussions 
on the matter, in order to submit in due time proposals for improving the 
composition of the Board. 
98. The Byelorussian SSR consistently supported all the Agency's activities 
and was participating in its most important programmes. Its own long-term 
programme for peaceful utilization of nuclear energy and the achievements it 
already had to its credit enabled it to take an active part in international 
co-operation in that field. There was no doubt that the responsibilities of 
the Agency would increase as science and technology developed and their 
practical applications became more widely spread. The achievements of the 
Agency during the past thirty years gave grounds for hoping that it would in 
future contribute worthily to the cause of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, and to the establishment of confidence and 
security on the planet Earth. 
99. Mr. LAVINA (Philippines) recalled that the thirty-first session of 
the General Conference was coinciding with the thirtieth anniversary of the 
Agency's establishment. During that short time the Agency had displayed 
intense activity in the fields of nuclear safety, safeguards, 
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The achievements 
of the Agency in those fields redounded to the benefit of mankind. On the 
present momentous occasion the Philippines trusted, as did many other 
countries, that the General Conference would take important decisions. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 33 


100. At the present time, 15% of the world's electricity was of nuclear 
origin. It was expected that that figure would rise and that nuclear power 
would represent for a considerable number of countries a reliable source of 
energy for their economic and social development. Although the Philippine 
Government had stopped the operation of its nuclear power plant, it did not 
deny the benefits of nuclear power, provided that safety conditions were 
respected. In that connection the Philippines hoped that the Agency would 
continue to secure the highest level of safety for all nuclear activities, and 
to further international co-operation in the nuclear safety field. 
101. The Agency had with remarkable speed succeeded in re-establishing 
confidence in nuclear safety, which had been shaken following the accident at 
Chernobyl, by the adoption of the Convention on Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency. Although those two conventions possessed 
considerable importance, certain circumstances were at present making it 
difficult for the Philippines to accede to them. The Philippine Government 
was nevertheless studying the conventions and their implications for its own 
policies, and hoped to be able to take a decision as soon as the present 
difficulties had been overcome. The main drawback of the texts was that they 
did not take account of the basic legal principle that "he who pollutes pays". 
102. The Philippines also attached great importance to the other peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. The increasing number of licensed users of 
radioactive materials was an indication of the extent of utilization of 
nuclear energy. Industry had wide recourse to the application of nuclear 
techniques. Research and development work was at present under way, with 
Agency assistance, in the spheres of food and agriculture, public health, the 
environment, industry and services related to the uses of atomic energy and to 
radiation protection. 
103. On the matter of the technical assistance supplied by the Agency, the 
Philippines trusted that the two-year programming cycle scheduled to start in 
1989 would make it possible to improve the delivery of technical assistance 
and the quality of projects. His delegation welcomed the fact that the system 
of evaluating technical assistance requests placed emphasis on programmes 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 34 


rather than on projects, and that the resources allotted by the Agency in 
recent years to programmes in non-power areas had increased. His delegation 
trusted that that trend would continue. The Philippines had benefited 
substantially not only from the Agency's technical assistance but also from 


its membership of the Regional Co-operation Agreement (RCA), and it was 


involved in nine projects under that heading. His country was also the centre 
of excellence for regional training in nucleonic control systems for the 
mineral industry. His Government also welcomed the transfer of the 
co-ordinating body for the RCA from the Agency's Department of Research and 


Isotopes to the Department of Technical Co-operation. That should improve 


co-ordination between RCA projects and the Agency's co-operation activities in 


the area of Asia and the Pacific. In addition, as a signatory of the RCA, the 
Philippines was supporting the Agency's role in promoting goodwill and 


co-operation among Member States within the same geographic areas. 


104. Regarding the proposed increase in the Regular Budget, the Philippines 
delegation called for an improvement in the procedure associated with its 
adoption. Countries which were not members of the Board of Governors should 
be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the Board, particularly on matters 
of contributions and assessments. Yet those States, the majority of which 
were developing countries, did not participate in discussions which were of 
concern to them, and their contribution to the budget was imposed upon them 
without their representation or consent. The Philippine delegation believed 
that even what appeared to be a limited increase in the Regular Budget would 
increase the burden upon numerous developing countries, particularly those 
with external debt problems. 
105. Turning to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, his delegation 
wished to reaffirm its support for the principle of universality in the 
membership of the Agency. That principle should find its expression in an 
equitable representation of Member States on the Board of Governors. 
106. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the General Conference would 
be able to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear safety and the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and that Member States would show more 
flexibility and political will in seeking solutions to the problems on the 
Agency's agenda, taking into account the overriding interests of international 
peace and security and the safety of mankind. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 35 


107. Mr. FORTUNE (New Zealand) wished first to read a message from the 
New Zealand Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Disarmament and Arms 
Control, Mr. Russell Marshall, who warmly congratulated the Agency on the 
occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of its establishment. According to the 
Minister, New Zealand - as a founder Member of the Agency - was most satisfied 
with the strength and vitality of the organization, which now boasted a 
membership of more than one hundred nations. New Zealand would continue to 
support the work done by the Agency that contributed to the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. The safeguards responsibilities of the Agency were 
onerous, but they were of crucial importance to the future of the world. 
108. The Minister had added that the confidence which New Zealand placed in 
the Agency had yet again been justified by the concerted measures, taken under 
the Agency's auspices, to improve international co-operation in nuclear safety 
in the wake of the serious accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant 
in 1986. Promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was important, but 
it should be pursued under the most stringent of safety conditions. Finally, 
the Minister had stated that New Zealand looked forward to a long-lived and 
mutually satisfying relationship with the IAEA as the Agency proceeded into 
its fourth decade. 
109. During its thirty-year history, the Agency had grown in stature and 
expanded its capacity to furnish technical progress and assistance, and to 
contribute to disarmament and arms control, to the development of economic 
resources, to nuclear research and development, to environmental planning and 
to nuclear safety awareness. The Agency provided an important link in a 
network of multilateral institutions through which the international community 
could take up the challenges flung at it by the build-up and escalation of 
armaments world wide. 
110. At the time of the Agency's foundation, there had been three nuclearweapon 
States. Now there were five. The number of States estimated to have 
either the capability of, or an interest in, acquiring nuclear weapons was 
rather larger. In 1987, even more acutely than in 1957, the importance was 
being realized of the verification system operated by the Agency to prevent 
the diversion of nuclear material by non-nuclear-weapon States for use in 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 36 


nuclear explosive devices. The system was already invaluable, but it could be 
extended. New Zealand continued to support the application of full-scope 
safeguards to all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle, and to all aspects of 
trade in nuclear materials and technology. It hoped that every nuclear 
supplier, whether an advanced or a developing country, would recognize the 
application of full-scope Agency safeguards as a condition for the delivery of 
equipment or technology. World security deserved no less. The New Zealand 
delegation welcomed the fact that, at the end of 1986, 164 safeguards 
agreements were in force in 96 States. 


111. On the other hand it was a matter for concern that by the end of the 
same year 46 States party to NPT had not complied with their obligations 
thereunder to conclude safeguards agreements with the Agency. The fact 
remained that for all States parties, including States only marginally 
involved in nuclear activities, the implementation of Agency safeguards would 
represent a clear commitment to the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
Similarly, adhesion to NPT itself by all countries would add immeasurably to 
world security and stability. That would also help to remove some of the 
present suspicions surrounding the nuclear programmes of the minority of 
countries remaining outside the NPT non-proliferation framework. Confidence 
in the non-proliferation regime and in the safeguards system was enhanced by 
the voluntary offers of the nuclear-weapon States to submit some or all of 
their peaceful nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. New Zealand had 
welcomed the decision of China to place some of its peaceful nuclear 
installations under Agency safeguards. 
112. The global non-proliferation system was sustained not only at technical 
level by the work of the Agency. It was strengthened at the regional and 
local levels by the decision to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones where 
circumstances permitted. Both the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (Tlatelolco Treaty) and its recently created 
counterpart, the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Rarotonga), 
constituted regional efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and to 
preserve the non-nuclear status quo of the areas concerned. In each case, 
Agency safeguards were an important element in the verification mechanisms. 
New Zealand welcomed the recent decision of the Board of Governors to note the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 37 


role and functions of the Agency under the Treaty of Rarotonga. While efforts 
to strengthen nuclear non-proliferation contributed to general global 
security, they did not in themselves reduce the latent threat to international 
stability posed by the armaments race, particularly in its nuclear dimension. 


113. New Zealand therefore applauded and supported the efforts of the United 
States and the Soviet Union to achieve real and verifiable reductions in 
nuclear weapons. It also welcomed the recent agreement in principle between 
the United States and the Soviet Union to conclude a treaty which would 
eliminate intermediate-range nuclear missiles globally. His Government 
trusted that the initiative which had led to the first ever negotiated 
reduction in nuclear arms would have a positive effect on the talks covering 
other classes of weapons, in particular, strategic and space weapons. The 
conclusion of an agreement on intermediate-range nuclear forces would indicate 
that the major powers had accepted the principle that security could indeed be 
maintained at lower levels of armament. That was perhaps the most important 
and most promising result which had been achieved, the origin of which went 
back to the Reykjavik Summit between President Reagan and General Secretary 
Gorbachev. The joint announcement by the United States and the Soviet Union 
that they would commence stage-by-stage negotiations to limit nuclear testing 
also represented a positive move and a political commitment in the sphere of 
arms control, from which New Zealand expected great results. Although the 
ultimate goal, a complete ban on nuclear testing, still appeared a long way 
off, that final state nevertheless remained the aim. Ways should also be 
sought of including peaceful nuclear explosions within such a prohibition, and 
of bringing other nuclear-weapon States within the negotiating framework. 
114. A great deal of present nuclear technological expertise and much of the 
available nuclear materials and equipment were being channelled into the 
production of increasingly more sophisticated and more deadly nuclear 
weapons. It was both urgent and vital better to co-ordinate international 
efforts to harness nuclear energy exclusively to peaceful applications under 
stringent and verifiable controls. New Zealand believed that that had been 
amply demonstrated by the recent United Nations Conference for the Promotion 
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. His 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 38 


Government considered that the Agency should continue to play a part in 
promoting a judicious and carefully considered application of nuclear science 
and technology for peaceful purposes. 


115. Public consciousness of the benefits of the civil uses of nuclear 
energy had been overshadowed by the accident at Chernobyl, which had resulted 
in a significant release of radioactive materials. New Zealand commended the 
speed with which measures were taken under the auspices of the Agency at 
inter-governmental level to improve international co-operation on nuclear 
safety, and his Government had been particularly encouraged by the prompt 
conclusion and opening for signature by the Agency of two nuclear safety 
conventions. His Government, which had acceded to the conventions, was 
gratified that both instruments had now come into force. It also looked 
forward to the outcome of the Agency's revision of its nuclear safety 
standards, in particular the review of the five Codes of Practice. 
116. The environmental hazards caused by significant radioactive releases 
and the accompanying need to develop the appropriate preventive measures were 
matters of public concern, as was also the disposal of dangerous nuclear 
wastes. The international standards set for the storage of low-activity 
wastes should be supplemented by more work on the safe disposal of highactivity 
wastes. Regional efforts to contribute to the safe management of 
nuclear wastes should also be intensified. During the previous year, a 
convention for the protection of the natural resources and environment of the 
South Pacific region, together with protocols on dumping and pollution, had 
been concluded and opened for signature. Its provisions on the dumping of 
nuclear waste complemented those on the disposal of radioactive wastes at sea 
set out in the Treaty of Rarotonga. 
117. At the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International 
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, the New Zealand 
delegation had stated that "the peaceful use of the atom will benefit no one 
in a world laid waste by the military use of nuclear energy. Nor can its 
potential be properly realized in a world that permanently faces that 
threat". At its thirty-first session, the General Conference still had that 
challenge before it. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 39 


118. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) said that he wished to take the occasion of 
the Agency's thirtieth anniversary to congratulate it on the serious manner in 
which it had discharged the tasks entrusted to it, and on the major 
contribution which it had made to the development and strengthening of 
international co-operation in the nuclear field, in spite of various 
difficulties and numerous political and financial crises. Morocco was proud 
to belong to an organization which held a prime place within the United 
Nations system. 
119. It emerged from the annual report for 1986 that total installed nuclear 
power had increased by 9%, reaching about 270 GW(e) at the end of 1986, and 
that in Europe, America and Asia 23 new nuclear power plants had been built. 
Although the developing countries had not registered significant progress in 
that field, the Agency had continued its work to assist countries to install 
their own nuclear infrastructures, particularly by furnishing them assistance 
in the fields of planning and implementation of programmes, training, expert 
services and the publication of reports, communiques and other important 
documents. 
120. The serious accident at Chernobyl had had an important impact on the 
design and operation of nuclear power stations on the one hand, and on the 
work of the Agency on the other, particularly that dealing with nuclear safety 
and radiation protection. Although the accident had provoked reservations in 
numerous political circles and had weighed heavily on public opinion in many 
countries, it had not led to the cancellation of nuclear programmes or to the 
shutdown of operating power plants. On the contrary, national authorities 
remained confident, and instead of rejecting nuclear power they had taken 
action to strengthen methods of prevention, surveillance and intervention in 
order to bring about improvements in that sector. 
121. In the sphere of international co-operation, the Chernobyl accident had 
led to the drafting of two conventions on early notification and on assistance 
in the case of a nuclear accident, which had been very favourably received 
throughout the world. In addition, the Agency had taken action to strengthen 
its existing structures, particularly as regards nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, and to create new mechanisms aimed at preventing the potential 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 40 


hazards of radioactive fallout. Several meetings and symposia on nuclear 
safety had been organized under the Agency's auspices, an expanded programme 
to strengthen international co-operation in that field had been prepared and a 
series of important documents had been issued on the subject. 


122. The discussions on international co-operation concerning nuclear safety 
and radiation protection had revealed some constructive ideas, including that 
of co-operation between neighbouring countries, which had given rise to a 
lively debate. Although Morocco considered that that type of co-operation 
should be confined to a strictly bilateral or regional context, it thought 
that the Agency might lay down guiding principles defining the procedures for 
negotiations aimed at concluding bilateral or regional agreements on that 
subject. The Agency might also collect and disseminate information on 
existing bilateral and regional arrangements, and assist Member States in 
creating further similar ones. Morocco was situated near to a number of 
States advanced in the nuclear field, with which it maintained close economic 
ties. It was therefore much interested in the principle of co-operation 
between neighbouring countries and believed that the Agency could assist 
Member States to apply that principle and evolve effective measures, at both 
bilateral and regional level, in the areas of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. 
123. Terrorist action and attacks against peaceful nuclear installations 
could have much more serious consequences than was generally thought. That 
was why, at its regular session in 1983, the General Conference had 
recommended, in resolution GC(XXVTI)/RE'S/407, the adoption of mandatory 
international rules prohibiting attacks against nuclear installations. 
However, that recommendation had remained a dead letter and the lacuna in that 
area remained unfilled. It was therefore up to the Member States, which were 
all opposed to terrorist attacks and actions against nuclear installations, to 
prepare rules with mandatory force in that field, in order to prevent the 
occurrence of dangerous situations of that kind instead of waiting for them to 
happen. The Agency had an important role to play in that department. 
124. Apart from its numerous other activities, the Agency was implementing, 
in the field of technical co-operation and assistance, measures which made an 
essential contribution to promoting, strengthening and controlling the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 41 


peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that connection, he noted with 
satisfaction that the volume of technical assistance supplied by the Agency 
had increased significantly, since in 1986 the programme of assistance 
included 854 ongoing projects in such areas as agriculture, nuclear safety, 
reactor technology, industry, hydrology and nuclear physics. The total sums 
earmarked during that period had increased by $35 million. The Moroccan 
delegation was gratified that evaluations now formed an integral part of 
technical co-operation activities, whose effectiveness they helped to 


increase. Although the Agency had made an effort as regards training and the 
grant of fellowships, the amount of training provided fell far short of the 
requirements of the developing countries, particularly by comparison with the 
other components of technical co-operation such as the supply of material, 
expert services and so on. 


125. The senior expert group on the promotion of nuclear power in developing 
countries had issued a report and put forward significant recommendations. 
The Moroccan delegation gave its full support to the proposal to associate the 
World Bank and other international and regional financial institutions with 
the task of creating in the developing countries nuclear infrastructures 
capable of making a positive contribution to the economic and social 
development of those countries. Similarly, his delegation reaffirmed its 
support for the principles of regional co-operation and exchanges of 
information, which in its view represented an effective means of expanding the 
infrastructures of the developing countries. 
126. At a period of industrial restructuring, and of world economic 
recession, nuclear power had an important role to play in reducing energy 
costs in the advanced countries. But the situation was not the same in the 
developing countries, particularly in non-oil-producing countries, for which 
energy costs always represented a heavy charge. That was why some of those 
countries had considered opting for nuclear power in order gradually to free 
themselves from their energy dependence. However, the launching of a nuclear 
programme called for patience and thorough regional and international 
co-operation, which the Agency could very well co-ordinate. That option also 
had economic, financial and other implications which called for an important 
contribution on the part of international financial institutions in such 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 42 


sensitive areas as economic and social development. In that regard Morocco 
was particularly interested in the Agency's studies on the introduction of new 
planning procedures, and above all on the problems of financing which 
represented the main obstacles to the implementation of nuclear electric power 
projects in the developing countries. 


127. Turning to technical co-operation, he said that his delegation 
particularly welcomed the fruitful and constructive co-operation between the 
national authorities in Morocco and the Agency Departments dealing with 
technical assistance and co-operation, which were helping Morocco to implement 
its nuclear programmes. Furthermore, he greeted the Agency's action to 
organize training sessions and regional courses in the developing countries, 
and wished in that connection to mention a regional course on nuclear power 
planning in the developing countries which had been held in Morocco in 
February 1987. The visit which the Director General of the Agency had paid to 
Morocco on that occasion had had positive effects on the Moroccan nuclear 
programme. He announced that his Government would also be prepared to host a 
regional course on radiation protection organized by the Agency for States in 
that region. 
128. Morocco had first embarked on the nuclear era by applying nuclear 
techniques initially to the economic and social realms, and then to 
agriculture, particularly agronomic research and animal production. It had 
available adequate scientific and technical infrastructures and likewise 
substantial human resources, and was preparing to set up, with Agency 
assistance, a regional training and research laboratory specializing in radioimmunological 
techniques applied to animal production, which might serve as a 
scientific training centre for the African countries. In addition, it used a 
number of other nuclear techniques in the important fields of health, 
education and so on. Convinced of the essential role of scientific and 
technical structures in the implementation of nuclear programmes, Morocco had 
set up a National Nuclear Energy, Science and Technology Centre, which would 
soon be equipped with research reactors. 
129. Referring to the Agency's activities in the safeguards area, he was 
pleased to note that, during 1986, there had been no diversion of nuclear 
materials and that the safeguarded material had continued to be devoted to 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 43 


peaceful nuclear activities. Morocco hoped that the Agency's safeguards 
system, which it strongly supported, would be extended to the whole world. 
However, his Government noted with regret that Israel persisted in its errors 
and continued to defy the international community and ignore all the 
resolutions of the United Nations and of the Agency's General Conference, 
particularly those envisaging the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones 


in the Middle East and in South Africa, and condemning Israel for its refusal 
to renounce the acquisition of nuclear weapons. Israel was further persisting 


in its refusal to apply resolution 486 (1981) of the United Nations Security 
Council, calling upon it to place its nuclear facilities under the Agency's 


safeguards system. The racist regime in Pretoria also continued to flout the 


resolutions of the United Nations and of the Agency's General Conference. The 


communique published by the South African Government, of which the Moroccan 
delegation had been informed, was no more than a mere declaration of intention 


and did nothing to change the position of the South African Government, which 


continued systematically to violate the United Nations Charter and the 
Agency's Statute. 


130. Turning to agreements and treaties, he recalled that during the past 
year two important conventions, namely the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material and the Convention on Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident, had come into force. It was to be hoped that the same would 
soon apply to the other agreements and treaties. The work of the Agency's 
Civil Liability Committee, in which Morocco had participated, had led to the 
convening of a group of governmental experts from States Members of the Agency 
and of the NEA, with a mandate to examine the relationships between the Vienna 
and Paris Conventions on civil liability. 
131. Morocco, long conscious of the damage liable to be caused by nuclear 
accidents, had requested the Agency to assist it in drafting legislation 
governing its nuclear activities as a whole. It had acceded to the convention 
on those matters, as indeed it had to all treaties and agreements drafted 
under the aegis of the Agency, and had taken all the necessary constitutional 
steps to ratify the documents in question, which it regarded as constituting a 
consolidated body of legislation for use in facilitating all aspects of the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 44 


problem of nuclear power. Morocco thus hoped that the legal framework 
regulating the greatest possible number of those aspects would continue to 
expand. 


132. On the subject of Morocco's financial obligations towards the Agency, 
he recalled that his Government had paid its contribution to the Agency's 
budget for 1986, and was at present taking the appropriate administrative 
action to discharge its obligations for the current year. Furthermore, the 
competent Moroccan authorities were preparing shortly to transfer their 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 
1987-88. 
133. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the work of the present 
session would lead to a strengthening of international co-operation in the 
area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and would also buttress the role 
of the Agency. 
134. Mr. BARBOSA FERREIRA (Portugal) said that it was with the greatest 
interest that his Government was following the expansion of the Agency's 
safety and radiation protection programme, which was playing an extremely 
important role, as attested by the two conventions adopted at the special 
session of the General Conference. 
135. Like all other countries, Portugal was alarmed at that disquieting 
aspect of atomic energy, and considered that the conventions should represent 
the first phase of a process of improvement aiming at more clearly defining 
the intervention level - which should include all significant nuclear 
accidents - and at enhancing international co-operation as far as possible, 
particularly between neighbouring States. In that connection Portugal 
attached particular significance to the ideas expressed in Attachment 1, 
paragraph 2 of the document prepared by the Secretariat at the request of the 
Board of Governors (GOV/INF/512), dealing with consultation arrangements, for 
existing and planned nuclear activities, with regard to nuclear safety, 
radiological protection, physical security and environmental acceptability. 
He hoped that the Agency would continue its efforts to convert those ideas 
into guiding principles governing inter-State relations. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 45 


136. The hazard constituted by nuclear activities was a reason why States, 
even if they had not or not yet opted for nuclear power, should be interested 
in more active participation in the work of the Agency's policy-making organs, 
in order to contribute more dynamic support to the sound decisions which were 
taken there. Hence, Portugal had co-sponsored the Italian proposal for 
revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole. His Government thought it 
appropriate to supplement the two criteria of technical expertise and 
geographical distribution with a third not less important criterion, namely 
the potential hazards for countries situated close to large concentrations of 
nuclear facilities. Mention should also be made of the importance of the 
OSART missions and the first ASSET mission in 1986. 
137. Turning to safeguards, he said that Portugal, as a country in favour of 
nuclear non-proliferation and a signatory of NPT, must necessarily support the 
Agency's efforts towards increasing the number of States party to that 
treaty. He considered that an important achievement was constituted by the 
fact that in 1986, as in previous years, the Agency had detected no anomaly 
which would indicate the diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded 
nuclear material - or the misuse of facilities, equipment or non-nuclear 
materials subject to safeguards - for the manufacture of any nuclear weapon, 
or for any other military purpose, or for the manufacture of any other nuclear 
explosive device, or for purposes unknown. 
138. Portugal was continuing its work of prospecting for and mining uranium, 
and its annual production was about 130 tonnes of uranium concentrate; there 
were plans to increase that figure. 
139. On the subject of research and development, he described Portuguese 
activities in the fields of medicine, agriculture, radiation protection and 
radiological safety, radioecological studies, including marine radioecology, 
and the use of a research reactor for radioisotope production and the 
application of nuclear techniques. 
140. Finally, Portugal was highly appreciative of the excellent co-operation 
which had been maintained over the years with the Agency. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 46 


141. Mr. TSEREN (Mongolia) said that, since its establishment, the 
Agency had become a recognized centre for the co-ordination of the efforts of 
States to develop international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and nuclear safety. 
Mongolia shared the view of the Director General that the Agency was serving 
its Members effectively and in a professional manner. Having always 
attributed great importance to strengthening co-operation between all States, 
Mongolia participating in all Agency activities. The Agency's anniversary had 
been marked in Mongolia by a solemn meeting of the scientific community, and 
the media had stressed the work of the Agency and co-operation between the 
latter and Mongolia. 
142. In the course of the year which had just passed, the Agency had carried 
out important work on nuclear safety. As a result of the Agency's efforts and 
at the urging of the Director General, two important conventions, which would 
serve as the legal basis for the safe development of nuclear power, had been 
drafted in record time and adopted in the Agency, and had already come into 
force. Mongolia, which had already signed and ratified them, further approved 
the expanded activities in the field of nuclear safety. His Government 
believed that the implementation of the proposals for establishment of an 
international regime governing the safe development of nuclear power would 
significantly promote those efforts. Mongolia also believed that it was time 
to take effective action against the possibility of nuclear terrorism. 
143. The prevention of the further proliferation of nuclear weapons through 
observance of NPT on the one hand and the striving for nuclear disarmament on 
the other were closely linked. It emerged from an article recently published 
by Mr. Gorbachev that it would be possible to achieve a non-nuclear and 
non-violent world on the basis of a universal regime of international peace 
and security and of genuine collaboration between States for the use of the 
atom in the service of mankind. In that connection he wished to emphasize the 
basic importance of the agreement in principle between the Soviet Union and 
the United States of America for the elimination of two types of nuclear 
weapon. Attention should also be drawn to the fact that the Agency's 
experience in applying safeguards to civil nuclear installations was beginning 
to be widely used as a model for implementing disarmament measures in other 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 4 7 


than nuclear fields. It was noteworthy that during the discussions on the 
prohibition and abolition of chemical weapons in progress at Geneva in the 
framework of the Disarmament Conference, reference was often made to that 
Agency experience. 


144. Mongolia noted with satisfaction the implementation of the Agency's 
main programmes and was prepared to approve the annual report and the accounts 
for 1986, the Agency's budget for 1988 and the scale of assessment recommended 
by the Board of Governors. His Government was in favour of the 12% increase 
for 1988 in the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, and would pay its 
national currency contributions to the Fund punctually and in full. Mongolia 
appreciated the technical assistance delivered by the Agency to implement 
national programmes involving nuclear energy. In that connection he wished to 
stress that that type of co-operation made a significant contribution to 
establishing and developing the necessary scientific and technical 
infrastructures, and to solving numerous economic problems. 
145. The Mongolian Government attached great importance to the Agency's 
programme for the protection of the environment and for the application of 
radiations and radioisotopes in agriculture, geology and the health field. He 
was pleased to note that, in recent years, the Agency's projects in Mongolia 
in the above-mentioned areas had been crowned with success. Those projects 
had yielded a better knowledge of the processes occurring in the macrocosm and 
in the microcosm, and were also of great importance in diagnosis and 
treatment, in selection work on the creation of new varieties of cereals, and 
in bringing about greater profitability of geological and prospecting work. 
With the assistance of the Agency's highly qualified experts, training courses 
had been organized to develop the skills of young Mongolian scientists. 
146. Finally, the Mongolian Government and scientific community wished to 
assure the Agency of their support, and were prepared to strengthen their 
collaboration with all Member States of the Agency in the peaceful application 
of the achievements of nuclear science. 
147. Mr. DARWISH (United Arab Emirates) said that the large attendance 
at the General Conference bore witness to the importance of the items on the 
agenda, the most crucial of which were the uses of nuclear power, the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.298 
page 48 


technical, administrative and financial problems associated with it, and the 
action to be taken to reinforce international co-operation in the prevention 
of nuclear accidents and in the radiation protection sphere. 


148. Before going into the matter of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy and describing the measures taken in that 
connection by the United Arab Emirates, he wished to stress the growing 
anxiety experienced by the peoples in the region of the Gulf and throughout 
the world in the face of the threat of nuclear conflict or of the risk of 
radioactive fallout. The whole world was today the scene of discussions of 
unprecedented seriousness not on the positive aspects of nuclear power and its 
peaceful uses, but on the risk of the destruction of mankind. 
149. There were at present in the world arms so destructive that one quarter 
of them would suffice to annihilate the entire human race. In a message to 
the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation 
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations had observed that existing nuclear arsenals created fear and mistrust 
among the peoples of the world and gravely threatened the whole of mankind, 
that there would be no effective international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy until the world had definitively rejected its 
destructive uses, and that it would be wise and logical to eliminate nuclear 
weapons once and for all, in order to enter into the full benefit of the 
peaceful uses of the atom. The world was fully aware of the dangers 
represented by the nuclear threat. That was why the United Arab Emirates 
urged the Agency and all international organizations and institutions to 
redouble their efforts to put an end to the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
and to strive for a strengthening of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
150. The United Arab Emirates had always endeavoured to develop nuclear 
power and its peaceful uses for the benefit of mankind. Nuclear techniques 
were being applied in industry, agriculture, medicine and water prospecting. 
Nuclear medicine laboratories were employed for therapeutic purposes and 
hormone analyses, and the country was provided with radiological apparatus. 
With the Agency's assistance, a laboratory had been installed and equipped for 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 49 


the detection of the radioactive content of food commodities. He also stated 
that the Council of Ministers of the United Arab Emirates had recently 
approved the establishment of an overall authority governing the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. 


151. The United Arab Emirates was making a great effort to reinforce 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and had 
agreed to sign the Conventions on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and 
on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. 
152. The time had come to prohibit the proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
to take specific measures to that end. The United Arab Emirates was convinced 
that the General Conference would accord all due attention to examining action 
to strengthen international co-operation in the prevention of nuclear hazards 
and in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
153. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece) said that the crucial role of the Agency in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was now beyond doubt. The Chernobyl 
accident, its impact and the responses to it had, in 1986, continued to 
influence the decisions, options or measures taken throughout the world 
regarding the peaceful use of atomic energy. Some countries had decided to 
forego or defer the nuclear option as an energy source, while others had 
reaffirmed their confidence in and reliance on nuclear power as a necessary 
precondition to their growth and prosperity. However, the need to improve 
nuclear safety and the absolute necessity of international co-operation on the 
subject of safety were universally recognized. The pivotal role of the Agency 
in that field was now uncontested, and the Greek delegation approved the 
activities and initiatives undertaken by the Agency since Chernobyl. 
154. In the same context, he was happy to announce that the upgrading and 
re-organization of the Greek Atomic Energy Commission had been recently 
approved by Parliament. The purpose of that upgrading was to secure 
improvements in various areas - the effectiveness of regulatory activities, 
radiation protection, and the promotion of research and applications in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Although the Greek Government continued to 
exclude the nuclear option for energy generation, the above action showed that 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 50 


it recognized the ever more important role of nuclear activities and the need 
to acquire the expertise in order to follow the development of nuclear 
technology in all its applications. 


155. In the area of nuclear safety, which had dominated the Agency's 
activities in 1986 owing to the Chernobyl accident, his delegation approved 
the measures which had been taken, namely: a meeting of government experts to 
draft the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency Assistance; the 
examination by international experts of a report by Soviet experts on the 
accident, in the light of the experience gained from other accidents; the 
convening of a special session of the General Conference in order to 
strengthen international co-operation; and the expansion of the Agency's 
programme on safety accompanied by a review of its plans and priorities by 
experts from Member States. 
156. The Greek delegation noted with satisfaction that the Convention on 
Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in 
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency had been signed by a 
majority of Member States. It urged other States to follow suit. It also 
hoped that the Agency would rapidly undertake the tasks assigned to it under 
the conventions, and in particular would make use of the World Meteorological 
Organization's Global Telecommunications System for rapid notification and 
exchange of data and information in a radiological emergency. His Government 
firmly believed that an Agency function of that kind would play a key role in 
promoting nuclear safety and developing international co-operation. The Greek 
delegation congratulated the Agency on having gathered, analysed and 
disseminated all the Chernobyl-related information, and particularly commended 
INSAG, which had prepared a complete report on the Chernobyl accident on the 
basis of the extensive information supplied by the Soviet experts. 
157. The special session of the General Conference held in September 1986 
had concluded that nuclear power would continue to be an important source of 
energy world wide. Recognizing that fact, Greece fully subscribed to the 
conclusion of the Conference that each country was responsible for securing 
the highest level of safety, with the Agency having the central role of 
encouraging and facilitating further international co-operation on safety. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.298 
page 51 


Consequently, his delegation also supported the Agency's expanded nuclear 
safety and radiation protection programme approved by the Board of Governors 
in December 1986, and in particular the accreditation of operator training 
programmes, safety assessment, severe accident management, emergency response 
and advanced safety technology. 


158. In the radiation protection field, the Greek delegation wished to 
stress the importance of follow-up studies on the Chernobyl releases, as 
regards atmospheric transport of radionuclides, radionuclide deposition on 
land surfaces, food chain transfer and the long-term impact of various dose 
levels on health. 
159. In the interests of strengthening international co-operation, the Greek 
delegation welcomed the efforts of various organizations - IAEA, WHO, FAO, CCE 
and NEA - to harmonize the derived intervention dose levels in responding to 
emergencies arising in Member States. 
160. The indispensable role of the Agency in safeguards should of course be 
mentioned. His delegation believed that that was the most significant Agency 
activity in the sense that its contribution to non-proliferation was 
substantial. 
161. The Greek delegation noted with satisfaction the absence of any anomaly 
which would indicate the diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded 
nuclear material - or the misuse of facilities, equipment or non-nuclear 
materials subject to safeguards under certain agreements - for the manufacture 
of any nuclear weapon, or for any other military purpose, or for the 
manufacture of any other nuclear explosive device, or for purposes unknown. 
Nevertheless, the Greek delegation felt some concern at the increased number 
of unexplained discrepancies or anomalies which had been recorded in 1986, and 
urged their speedy resolution. 
162. Greece, which was both a donor and a recipient of technical assistance, 
greatly appreciated the Agency's assistance in the fields of uranium 
exploration, research reactor safety and radiological protection, the 
development of radiopharmaceutical products and many others. 

GC(XXXi)/OR.298 
page 52 


163. In conclusion, he wished to re-state his Government's firm intention to 
continue supporting the Agency's activities. Thus, Greece had already 
promised to pay in full its increased assessed voluntary contribution for 1987 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m. 



« V 


/ 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
February 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-NINTH MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 24 September 1987, at 9.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. SHIELDS (Canada) 
later: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


General debate and annual report 


for 1986 (continued) 


153 


Statements by the delegates of 


Sri Lanka 


1 -8 
Denmark 9 -14 
Mexico 15 -22 
Jordan 23 -30 
Bangladesh 31 -38 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 39 -43 
Cuba 44 -67 
Holy See 68 -76 
Venezuela 77 -87 
Ecuador 88 -93 
Ireland 94 -104 
Namibia 105 -115 
Cote d'lvoire 116 -121 
Thailand 122 -129 
Cyprus 130 -133 
Sudan 


134 -140 
Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance 


141 - 153 


I*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 5 October 1987. 


GC(XXXI)/818. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-0786 
2356e/0296e 



GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1986 (GC(XXXI)/800 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. DHARMAWARDENA (Sri Lanka) said that in March of the present 
year, a ceremony had been held in the capital of his country to commemorate 
three important landmarks: the thirtieth anniversary of the Agency, the 
fifteenth anniversary of the Regional Co-operative Agreement in the Asia and 
Pacific Region (RCA) and the silver jubilee of Sri Lanka's atomic energy 
programme. The ceremony had been attended by the Sri Lankan Minister for 
Foreign Affairs and Minister in charge of atomic energy and the Agency's 
Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation. The annual meeting of the 
RCA working group and an exhibition on activities under the Agreement had been 
held in the same month. 
2. During its thirty years of existence, the Agency had performed a 
tremendous service for Member States, particularly those of the developing 
world which it had helped to initiate and develop their energy programmes and 
train manpower, thus enabling them to bring some of the benefits of nuclear 
energy to their people. Bearing in mind, however, that two thirds of the 
world population lived in those countries, the Agency's future task in 
bringing the benefits of nuclear energy to mankind was enormous. 
3. His delegation commended the Agency on its laudable action in the 
aftermath of the Chernobyl accident, in particular the action to strengthen 
the safety aspects of nuclear power, thereby proving the essential need for 
its existence to ensure global safety in the use of nuclear energy. His 
country and many others had had to take action to control the radioactivity of 
imported food and, in the absence of any internationally recommended levels 
for intervention, had had to consult the other countries of the region. As 
the Director General had mentioned in his opening address, internationally 
acceptable levels would have to be adopted. 
4. During the past four years Sri Lanka had undergone a period of ethnic 
unrest which had taken an increasing portion of the budget, thus reducing the 
funds available for other projects and slowing down some of the programmes. 
It was anticipated that the development programmes would soon catch up, as a 
result of major steps taken earlier in the year, in co-operation with its 
neighbouring country, to put an end to ethnic-related violence. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 3 


5. The peaceful applications of nuclear energy had proceeded smoothly in 
Sri Lanka during the past year. In agriculture, a new programme on mutation 
breeding had been started and a gamma radiation cell set up. In industry, the 
use of nuclear techniques, particularly NDT methods and X-ray fluorescence 
analysis, had expanded and work on the use of radiation for prevulcanization 
of natural rubber latex had been a great success. In medicine, two nuclear 
facilities for in vitro diagnosis had been started and improvements were being 
made in the use of radiation therapy for cancer treatment. In hydrology, the 
uses of nuclear techniques had been expanded by a project for assessing soil 
erosion by fallout caesium-137 measurement. In archaeology, thermoluminescence 
had been used for dating objects dug out under a UNESCO-sponsored 
cultural project, the objects being analysed by nuclear techniques. The 
training programmes in nuclear science, nuclear engineering and electronics 
had continued as in 1986 and three new training courses on NDT had been 
launched. 
6. His delegation greatly appreciated the Agency's equipment, training and 
expert assistance in those activities. While selecting the best experts for 
such Agency-sponsored projects, it was important to ensure that the experts 
concerned made a positive contribution to the country's total programme. There 
was no purpose in recruiting an expert, however competent in his own sphere of 
activity, if he interfered with other projects which were not his concern. It 
was also necessary for experts to be briefed so that they respected safety and 
other rules applicable in general and under local conditions. An expert who 
violated radiation protection regulations and practices and induced local 
junior staff to disregard such rules could cause great damage to a nuclear 
energy programme and to public relations. 
7. The RCA programme in his region was one of the most successful of the 
Agency's activities and had resulted in considerable mutual benefit to the 
14 Member States which were parties to the Agreement. His delegation 
expressed its strong support for the programme. 
8. He wished to congratulate the Director General on his able direction of 
the Agency's activities and to inform him that Sri Lanka would contribute its 
share to the voluntary contributions fund. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 4 


9. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) noted that the Danish Parliament had decided, 
prior to the Chernobyl accident, that future energy planning in Denmark would 
not include nuclear energy. New and renewable sources of energy played an 
increasing role in Danish energy research, development and supply. Among OECD 
countries, Denmark had the lowest consumption of energy per unit per gross 
national product and it had the lowest level of electricity production prices 
in the European Community. 
10. His delegation had noted with appreciation that four non-nuclear-weapon 
States had become party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) in 1986. It was to be hoped that at the General Conference 
in 1988 it would be possible to welcome additional parties to NPT. However, 
it was a matter of concern that 46 of the 131 non-nuclear-weapon States party 
to NPT had not complied with their obligations under Article III of the Treaty 
regarding the conclusion of the relevant safeguards agreement with the 
Agency. Denmark noted with satisfaction that the Secretariat, as in previous 
years, had concluded that nuclear material under Agency safeguards in 1986 had 
remained in peaceful nuclear activities or had been otherwise adequately 
accounted for. Furthermore, negotiations with China to place some of its 
civilian nuclear installations under Agency safeguards would soon be finalized 
and with that agreement there would be safeguards agreements in force with all 
five nuclear-weapon States. The Agency's safeguards system should be 
continuously expanded and all nuclear facilities, without exception, should be 
subject to safeguards. With regard to the question of the financing of 
safeguards his Government believed that all Member States should participate 
in the financing which was a collective responsibility and which benefited all 
countries. 
11. Another vital area in the Agency activities was nuclear safety. The 
Agency had witnessed a major development in the field of co-operation on 
nuclear safety since the Chernobyl accident. In particular, the adoption of 
the two Conventions on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency were 
important steps. As recognized at the special session of the General 
Conference in 1986, it was important to strengthen international co-operation 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 5 


both at the bilateral and the multilateral level with regard to nuclear 
safety, radiological protection, physical security and environmental 
compatibility. 


12. Since the special session, Denmark had negotiated bilateral agreements 
on nuclear safety and radiological protection with all its neighbouring 
countries or countries situated close to its territory. Negotiations with the 
Soviet Union had not yet been finalized, but it was hoped that negotiations 
would lead to the signing of an agreement in the near future. The bilateral 
agreements which had been concluded were all different in wording but were 
based on the same fundamental principles: a commitment to notify the other 
party directly of nuclear accidents; a commitment to exchange updated 
safety-relevant information on existing as well as planned nuclear facilities; 
and a right to request consultations. Such agreements were of great 
importance, not only as a means of obtaining the highest level of nuclear 
safety, but also as a confidence-building measure. 
13. In the longer term, it would be in the interest of all countries for 
the contents of the bilateral agreements to be expanded to cover commitments 
to apply a standardized scheme on reporting the operational experiences of 
nuclear facilities. That was an area where the Agency would have a role to 
play in the development of bilateral co-operation. The Agency could make an 
instant contribution to the promotion of bilateral co-operation in the field 
of nuclear safety simply by collecting or registering the texts of the 
agreements concluded and by expressing its readiness to assist countries upon 
request - in the formulation of such arrangements. 
14. While recognizing that nuclear safety was primarily a responsibility of 
individual States, it was important that basic safety principles and standards 
be developed and adhered to by all Member States. The most realistic approach 
would be to develop safety principles and standards to which States could 
commit themselves on a voluntary basis. Denmark strongly supported the work 
which had been initiated in the Agency regarding the formulation of basic 
safety principles and an updating and strengthening of the NUSS Safety Codes. 
The adherence of Member States to common safety principles and safety standards 
would also facilitate the consultations foreseen within the framework of the 
bilateral agreements. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 6 


15. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico) said that his Government believed that 
the Agency had made undeniable progress in increasing the contribution of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy to the development of all countries, and had 
carried out its safeguards inspection activities in an exemplary way. 
16. With regard to technical assistance, his country was grateful for the 
valuable assistance which it had received from the Agency in the fields of 
medicine and food. However, Mexico was experiencing difficulties associated 
with the huge investments involved in the development of its nuclear power 
programme and, in that area, the Agency had not provided enough assistance, 
although his country considered that the OSART missions were particularly 
helpful. The Agency's seminars and training courses were also very useful. 
17. Nuclear power production created enormous problems and it was not 
surprising that many countries had doubts about it or that some countries had 
adopted other forms of power production. His Government, which regarded 
nuclear power as essential, had decided to pursue a nuclear power plant 
construction programme which would mean that by the end of the century Mexico 
would have five nuclear power plants accounting for more than 10% of 
electricity production in Mexico. 
18. The Agency had not always been able to fulfil its functions associated 
with the transfer of technology which was often obstructed by financial 
interests. Developing countries mistrusted the policy of zero growth and 
considered that resources for technical assistance should in fact be increased 
so that, for example, fellowship applications were not rejected owing to a 
lack of places. 
19. The Agency's second main objective was to prevent the atom from being 
used for military purposes. His country regretted that the Agency had not 
been able to contribute to establishing a world free of nuclear weapons. It 
had frequently been stated that the Agency was not the proper forum for the 
discussion of such questions. His country wished to take advantage of the 
Agency's anniversary to appeal to all States to modify that negative 
attitude. The prohibition of attacks against nuclear power plants was, for 
example, a vital subject which lay within the Agency's sphere of competence. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 7 


20. The problems of nuclear power, such as waste management, spread of 
radiation, and the consequences of possible accidents, transcended national 
boundaries. An attitude of supranationalism was essential and yet nationalism 
appeared to be stronger than ever. Unless the problem of nationalism were 
overcome, the Agency would be unable to carry out its work properly. 
21. A fundamental aspect of Mexico's foreign policy was the exclusively 
peaceful use of nuclear energy and his country hoped that, through the Agency, 
nuclear-weapon-free zones, such as those established by the Tlatelolco and 
Rarotonga Treaties, would gradually be extended to cover all continents. The 
Agency should redouble its efforts (and that would obviously mean doubling its 
budget) to enable all peoples of the world to benefit from the numerous 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
22. In connection with that lofty objective, one large area had been 
neglected, namely the education of young people to inform them about the 
characteristics and potential of nuclear energy. Criticism of the use of 
nuclear energy was generally the result of ignorance. Some Member States had 
demonstrated the role which education could play in facilitating the 
acceptance of nuclear power and his country hoped that the Agency would 
participate in a wide-ranging programme designed to familiarize the world's 
youth with the use of nuclear energy. 
23. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) noted that the continuous efforts that the 
Agency had made in enhancing international understanding and co-operation 
during the past three decades had been rightly appreciated after the Chernobyl 
accident. The prompt response of the Agency with the full support of Member 
States in the immediate aftermath of the incident had demonstrated the 
Agency's important role in minimizing the consequences of any nuclear event or 
catastrophe. The Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and 
the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency, which had been signed by a number of Member States, including 
Jordan, were typical examples of the importance of international co-operation. 
24. Jordan hoped that the Agency would direct its efforts towards 
developing international conventions to cover legal international objective 
responsibility for nuclear damage, notification and assistance in case of 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 8 


nuclear incidents in non-civilian nuclear facilities, prevention of attacks 
against nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes, particularly 
those facilities subject to international safeguards, expansion of 
nuclear-weapon-free zones and prevention of horizontal and vertical 
proliferation of nuclear weapons directly or by proxy. 


25. In addition to the critical unstable political and military situation 
in the Middle East, Israel continued to enhance its nuclear military 
capabilities and develop its combat nuclear potential in such a way as to 
become a threat to the whole area. Although the international community had 
repeatedly called upon Israel to subject its nuclear facilities to 
international inspection, Israel continued to ignore Security Council 
Resolution 487. The threat of Israel was not restricted to the Middle East, 
since Israel had close co-operation links with the South African regime to 
develop its nuclear military capabilities, thereby expanding the threat to 
Africa. Both countries should submit their nuclear facilities to the 
safeguards system and international inspection which would constitute an 
important step towards transforming both the Middle East and Africa into 
nuclear-weapon-free zones. 
26. With regard to the nuclear safety programme, his delegation believed 
that it should entail the full and active participation of the manufacturers 
of nuclear systems in the programme and the participation of all countries, 
both nuclear and non-nuclear, industrial and developing, in the programme with 
full exchange of relevant information. Furthermore, it should concern itself 
with solving legal difficulties related to the flow of safety information 
within the framework of international or trilateral agreements where the 
Agency would be the third party. 
27. The energy demand of developing countries was continuously increasing, 
and the majority of those countries still depended on imported energy. The 
average energy share per capita in developing countries was much less than 20% 
of the average energy share per capita in industrial countries. If the global 
rates and patterns of growth of energy consumption maintained their present 
shape then the gap between developing and industrial countries would require 
more than 90 years to bridge. In view of the fact that known economic 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 9 


reserves of oil and gas might become depleted within three or four decades, it 
was clear that developing countries could lose the opportunity to make use of 
oil and gas in building their economies. Hence, the availability of nuclear 
energy to generate electricity would become absolutely decisive for the future 
of developing countries. 


28. The United Nations Conference on the Use of Nuclear Energy for Peaceful 
Purposes had expressed very strongly the determination of the international 
community, particularly developing countries, to dismantle the technological 
barriers in the nuclear field. Although his delegation noted with 
satisfaction the Agency's efforts in the field of technical assistance, 
exchange of experts in medicine, agriculture, food preservation, exploration 
of natural resources etc., the United Nations Conference had revealed that 
there was still a number of psychological, economical, political and legal 
obstacles that prevented the dissemination of knowledge to include all 
countries that required it. 
29. There had been little progress in the question of the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute over the past 10 years. The right of the 
African and the Middle East and South Asian groups to be fairly represented in 
the Board of Governors should not be ignored, nor should a solution to the 
matter be postponed, especially since a number of States in those two groups 
were making reasonable progress in acquiring nuclear technology. Jordan 
believed that the representation system related to those two groups should be 
amended without amending Article VI of the Statue as a whole. 
30. With regard to the annual report for 1986, his delegation believed that 
the technical co-operation programme should be expanded and reconstructed in 
such a way as to facilitate the transfer of technology to developing countries 
in integrated batches through team-training systems. The programme should aim 
to help developing countries establish long-term plans to acquire nuclear 
knowledge and technology. There should be a continuous growth in the 
technical assistance programme and the zero-growth policy should be 
abandoned. Finally, developing countries should be able to establish a link 
with the data bank system through regional and international data networks. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 10 


31. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh) congratulated the Agency on its thirtieth 
anniversary and on the significant contribution it had made since its 
foundation in advancing the cause of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
in strengthening international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, although he could not but express some disappointment on the part 
of developing countries, especially those which had signed NPT, that 
technology transfer in the area of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy, and particularly in that of nuclear power, had not taken place to the 
extent expected. That was all the more unfortunate in that the growth of 
electricity consumption in the developed countries was levelling off while the 
developing countries were in dire need of new sources of commercial energy. 
The Director General had rightly pointed out in his opening statement that 
"new and renewable energy sources" could not meet that increasing energy need 
of the developing countries and that nuclear power would have to be introduced 
there, with due regard for safety, waste disposal and environmental problems. 
He hoped that the Director General and his staff would continue to help build 
up the infrastructure of developing countries and offer various advisory 
services during their progress towards nuclear power. 
32. Bangladesh's first 3-MW research reactor had just completed one year's 
successful operation. The reactor had the capacity to operate in both steady 
state and pulsed mode. During that year, neutron flux distributions and 
neutron spectra had been measured in different experimental positions. For 
the effective utilization of the reactor, a comprehensive programme had been 
developed to meet immediate needs regarding radioisotope production and 
material analysis, to develop nuclear manpower through training and research, 
and to perform applied research related to the overall nuclear programme of 
Bangladesh. Although the main radioisotope production laboratory was still 
under construction, the reactor had been used for the trial production of 
technetium-99m by irradiating MoO targets in a small laboratory set up 
2 


with help from the Agency and the German Democratic Republic. A facility for 
producing iodine-131 from tellurium targets was soon to be installed in 
continuation of the same assistance. While some progress had been made with 
an experimental facility for neutron activation analysis and neutron 
radiography, substantial help was awaited from the Agency in setting up a 



GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 11 


triple-axis neutron spectrometer for inelastic neutron scattering work. 
Co-operation had already been established with India in that connection and 
construction of a double-axis spectrometer had been initiated as a first step. 


33. In the field of commercial food preservation by irradiation, an 
irradiator supplied by the Soviet Union through the Agency's technical 
assistance programme had formed the basis for a multi-purpose commercial 
irradiator being set up in Chittagong in collaboration with a reputed private 
entrepreneur. Stress would be given to the export of irradiated fish, dried 
fish and potatoes, in addition to the routine sterilization of medical 
products. In that connection, his country hoped the Agency would help remove 
restrictions on the international movement of irradiated products. 
34. Bangladesh had for a long time been seeking to meet the growing demand 
for electricity by means of nuclear power, and had been attempting to build up 
the necessary infrastructure and manpower as a first step. However, the grid 
capacity was still low, and so Bangladesh had been urging the necessity of 
developing small and medium power reactors (SMPRs) which had already proved to 
be economical in some developing countries such as India and Argentina. Since 
Chernobyl, a fresh critical look needed to be given to the safety aspects, and 
a fresh feasibility study for a first nuclear power reactor was now being 
conducted. Such a capital-intensive programme had, of necessity, to be 
cost-effective, and the fund-giving agencies, in both the private and the 
public sector, had to make special concessions when financing nuclear power 
stations. The Agency had already organized a large number of surveys, studies 
and conferences in that connection, but that was not enough. He therefore 
urged the Agency to help set up a "nuclear development bank" to provide soft 
commercial credits for projects whose viability had been established and, if 
necessary, endorsed by the Agency. 
35. The Agency had recently evaluated the progress made during the 
last 15 years by various programmes under the Regional Co-operative Agreement 
for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology (RCA) for Asia and the Pacific Region and had thereupon extended 
the programme for a period of another five years. Bangladesh had been 
actively supporting programmes under the RCA and had benefited in many ways 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 12 


from them. It deeply appreciated the financial and other assistance provided 
under the RCA and hoped that the flow of assistance for various projects would 
be maintained and that due care would be taken to widen the scope of such 
projects to make them more meaningful and better suited to the varied 
requirements of the countries in the region. 


36. In that connection, he recalled that Bangladesh had recently proposed 
to the RCA countries the establishment of a Regional Centre for Research and 
Development and Application of Nuclear Science and Technology in one of the 
RCA Member States which would enable scientists in the region to exchange 
ideas in research, training and development in a proper institutional 
framework. As the idea had not gained acceptance, he now wished to suggest 
developing at least one "centre of excellence" in each RCA country, or 
strengthening such centres where they already existed. 
37. Turning again to the Agency's technical co-operation programme, he 
noted with satisfaction that in recent years, the Agency had given attention 
to the impact of that programme on development and to package multi-year 
programmes with definite objectives. Bangladesh had greatly benefited from 
such a long-term programme in connection with its research reactor 
laboratories. The Agency should also seek to close the gap between research 
workers and investment entrepreneurs by providing experts and funds to cover 
the intermediate step of extension work and feasibility studies. 
38. In concluding, he again congratulated the Agency on its excellent 
record of achievements in the past 30 years, and assured it of Bangladesh's 
continued co-operation. 
39. Mr. EL MEDNI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) reiterated the importance of 
guaranteeing secure and adequate financial resources for the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF). The resources of that Fund should be 
increased so as to promote the economic and social progress of developing 
countries. 
40. With regard to safeguards, it was a source of great pleasure to find 
that during the past year, the Agency had not found any abuse of materials or 
installations or diversion of source materials for any purposes other than 
peaceful ones. It was important that the Agency should ensure that there was 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 13 


a proper balance between its regulatory and promotional activities. As far as 
financing of safeguards was concerned, his delegation believed that Member 
States with the greatest number and the largest installations should pay a 
larger contribution to the safeguards budget. 


41. His country was determined to benefit from the applications of nuclear 
energy in agriculture and industry and also planned to use nuclear energy for 
electricity generation. However, some developed countries were attempting to 
hinder the progress of developing countries. 
42. Israel had continued to ignore the wishes of the international 
community. Although it had been given five years to abide by United Nations 
resolutions, it had shown no evidence of its intention to do so. It had 
refused to submit its nuclear installations to the Agency's safeguards system 
and there was reason to wonder whether there was any justification for it to 
continue to be a Member of the Agency. In addition, there was a very close 
relationship between Israel and the racist regime in South Africa which used 
its nuclear capabilities for aggressive purposes. His country wished to join 
other peace-loving countries in condemning the two regimes in occupied 
Palestine and South Africa and in calling for them to cease their defiance of 
the international community. 
43. An amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute was necessary in order to 
establish an equitable geographical distribution in the Board of Governors, 
particularly as far as the regions of the Middle East and Africa were 
concerned. It was also necessary to be very careful in recruiting staff so as 
to ensure that developing countries received their fair share of posts. His 
country had ample expertise and it was to be hoped that the Agency would take 
advantage of it. Furthermore, his delegation wished to reiterate the 
importance of using the Arab language in the Agency in the same way as the 
other working languages. 
44. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) said that the thirtieth anniversary 
was an auspicious occasion on which to reflect on the role which the Agency 
had played in supporting and promoting the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy. Over its thirty years, the Agency had provided valuable technical 
assistance to more than 70 different countries; according to its own 

GC(XXXi)/OR.299 
page 14 


information, the amount disbursed in technical assistance had risen to over 
US $300 000 000 between the founding of the Agency and 1986; that assistance 
had made possible the introduction and development of various nuclear 
techniques in agriculture and food production, and also in public health and 
other sectors of indubitable importance to developing countries and the 
international community as a whole. 


45. The Agency had been a suitable forum for studying and propagating 
international experience in nuclear safety and radiation protection, and for 
putting those technologies within Members' reach. 
46. Of equal importance had been the experience of nuclear power generation 
and the fuel cycle which the Agency had compiled and circulated; special 
attention had also been given since the founding of the Agency to designing 
and applying safeguards; safeguards had been applied in 1987 in more than 
90 States, and had major resource allocations. 
47. The Agency's laboratory at Seibersdorf had played an important part in 
the above programmes, as had the International Laboratory of Marine 
Radioactivity at Monaco; those bodies had made it possible to carry out 
research needed by developing countries and to train staff from them, as well 
as fulfilling other objectives. A related matter was that of the fellowship 
programmes and training courses which had each year given hundreds of 
specialists from developing countries the chance to acquire the necessary 
knowledge and training to take new techniques back to their countries for 
adoption. 
48. The International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste had 
received more than 22 000 research workers from developing countries, who had 
been able to build up their knowledge, put new ideas into practice, exchange 
ideas with scientists from other countries and have at their fingertips the 
wealth of up-to-date information available at the Centre. 
49. Cuba joined with the other members of the international community in 
celebrating the successes of the Agency's thirty years, and was using its mass 
media to publicize the Agency, its programmes and the assistance with which 
Cuba had been provided. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 15 


50. Nuclear power had expanded greatly during the Agency's thirty years, 
although the realities of the day could not be ignored; the annual report 
for 1986 gave data concerning power reactors in service or under construction 
at the end of that year: installed capacity in developing countries had 
remained effectively the same as in 1985 at about 4% of total nuclear power 
generation capacity. The electricity produced by those facilities had, 
moreover, decreased relative to the total produced by nuclear plants 
from 2.47o in 1985 to 1.5% in 1986, and with every passing year the figure 
dropped further behind; only ten or so Third World countries would have 
operational programmes by the year 2000. 


51. The energy shortfall facing the developing countries was only one 
aspect of a much more complex problem of which those countries were victim; 
the problem was reflected in the acute economic crisis affecting them, in 
which one of the major elements was foreign debt. That debt had risen to a 
million million United States dollars at the time of speaking, with interest 
payments to service that debt of some US $120 000 000 annually; the 
paradoxical result of that situation was that those which most needed nuclear 
power were least able to afford it. President Castro of Cuba had said the 
following at the inaugural meeting in Havana of the sixth ministerial meeting 
of the Group of 77: 
"Faced with these realities, what is the future awaiting our peoples? 


In 1985, the population of the underdeveloped countries was already 


three quarters of the population of the world. In 2025, there will be 


6 799 000 000 people in the Third World, 83.1% of the world's 


population, according to the calculations: this means that our 


countries, in the next forty years - less than one lifetime - will be 


faced with the colossal challenge of providing food, clothing, 


education, employment, housing and health care for an average of almost 


eighty million more people each year. Will our impoverished, indebted 


and exhausted countries be able to meet even that challenge?" 


52. The energy crisis in the developing countries was only one aspect of 
the acute economic crisis under which their people laboured, and its only 
solution required, among other things, the establishment of the new 
international economic order approved by the United Nations. 
53. It was paradoxical that, while the Third World was suffering under the 
most brutal economic crisis it had ever seen - one deplored by the summit 
meeting of the non-aligned States, and, more recently, by the 1987 session of 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 16 


UNCTAD - an amount equivalent to the total foreign debt of those countries was 
going annually to military expenditure: at the current rate of increase in 
that expenditure, the total foreign debt of the Third World could be paid 
seventeen times over in the thirteen years to come. From a purely economic 
point of view, many benefits would derive for the peoples of the Third World, 
and for humankind as a whole, from a cessation of the amis race. 


54. The arms race must, however, cease first and foremost insofar as it was 
pregnant with a far greater risk, that of the destruction of humankind and the 
wealth of thousands of years of civilization and culture, the destruction of 
nature and even of the planet itself. Great efforts were being made in 
negotiations towards effective measures to stop the arms race and turn it in 
its course, in other words, to bring about nuclear disarmament and, in the 
end, general and complete disarmament. 
55. The programme to eliminate nuclear weapons before the year 2000 put 
forward by the Soviet Union in January 1986 was of particular importance 
amongst those efforts, as were the proposals it had made in February 1987 to 
reach separate agreement on the total elimination of intermediate- range 
missiles in Europe and on the total elimination of battlefield missiles. 
Recent events had shown that the above was possible, and the whole of humanity 
was awaiting the conclusion of that agreement. 
56. Turning to matters concerning the work of the Agency, he said that the 
1988 budget contained an imperceptible increase, in pursuance of the 
zero-real-growth policy which Cuba had opposed at various times; an official 
consultation system had been recently adopted in working out the draft budget, 
which Cuba considered useful as it enabled Member States to participate more 
actively and directly in that important task. Cuba welcomed the fact that the 
increase of 12% in the TACK for 1988 was to be maintained; its position on 
other matters, such as the financing of technical assistance and the revision 
of Article VI of the Statute, had not changed. 
57. The General Conference had before it a recommendation from the Board 
concerning the suspension of South Africa, the result of a long history of 
denunciations in the General Conference, and other fora, of its racist regime; 
those denunciations stemmed from the repeated violations which that country 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 17 


had committed and continued to commit. It was beyond doubt, he said, that 
South Africa's possession of unsafeguarded enrichment plants enabled it to 
develop and acquire the capacity to produce fissile material for purposes that 
were not peaceful; in addition, it was reinforcing that capacity by illegally 


acquiring uranium from Namibia; it was beyond doubt also that international 
peace and security were thereby seriously endangered, particularly the peace 


and security of African States. 


58. With the exception of a few States which gave de facto support to its 
apartheid regime, South Africa, despite its hypocritical statements, had been 
the object of revulsion and condemnation on the part of all governments and 
all peace loving peoples for its policy of aggression, its repeated violations 
of the frontiers of neighbouring States and its brutal repression of its own 
people. Cuba therefore supported the most severe measures which the General 
Conference might take, and, distancing itself from any promises or 
compromises, would keep itself abreast of whether those measures were being 
implemented in full. 
59. Israel's nuclear capabilities had been studied as a matter of course at 
other meetings, and many delegations had expressed their concern. It would 
appear that the problem was no longer a potential, regional one, but one which 
had become a real problem on a wider scale. Statements by an Israeli expert 
and the news concerning the development of new and more powerful missiles 
testified eloquently to the fact that Israel, was,as he spoke, already no mean 
nuclear power. If the chaff of all the elliptical statements were blown away, 
the gist showed that what must be done was to inscribe that matter on the 
agenda of the Conference on Disarmament and other fora which discussed 
disarmament by nuclear-weapon States. 
60. He said that Cuba's programme for the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy continued to advance on a firm footing; Cuba's first nuclear power 
station was being constructed, and the international undertakings accepted 
with regard to it were being observed and would continue to be; special 
attention was being given to strict measures to ensure its safe operation, 
measures which touched its construction, installation and operation and also 
training for its personnel. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 18 


61. Preliminary work was also continuing on a nuclear research centre, 
which, together with Cuba's first nuclear power plant, would be a corner-stone 
of its nuclear power development. 
62. An advanced nuclear science and technology institute was soon to be set 
up on the basis of the existing department, with a view to increasing the 
numbers and quality of specialist staff for the nuclear power programme; the 
new institute would increase the range and depth of specialist subject 
teaching. 
63. The food irradiation plant provided by the Agency through a technical 
assistance project had begun operation in a satisfactory manner; as well as 
being a practical step towards introducing an important technology to Cuba, it 
was planned to offer training to specialists from other countries in the 
region. 
64. All the above advances were in addition to those in nuclear 
applications in medicine, agriculture and industry, and Cuba had decided in 
that light to indicate its interest in taking part in ARCAL; by so doing, it 
would expand on the valuable co-operation arrangements between Cuba and a 
number of countries, particularly the Soviet Union and the other CMEA 
countries, and also other friendly countries in the Third World. 
65. Cuba had in 1987 put itself forward for a seat on the Board of 
Governors for 1987 to 1989, which would be the second opportunity it had had 
to take part in the work of that important body. The way in which Cuba had 
adopted nuclear energy was an example of what could be done when a people had 
political and economic independence and the right to decide what was their 
best way to a better life and to development. 
66. It was a matter of some satisfaction that the thirtieth anniversary of 
the Agency had seen a number of important successes of great benefit to all 
Member States; the peaceful applications of nuclear energy which it had 
supported and promoted over those thirty years were the only ones which 
humankind could accept, directed as they were to improving human well-being; 
many nations in the Third World had been able to gain access to those 
applications of nuclear energy thanks to the Agency's dedicated efforts. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 19 


67. Humankind was, he said, living through a time of great challenges; 
never before had the indissoluble link between the struggle for peace and the 
struggle for development been so clearly seen. Cuba called, therefore, upon 
all to unite their efforts and will to start out on the path towards the end 
of nuclear weapons, that same path which led to the conversion of nuclear 
technology into a factor in development, prosperity and well-being for those 
who had been left behind in the strategic stalemate which had a stranglehold 
on the world; all should act towards the goal of giving nuclear energy, born 
in the shadow of the politics of terror, blackmail and threat, its proper 
place in the life of humankind of the third milleniutu, one in the sunshine of 
progress, liberty and the independence of peoples. 
68. Mgsr. CEIRANO (Holy See) said that, in commemorating the 
foundation of the International Atomic Energy Agency thirty years earlier, 
Members might ponder on the reasons that had induced so many States to bring 
the organization into being, or to accede to it afterwards, and - even more 
important - whether, looking back on the Agency's past history and forward 
into its probable future, those reasons were still valid. 
69. That was particularly so for the Holy See, belonging as it did to the 
Agency not as a mere observer but as a full Member. 
70. The Holy See had decided to join the Agency on 20 August 1957 because 
of its uniqueness. Never before nor since had an international organization, 
by its very existence, represented the realization of the biblical vision of 
turning swords into ploughshares. The International Atomic Energy Agency 
represented the determination of its founding fathers to transfer the use of 
nuclear energy from the field of destruction to the field of creation. What 
had until then been seen primarily under the terrible aspect of the atomic 
bomb was now to be viewed in the pleasant light of a new and very useful tool 
of almost Limitless possibilities in the hands of mankind. It was to that 
vision of a new and better world, free from war and want, that the Holy See 
had given its support by becoming a founder Member of the Agency. 
71. The Agency had been entrusted with a twofold task. On the one hand it 
had to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, of special importance to 
developing countries and to all other countries which lacked - or which 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 20 


suffered a serious shortage of - other energy sources. But the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy was not limited to energy in the strict sense - to nuclear 
power. Today the application of nuclear radiation played an ever-increasing 
role in such differing areas as medicine, agriculture and food preservation. 
On the other hand, the Agency had to supply safeguards which ensured that the 
systematic international co-operation which assisted nations in building up 
their nuclear programmes for their own economic and social development was not 
abused by the transfer of material and know-how for the purpose of building up 
military nuclear capacity. 


72. In that connection, he mentioned the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, to which the Holy See had become a party and under which, by 
agreement with the Agency, it was subject to the special safeguards system 
called for by the Treaty. The Holy See had done so in order to encourage all 
members of the international community to do the same. It attached the utmost 
importance to the on-site inspections carried out by the Agency to verify that 
activities in the field of the peaceful use of nuclear energy were not being 
used to further the proliferation of nuclear weapons. It urged all States 
which had not yet done so to reconsider their position and participate in a 
worldwide system of control, 
73. In addition to the two tasks of peaceful use and safeguards, there was 
a third one, namely, nuclear safety. Various accidents, such as Three Mile 
Island and especially the tragic accident which had occurred the previous year 
at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, had made both the public at large and 
those responsible for the management and operation of nuclear installations 
sensitive to the need for the highest possible safety standards when handling 
nuclear material. There again, the Agency had already played an important 
role in recent years - and would certainly continue to do so - in enhancing 
radiation protection programmes with regard to the production, transport and 
disposal of nuclear material and waste. It was his delegations's firm belief 
that the peaceful use of nuclear energy had no future unless the safety 
problems could be satisfactorily solved very soon. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 21 


74. The dangers arising for ail States from the possibility of nuclear 
accidents with transboundary effects also called for an increased measure of 
international co-operation. The two conventions worked out and signed in 1986 
under the Agency's auspices, calling for information and collaboration in the 
event of a nuclear accident, were positive steps in the right direction, as 
His Holiness Pope John Paul II had pointed out only recently. Those 
conventions were not sufficient, however. They needed to be supplemented by 
an agreement on international liability for damage inflicted by transboundary 
nuclear pollution. A State would be induced to apply even higher safety 
standards by an obligation to compensate other States for damage originating 
in its territory. That was true particularly for States which justified their 
nuclear activities on the grounds that the advantages gained for society from 
nuclear energy warranted certain risks to the life or property of individuals a 
moral position that the Holy See considered dubious to say the least. 
75. Why had the Agency been so successful in the first thirty years of its 
existence? The answer lay in what he would like to call "the spirit of 
Vienna". The International Atomic Energy Agency had been primarily an 
organization of co-operation rather than confrontation. The co-operation of 
Members among themselves and with the Secretariat had run more smoothly than 
in other organizations. That had enabled the Agency to be an organization 
within the United Nations system - although strictly speaking not one of its 
specialized agencies - which had demonstrated exceptional commitment to the 
purposes and principles for which it had been established. 
76. Accordingly, the Holy See joined in commemorating the anniversary of 
the Agency as an international organization that had lived up to the 
expectations placed in it thirty years earlier. That certainly justified the 
same expectations for the future. The Holy See therefore reaffirmed its 
continued support for the work of the Agency in the years ahead. 
77. Mr. SUCRE FIGARELLA (Venezuela) commended the Agency on three 
decades of successful and fruitful work during which it had done more than 
most other international organizations to further the cause of international 
co-operation and peace - especially considering that its specific province, 
while full of constructive and promising possibility, was also fraught with 
great dangers. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 22 


78. "Atoms for Peace" was not merely a slogan, it was a concrete 
programme: although there was nothing that could be as destructive to human 
society as the release of atomic energy, there was also nothing which 
presented such an opportunity for good as its peaceful use. Now that the 
Agency's first thirty years had shown that those, energies could be channelled 
in the right direction, it was possible to hope that future generations would 
be able to carry the work on to even greater achievements for peace, progress 
and prosperity. 
79. That being said, he wished to consider three questions which had also 
been touched upon by the Director General in his opening statement. The first 
was whether nuclear energy was a safe source of power. Since the Chernobyl 
accident in particular, governments and public opinion had been asking whether 
the construction of nuclear power plants was justifiable at all. The 
so-called Brundtland report and innumerable other papers of a general nature 
had been published in that connection, but there seemed little point in such 
generalizing and evading the difficult decisions. Nuclear energy could not be 
properly characterized by either apocalyptic judgements or exaggeratedly 
favourable opinions. Clearly, where energy was concerned, countries had to 
make decisions which took into account such considerations as environmental 
protection, cost, optimum utilization of available natural, financial and 
technical resources and so on. 
80. In his own country's case, circumstances had made a decision on those 
matters easy. Venezuela had a considerable production of fossil fuels, 
including gas, oil and coal, as well as a vast hydroelectric potential. 
However, there was no doubt that scarcity of energy would become a worldwide 
problem in the future, because a steady continuation of growth and development 
demanded an increase in energy consumption. For that reason, Venezuela's 
policy was to conserve its own hydrocarbon reserves and to press on with 
exploration to determine its real potential. Thus, Venezuela was making every 
effort to assure its future energy supply while at the same time protecting 
the natural environment, for without ecological equilibrium there could be no 
true development. However, decisions in the field of energy supply could not 
be made on the basis of simplistic criteria or elaborate theoretical schemes 
which did not take account of the dynamism of the facts. For that reason, his 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 23 


country had requested the Agency's help in conducting a study on the estimated 
energy demand for future years so as to be able to draw up the most 
appropriate energy policy possible. 


81. The second question which he wished to take up was whether the Agency 
was fulfilling its tasks with regard to establishing appropriate standards to 
guarantee nuclear safety. That was a vast and very important question because 
nuclear energy was not a normal energy source. Not only the contamination 
aspect, but also the effects of radiation on life in all its forms and the 
profound complications of a military or strategic nature involved in nuclear 
fission must be considered. 
82. Chernobyl had shown that, in the case of a nuclear accident, no country 
was exempt from the consequences, however remote it might be. It was true 
that accidents happened in the use of other energy sources, indeed in all 
other human activities, as well, but those which occurred in the nuclear field 
had wider and more long-term consequences. Radioactive contamination 
presented the most serious challenge to human society. 
83. It was the Agency's achievement to have drawn attention to those 
problems while at the same time organizing an effective, comprehensive and 
far-sighted system for establishing standards which would allow the use of 
nuclear energy in safe conditions. However, there was one question which 
merited special attention, namely that of international liability in the field 
of nuclear safety. That was admittedly a politically difficult issue but 
there could be no true nuclear safety in the world, however perfect the safety 
standards adopted, without genuine co-operation between nations within an 
international legal framework establishing equal rights for all without 
distinction. Of course such an integrated co-operative system would call for 
the conclusion of political agreements at the highest level in a climate of 
peaceful co-existence between nations, but the present time was characterized 
by high hopes that decisive steps might at last be taken towards strategic 
disarmament, and so it would be only logical if the climate of confidence 
which now existed between the great Powers could also benefit negotiations 
being conducted in other international fora such as the Agency. In other 
words, the time had come for all countries which were in favour of nuclear 

GC(XXXi)/OR.299 
page 24 


non-proliferation, having signed the Tlatelolco Treaty or the NPT, to demand 
the establishment of an international legal order which would become ever more 
binding between nations and which would guarantee access to nuclear technology 
under safe conditions and with a right to compensation for damage caused by 
third parties in the case of a nuclear accident. It was one of the essential 
tasks of the Agency to keep under permanent review the entire system of 
nuclear safety so as to be able to introduce ail modifications made necessary 
by developments in international relations and in technical and scientific 
co-operation. 


84. His country believed that such a legal order would also help the 
Agency's safeguards system to fulfil its purpose better. The safeguards 
system was generally recognized as one of the great achievements of the 
Agency, many countries were subject to it, and experience showed that it 
operated efficiently and competently. However, it was worth asking to what 
extent it had been effective in preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. The system had certainly been effective wherever States, in the 
exercise of their sovereignty, had permitted it to be. However, safeguards 
ended where the strategic interests of States began. That was a reality of 
international law which no one could deny, and if a regime of co-operation and 
equal rights was to be set up, therefore, it would be necessary to create a 
supranationally binding system of some kind. 
85. The third question was whether the Agency was properly fulfilling its 
function of assuring that atomic energy served the interests of a better life 
for mankind by promoting international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. Much progress had indeed been achieved in that area, because 
no strategic considerations stood in the way. On the contrary, co-operation 
in that field had become a genuine global endeavour without frontiers, and 
that applied not only to the utilization of atomic energy as a power source, 
but also to the use of radiation and isotopes in agriculture, biology, 
medicine, industry and hydrology. Venezuela firmly supported the Agency's 
activities in those areas and had benefited much from them, in particular from 
the regional programme known as ARCAL, which had become a magnificent 
instrument for co-operation throughout the Latin American region. The answer 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 25 


to the third question was thus that Venezuela had an interest in supporting 
and, indeed, strengthening the Agency as an instrument of international 
co-operation. 


86. Turning to the Agency's current financial difficulties, he said that 
Venezuela had been a reliable contributor in spite of its own financial 
problems and limited resources. It was certainly the responsibility of 
Member States to fulfil their commitments to international organizations. 
However, it was necessary also to consider the true value of the international 
co-operation achieved, which had been productive, no doubt, but in which much 
effort and many resources had been wasted in useless bureaucracy, repetitious 
plans, and a lack of understanding of the reality in each country. His 
delegation appealed to the managements of international organizations, at the 
present time of financial crisis, to review their programmes so that 
appropriate solutions could be found to the current problems in a spirit of 
collaboration. It had to be said clearly and simply that Venezuela could not 
accept any additional burden in its international commitments and that the 
organizations must adopt a policy of retrenchment which was in conformity with 
the present situation. 
87. That being said, he hoped that the Agency, having given such excellent 
results in the past, could rise to even better ones in the future, if all, 
great and small, worked together to create a nuclear civilization without 
frontiers for the good of all humanity. 
88. Mr. AVENDANO (Ecuador) congratulated the Agency on its thirtieth 
anniversary and on the contribution it had made since its foundation to peace, 
health and development throughout the world. 
89. Although Ecuador had only a limited number of projects related to 
nuclear energy, positive results had been obtained in the production of 
radiopharmaceuticals, in the provision of nuclear medicine services, 
particularly in cardiology, neurology and oncology, in agriculture, where 
nuclear techniques had been used for research on avoiding the harmful effects 
of fumigation and fertilization systems, and in the establishment of safety 
standards for the protection of life and the environment. In addition, his 
country would continue to participate in the ARCAL programme. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 26 


90. The earthquake which had occurred in March 1987 had been a serious 
setback for his country's projects, however, and Ecuador hoped that the 
international community, particularly the large donor countries, would be able 
to provide effective assistance to its people. 
91. His country had always been in favour of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy while condemning any activity which diverted that form of energy to 
other, destructive purposes. For that reason, it supported international 
co-operation to prevent such diversion and had signed such international 
instruments as the Tlatelolco Treaty and a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency to demonstrate the peaceful nature of its own nuclear energy activities. 
92. Nuclear accidents, like the hazards of thermonuclear war, respected no 
frontiers and illustrated the disastrous consequences of the use of nuclear 
energy as a destructive force. Thus, all countries must make every effort to 
ensure the safety of their nuclear facilities. The Agency was playing an 
important role in maintaining confidence in the safe and peaceful use of 
nuclear energy, and in that context his country particularly welcomed the 
entry into force of the conventions on early notification and emergency 
assistance. 
93. Peace signified not merely the absence of war, but peaceful co-existence 
free of threats and tensions. Ecuador was in favour of dialogue and detente 
and was opposed to all warlike confrontations which might have incalculable 
and harmful consequences for mankind in general. It therefore reiterated its 
support for the Agency's noble objectives and paid tribute to the 
Secretariat's valuable efforts in seeking to attain them. 
94. Mr. FITZGERALD (Ireland) said that the current session of the 
General Conference was especially significant in that it marked the Agency's 
thirtieth anniversary. During the previous 30 years, the Agency had made a 
major contribution to world peace and to strengthening the collective security 
of its Member States. 
95. Another significant date, namely the twentieth anniversary of the 
conclusion of NPT, was to occur in 1988. While his country remained deeply 
dissatisfied with the present scale of the nuclear arms race, particularly 
between the two superpowers, it felt that the restrictions imposed by NPT had 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 2 7 


helped to avoid an even more serious escalation of the problem of nuclear 
weapons. As one of the original signatories, Ireland reaffirmed its full and 
unconditional commitment to NPT and its belief in the validity and purpose of 


its provisions. 


96. One of the priority aims of the United Nations was the maintenance of 
international peace and security through the collective efforts of 
Member States. In the nuclear age, all States and peoples were inextricably 
linked in a complex system of interrelationships, within which the concepts of 
national and international security could no longer be considered in 
isolation. It was as necessary now as it had been in 1968 for the 
international community to face up to the nuclear threat and to concentrate 
its collective will on the preservation of international peace and security. 
Of all the attempts to deal with that threat, none had been of greater 
significance than NPT. NPT united 130 States in a firm commitment to the 
belief that nuclear weapons were unacceptable as a long-term basis for 
security. It made a major contribution to world stability by inhibiting the 
spread of nuclear weapons and underlining an obligation to pursue a path 
towards nuclear disarmament. In that context, he welcomed Spain's decision to 
accede to the Treaty. 
97. The Treaty had originally been formulated in response to widespread 
concern at the prospect of a world in which nuclear weapons might become more 
widely available, a phenomenon which could well have led to their use in war. 
Had the feared proliferation of nuclear weapons taken place, it would have 
destroyed all hope of establishing peace and security for all nations and 
would probably have resulted in a worldwide nuclear arms race of gigantic 
proportions. The fact that that had not happened had been largely due to the 
willingness of those non-nuclear States which had signed NPT to renounce 
forever the acquisition of nuclear weapons, seeing that their possession could 
in fact only diminish their security. It was greatly to be regretted that 
some States still refused to see the logic of that position and had not 
acceded to NPT. His delegation urged them to reconsider their position. 
NPT did not impose obligations on non-nuclear States only - rather it embodied 
an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations. Those 



GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 28 


States, Ireland among them, which had renounced nuclear weapons had delegated 
special responsibility to States which already possessed such weapons. 
Ireland continued to follow with great interest the current dialogue between 
the United States and the Soviet Union and welcomed the recent superpower 
agreement to eliminate all intermediate-range nuclear weapons, which 
represented a step towards reversing the nuclear arms race and easing tensions 
generally. It was to be hoped that that would represent but a first step in 
eliminating all nuclear weapons and that progress could also be made in the 
not-too-distant future in other areas of the superpower dialogue, particularly 
strategic nuclear weapons. 


98. It had been encouraging, in the months after Chernobyl, to see that the 
world community had enhanced international co-operation on nuclear safety. 
That momentum had to be maintained, while action had been taken and progress 
made on many of the proposals on nuclear safety and radiological protection 
made at the first special session of the General Conference the previous year, 
much still remained to be done. The need for further progress in that area 
had also been highlighted by the recommendations of the Brundtland report on 
nuclear energy and the environment, including public safety. His Government 
endorsed the approach recommended in the report and would support proposals 
when they came up for consideration at the United Nations. The 
recommendations should also be studied by the Agency, the CEC and other fora 
which promoted regional co-operation. 
99. A number of matters should be treated with high priority by the 
Agency's Member States. Many countries which had chosen not to generate 
electricity from nuclear power were justifiably concerned about the 
transboundary effects of other countries' nuclear power programmes, and 
positive action was therefore required. An important step would be to ensure 
that operational safety standards were as high as possible, uniform and 
subject to independent verification; the Agency's Nuclear Safety Standards 
would be an appropriate basis. Countries with nuclear power programmes should 
accept such standards for their nuclear installations and agree to a system 
for verifying their maintenance. Also, those standards should be revised to 
reflect the best technology and experience available. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 29 


100. The concept of the Agency's Operational Safety Review Teams (OSARTs) 
had achieved general acceptance internationally. The experience and differing 
perspectives brought by the visiting experts enabled a valuable independent 
second opinion to be given on the operation of a nuclear installation. He 
hoped that countries which had not yet done so would submit their installations 
to such a review and particularly welcomed the United Kingdom's announcement 
that it would soon arrange for an OSART mission. While the OSARTs were a 
commendable example of international co-operation in nuclear safety, the 
concept should be further developed. At the Board of Governors his country 
had made a proposal which was based on the OSART concept and which would 
complement the OSART programme. The approach proposed was more general than 
that of OSART missions, aiming at voluntary reviews of regulatory organizations 
to provide independent advice on the possible optimization of regulatory 
activities and to exchange information on good regulatory practices. He 
looked forward to the Agency's further consideration of the proposal when the 
question of the exchange of information on regulatory practices was discussed 
in the coming years. 
101. The conclusion, signature and adoption of the early notification and 
emergency assistance conventions within a matter of months of the Chernobyl 
disaster was another example of valuable international co-operation in nuclear 
safety. However, practical benefits would depend on a clear understanding 
and, if necessary, the elaboration of the relevant procedures for early 
notification and for assistance under the conventions, which should be 
clarified and tested from time to time by means of emergency exercises. 
102. The transboundary consequences of the Chernobyl disaster were still 
being experienced and although the tangible effects on international trade had 
diminished, the effects on health could at present only be guessed. There was 
now an opportunity to check and verify risk estimates for low levels of 
radiation dose by means of epidemiological studies: Ireland would support and 
encourage those efforts and looked forward to the publication of the results. 
103. The inadequacy of existing arrangements for compensating the victims of 
a nuclear accident were a further source of concern. The effectiveness of 
existing international conventions on third-party liability was limited by the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 30 


small number of States which had adhered to them, the amounts of compensation 
available and the types of damage covered. Ireland therefore supported the 
efforts being made to harmonize those conventions, but stressed the need to 
start work to overcome their other shortcomings. Countries that were confident 
of the safety of their nuclear power programmes had an opportunity to reassure 
the international community that the likelihood of a major nuclear accident 
was remote by accepting responsibility for damage which could result from such 
an accident. The international agreement already reached on the risks from 
space exploration and development could serve as a model for the nuclear field. 


104. The Agency's current cash-flow difficulties were a very serious 
matter. While many Member States were experiencing difficult economic 
circumstances and there was a need for stringency in all aspects of the 
Agency's operations, it was nevertheless essential to the vital activities of 
the Agency that it should not be deprived, even temporarily, of the necessary 
funds. He therefore appealed to all Member States to fulfil their financial 
obligations to the Agency on time, so that the organization's activities would 
not suffer and the time of the Director General and his staff not be wasted. 
105. Mr. OLUMOKO (United Nations Council for Namibia) congratulated the 
Director General and the Secretariat on the occasion of the Agency's thirtieth 
anniversary. 
106. The continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa, which 
constituted an act of aggression against the Namibian people and a challenge 
to the United Nations, represented a serious threat to international peace and 
security. It was now 21 years since the United Nations had terminated 
South Africa's mandate over Namibia, but the apartheid regime in Pretoria was 
still in illegal occupation of the territory. During that time, the 
international community had on repeated occasions condemned the regime's 
oppressive policies, and called for its withdrawal. One such occasion had 
been the International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia, 
held in Vienna in July 1986. 
107. 1987 would mark the forty-second year that the question of Namibia had 
been taken up as a major concern of the General Assembly. It was now 
nine years since the Security Council had adopted resolution 435 (1978) 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 31 


endorsing the United Nations plan for Namibia, yet the impasse still 
continued. Efforts to bring about the implementation of Security Council 
resolution 435 (1978) had foundered on the issue of the prior withdrawal of 
Cuban troups from Angola, the so-called concept of linkage. Both the General 
Assembly and the Security Council had rejected that concept. 


108. Pending the implementation of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions 
against South Africa, the General Assembly had called upon all States to take 
legislative, administrative and other measures in order effectively to isolate 
South Africa politically, economically, militarily and culturally. The 
Council for Namibia appreciated the efforts made by many States in that 
regard. 
109. The Council was deeply concerned about the plunder of Namibia's natural 
resources by South Africa, certain western States and other foreign economic 
interests, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the relevant 
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, the advisory 
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971 and Decree No. 1 
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia. In an effort to 
implement that decree, the Council had contacted governments and corporations 
and had organized hearings and seminars with a view to halting foreign 
investments and operations in Namibia. The General Assembly had affirmed that 
those States which were now illegally operating in Namibia and exploiting its 
natural resources would be liable to pay reparations to a future legitimate 
government of an independent Namibia. In addition, the General Assembly had 
declared that the continued exploitation of the territory's natural resources, 
notably its uranium deposits, and the accumulation of profits by foreign 
economic and financial interests, were a grave threat to the integrity and 
prosperity of Namibia and a major obstacle to its independence. The Council 
was continuing to compile statistical information on the wealth illegally 
extracted from the territory, with a view to assessing the extent of 
compensation which would eventually be due to an independent Namibia. 
110. In May 1985, the Council had declared that it would initiate legal 
proceedings against corporations and concerns engaged in the plunder of 
Namibia's natural resources. Legal proceedings had recently been instituted 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 32 


in the District Court of The Hague against the Dutch uranium enrichment plant, 
URENCO-Nederland V.O.F. and its State-controlled managing partner, 
Ultra-Centrifuge Nederland N.V., seeking to prevent them from carrying out 
orders on the basis of purchases of Namibian uranium. 


111. The current situation in southern Africa was a gloomy one: the 
Pretoria regime's continued illegal occupation of Namibia had been 
characterized by a series of repressive measures, including conscription, 
curfew and martial law. The need for the imposition of comprehensive and 
mandatory sanctions against South Africa had become even more urgent, and he 
appealed to members of the Conference to exert the maximum pressure on the 
Pretoria regime to cease its obstruction of progress towards Namibia's 
independence. 
112. The United Nations system, together with the international community, 
should take more energetic and concerted action in support of the legitimate 
struggle of the Namibian people for self-determination, a struggle which was 
led by its sole authentic representative, the South West Africa People's 
Organization (SWAPO). In that regard, he welcomed the decision by the Board 
of Governors to recommend to the Conference the suspension of South Africa's 
privileges and rights of membership of the Agency, in accordance with 
Article XIX.B of its Statute. 
113. He thanked those Member States which had supported the efforts of the 
Council to discharge its responsibilities, and again called on the Agency to 
take all necessary measures to implement General Assembly resolutions aimed at 
strengthening co-operation between the Agency and the people of Namibia. The 
Agency had an important role to play in promoting and developing technical 
assistance projects for Namibia, before independence, during the transitional 
period, and after independence. In particular, it could make an increased 
contribution to training activities, which should be conceived as a 
consolidated and comprehensive assistance programme, specifically designed to 
meet the country's needs. 
114. He was grateful for what the Agency had done to assist the Namibian 
people through the Council's Nationhood Programme, and hoped that that 
programme would be substantially enlarged. He also commended the efforts made 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 33 


by the Director General over the past few years to increase the representation 
of developing countries in the Secretariat. The Council would like to see 
Namibians recruited for employment by the Agency, and would in due course put 


forward names of suitably qualified candidates. 


115. In conclusion, following the request made by the General Assembly to all 
specialized agencies, he wished to call upon the International Atomic Energy 
Agency to continue to grant a waiver of assessment to Namibia during the 
period in which it was represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia. 
116. Mr. SAKO (Cote d'lvoire) congratulated the Agency on its efforts, 
during the thirty years of its existence, to attain its statutory objectives 
of accelerating and enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world and ensuring that assistance 
provided by it or at its request or under its supervision or control was not 
used in such a way as to further any military purpose. 
117. The effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system had allayed many 
suspicions and reassured Member States that material and facilities under 
safeguards served only peaceful purposes. The system had achieved a high 
level of credibility, it played a decisive role in the implementation of the 
NPT, and it had been cited many times at the Geneva Conference on Disarmament 
as a model for the verification of arms limitation agreements. However, 
international security would be even better served if all States possessing 
nuclear facilities would place them under Agency safeguards in the near future. 
118. The Agency had also done much to assist Member States in developing 
nuclear power, which now accounted for a significant share of electricity 
production in many developed and some developing countries. In attempting to 
make that source of power available to a greater number of developing 
countries, the Agency had provided technical assistance and manpower training 
and carried out extensive studies on the infrastructure needs which must be 
met before nuclear power could be introduced. The report of a senior expert 
group on that subject recently issued by the Agencytl], he hoped, would help 
solve many of the problems which developing countries faced in the promotion 
and financing of their nuclear power programmes. 
[1] See document GOV/INF/527. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 34 


119. Other Agency activities which were of particular importance to 
developing countries included the use of nuclear techniques in food and 
agriculture, life sciences, physical sciences and medicine. His own country 
placed special hopes in the use of those techniques in the area of food and 
agriculture, and he hoped that the assistance provided by the Agency in that 
area would continue to receive broad support from Member States. In that 
connection, he wished to express his country's gratitude to those donors which 
had provided extrabudgetary resources for the implementation of several of its 
high-priority projects. 
120. International co-operation was more than ever necessary to resolve the 
problems of the future, especially where the non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and support to the developing countries in their efforts to close the 
gap to the industrialized countries were concerned. In that context, it was 
particularly important to provide financing on easier terms for developing 
countries* nuclear power programmes and to make resources available on a 
reliable and predictable basis for the execution of their vital development 
projects. 
121. In conclusion, he wished to stress the importance also of strengthening 
nuclear safety measures, in particular by the future use of reactors in which 
human error was minimized - the need for which had been highlighted by the 
Chernobyl accident. 
122. Mr. KONGSIRI (Thailand) noted that throughout the thirty years of 
its existence, the Agency had proved to be a valuable institution not only by 
contributing to international peace and security through its attempts to curb 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons, but also by helping to improve human 
living standards through its extensive activities in the field of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
123. There was no doubt that safeguards was one of the main functions of the 
Agency and his delegation believed that the Agency had performed that function 
exceptionally well. As a peace-loving country and a State party to the NPT, 
Thailand attached great importance to the nuclear non-proliferation regime, 
and to the continued effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 35 


124. Another principal function of the Agency was the promotion of 
international co-operation for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The 
Agency had also perfomed that function very satisfactorily. It had provided 
various types of technical assistance to developing countries, and had acted 
as a centre for international co-operation in various fields of nuclear energy. 
125. In the past year, several developments had enhanced technical 
co-operation and assistance between the Thai Government and the Agency. As 
always, it had actively participated in many of the Agency's programmes 
through technical assistance projects, the Regional Co-operative Agreement 
(RCA), research contracts, seminars, meetings and conferences. Following the 
signing of a tripartite agreement for the transfer of special nuclear 
materials, by the Thai Government, the Agency and the Government of the United 
States of America, Thailand had been provided with special nuclear material 
for 1985 and 1986 procurements of nuclear fuel elements for its research 
reactor amounting to US $50 000 each year. Such assistance had been very 
useful and his country was very grateful to the Agency and appreciated the 
generosity of the United States Government. In that connection, a Safety 
Mission had been sent to Thailand in June and the experts' comments and 
recommendations had been constructive and would be taken seriously to ensure 
better safety in his country's nuclear facilities. His country hoped that it 
would have the opportunity to receive another such mission. 
126. A number of technical assistance projects had been completed while many 
more projects were being implemented. One outstanding completed project was 
the Energy and Nuclear Power Planning Study for Thailand. The result of the 
study clearly indicated that nuclear power for electricity generation would be 
economical for Thailand after the year 2000. The result had been submitted to 
the Committee on Energy Policy for further consideration. 
127. His country was also very grateful to the Agency for the level of 
current assistance to Thailand which had been of paramount importance to its 
development activities. The activities under the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement Project had also been very useful. It was hoped that the level of 
technical assistance to Thailand for 1988 would, if not increased, at least 
remain at the same level. Nevertheless, his delegation was concerned at the 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 36 


view that the level of implementation rate should be taken as the measure of 
success. A rush to spend funds allocated to technical assistance on a project 
might lead to an undesirable situation where the benefits of such assistance 
to recipients became meaningless. 


128. No matter how valuable nuclear energy was as a source of energy, it 
would not benefit mankind if it were not safe. Nuclear energy would continue 
to be a precious asset of mankind so long as its harmful characteristics were 
controlled. The control mechanisms should cover not only measures designed to 
prevent nuclear accidents, but should also cover measures designed to provide 
early warning systems and emergency assistance in case of a nuclear accident. 
The adoption of the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and 
the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency was a step in the right direction. In that connection, he was happy 
to announce that his country would sign those two conventions, subject to 
ratification, before the end of the General Conference. 
129. Finally, his delegation was pleased to announce that it had already 
pledged its voluntary contribution of US $34 200 to the Agency's Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for the year 1988. 
130. Mr. PAPADEMAS (Cyprus) joined previous speakers in congratulating 
the Agency on its thirtieth anniversary and conveyed a message of congratulations 
from the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, to the 
Director General. 
131. The Agency was unique amongst the family of international organizations 
for its achievements in the service to humanity in areas such as nuclear power 
production and applications of nuclear energy in the fields of agriculture, 
medicine, water conservation and so on. In addition, the safety measures 
provided by the Agency helped to ensure the safe and peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. The safety regulations of all power plants should be inspected 
regularly by the Agency. 
132. Non-proliferation was essential and all nations should adhere to the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty since the accumulation of a gigantic stockpile of 
nuclear weapons was a constant and continuous threat to mankind's existence. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 3 7 


In that connection, the recent announcement of the two superpowers to conclude 
a summit treaty abolishing medium- and shorter-range nuclear missiles was very 
welcome and constituted an achievement of high historic importance. 


133. In conclusion, his delegation wished to thank the Agency for the 
technical assistance which it had provided to Cyprus in the fields of 
agriculture and medicine. Since not all countries could afford atomic 
reactors for electricity production the application of nuclear energy in other 
fields should perhaps be expanded for the benefit of more peoples, especially 
in the developing countries. Finally, his delegation was happy to announce 
its voluntary contribution of US $7600 to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund subject to parliamentary budgetary approval. 
134. Mr. ELTAHIR (Sudan) noted that the Agency's thirtieth anniversary 
commemorated many laudable achievements, especially in the implementation of 
the technical assistance programme. As the Director General had pointed out 
in his statement, many developing countries lacked the necessary infrastructure 
for radiation protection and the Agency could play a crucial role in that 
area. The report prepared by the group of experts concerning the problems and 
the possibility of developing the use of nuclear energy in developing 
countries was very useful and his delegation supported the conclusions of the 
report which highlighted the important contributions which the Agency could 
make in assisting developing countries in planning and implementing nuclear 
power programmes. Sudan hoped that Member States would arrive at a consensus 
concerning the implementation of the recommendations of the group of experts. 
135. His country was in the process of rehabilitation and reconstruction 
work following a period of drought and desertification. That work required 
many studies and careful programming of resources. Within that framework, 
Sudan was focusing its attention on nuclear power which could make a practical 
contribution to the country's social and economic development through the use 
of radioisotopes and irradiation techniques in medicine, agriculture, plant 
and animal husbandry as well as groundwater studies. It was hoped that new 
groundwater resources would be discovered in order to assist in the country's 
development. The Agency had repeatedly given advice promptly to the Sudan 
regarding the practical application of nuclear power. In particular, his 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 38 


country was very grateful to the Agency's Seibersdorf Laboratory for the 
considerable services which it had provided and hoped that the laboratory 
would be consolidated so that it could live up to expectations. 


136. The problem of the radioactive pollution of food following the 
Chernobyl accident highlighted the need to develop the necessary capabilities 
to ensure proper environmental and radiation protection. Assistance should be 
provided to developing countries in order to train the necessary scientific 
staff. There was a need to establish specific recommendations concerning 
acceptable levels of radioactivity in food which could be used when 
formulating national rules and regulations. With the Agency's assistance, his 
country had been able to establish a national radiation protection programme 
for people working in the medical and research fields; however, the field of 
radioactive waste management continued to require more assistance and 
technical preparation. 
137. The problem of the maintenance of sophisticated technical equipment was 
a source of concern to many countries. The frequent breakdown of such 
equipment could to some extent be avoided and it was hoped that more spare 
parts maintenance would be provided in order to prevent disruption of 
programmes. 
138. His country agreed in principle, on the Agency's budget for 1988, but 
wished to repeat its reservations regarding the principle of zero growth 
especially in relation to the Agency's development programmes which were of 
importance to developing countries. With regard to Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute his delegation felt that it was time to take positive steps to find a 
solution which satisfied the aspirations of the regions concerned so as to 
enhance the principle of equality in the distribution of seats on the Board 
among the various regions. 
139. The two Conventions on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and 
Assistance in Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency were very 
welcome and all countries which had not done so were urged to accede to those 
two conventions. The Agency should continue to expand its nuclear safety 
programme which was essential at regional and international levels. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 39 


140. It was regrettable that the racist regime in South Africa continued to 
defy the decisions of the international community. South Africa's refusal to 
place all its nuclear facilities under the Agency's safeguards system 
constituted a challenge to Africa as a whole and to neighbouring countries in 
particular. The international community should therefore support Africa in 
its efforts to put an end to South Africa's defiance and violation of all 
international resolutions. Furthermore, the co-operation and solidarity 
between South Africa and Israel represented a danger to the Middle East region 
and prevented the Middle East and Africa from being declared nuclear-free 
zones. 
141. Mr. ERTEL (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance - CMEA), began 
by reading out a letter to the Director General from the Secretary of the 
CMKA, Mr. V. Sychev. 
142. The letter conveyed the congratulations of the CMEA on the occasion of 
the thirtieth anniversary of the Agency, which it considered the most 
important, representative and authoritative body in the field of co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The CMEA Secretariat welcomed the 
continuing development of co-operation between the two organizations on the 
basis of the agreement concluded in 1975 and looked forward to further 
collaboration in the safe development of nuclear power, the use of nuclear 
energy exclusively for peaceful purposes, the strengthening of confidence in 
international relations, and the creation of a comprehensive system of 
international peace and security. 
143. Having read out that message, he went on to say that 1986 had been an 
important stage in the implementation of the decisions of the June 1984 
economic summit meeting of the CMEA member countries which had since 
reasserted the importance of seeking new forms of closer co-operation to 
increase national outputs on the basis of scientific and technical progress so 
as to assure higher levels of economic efficiency and public well-being. 
144. Through a number of agreements, CMEA member countries were engaged in 
large-scale international scientific and industrial co-operation under a 
Co-ordinated Programme for Scientific and Technical Progress up to the 
year 2000; that programme had become the basis for scientific and technical 

GC(XXXI)/0R.299 
page 40 


co-operation within the CMEA, an organization which was playing a leading role 
in promoting socialist economic integration through specialization and 
co-operation in science, technology and industrial production and through 
expanding foreign trade. 


145. The 42nd Session of CMKA in November 1986 had called for more rapid 
attainment of those goals and had encouraged the use of such novel measures as 
direct links in the areas of science and industry between the economic 
organizations of individual member countries and the establishment by 
interested countries of joint industrial enterprises, scientific 
organizations, and other ventures on an economic basis. 
146. The CMEA member countries had addressed the problems of energy and raw 
material resources by collaborating over a number of large projects, jointly 
expanding the capacity of nuclear power plants, and agreeing on co-operative 
measures to save energy and raw materials. Nuclear power had not lost its 
significance as a reliable power source for the future, and nuclear power 
plants in CMKA member countries had produced some 209 000 million kWh of 
electricity in 1986, which represented approximately 10% of the total 
electricity generated. Plants using WWER-type water-water reactors, designed 
in the USSR and built with Soviet technical assistance, had been operating 
successfully in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and the German Democratic Republic. 
Further such reactors were in the planning stage or under construction in 
Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, and 
Poland. 
14 7. In recognizing the importance of further co-operation in the field of 
nuclear power, the 42nd Session had approved a construction programme for 
nuclear power plants and nuclear heating plants to the year 2000. The 
programme would take the total power of nuclear plants in CMEA member 
countries, excluding the USSR, to 50 gigawatts, as against approximately 
8 gigawatts in 1986. Nuclear power in those countries would thus account for 
30-40% of the power generated. In the USSR, the share of nuclear power would 
be boosted from about 11% in 1986 to about 30% which would mean expanding 
nuclear power plant capacity by a factor of 5-6. In addition, nuclear district 
heating plants would be built both in the USSR and in the other CMEA countries. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 41 


148. So comprehensive a programme of nuclear power development would be 
possible only through close scientific, technical and industrial co-operation, 
based on the highest levels of nuclear engineering, specialization and joint 
efforts between the CMEA member countries and Yugoslavia. Those countries 
already had the capability of assembly line construction of 440 HW(e) power 
plants with WWER-440 reactors and preparations for the construction of 
WWER-1000 reactors were nearing completion. 
149. If the objectives set by the Session were to be reached, it was 
especially important to link them with the division of responsibilities under 
the Co-ordinated Programme to the year 2000, so that nuclear power plants 
could incorporate the latest technological advances, and safety features. 
With a view to faster and safer development of nuclear power under the 
Co-ordinated Programme and the plan for technical co-operation over the 
period 1986-90, joint efforts were envisaged for co-operation and 
co-ordination in research and development work on the rapid adoption of 
WWER-1000 reactor technology, on high-output fast reactors, and on equipment 
for control and monitoring systems in nuclear power plants and for radiation 
protection. It was intended to further the development of combined nuclear 
district heating and power plants and single-purpose nuclear heating plants 
and to seek ways of guaranteeing nuclear safety, reprocessing power plant 
waste, decontaminating surfaces, and transporting spent fuel. 
150. The development of nuclear power had brought new concerns to the 
population relating to the safety of nuclear power plants and the prevention 
of environmental pollution. The Three Mile Island and Chernobyl accidents, as 
well as other accidents in capitalist countries, had failed to curtail the use 
of nuclear power; on the contrary, they had focused attention on ensuring it 
was safer. The CMEA member countries welcomed the response of the Agency's 
Member States to the Soviet proposal for promoting co-operation between all 
States in order to create an international regime of safe nuclear power 
development. 
151. The CMEA member countries were prepared to make their contribution 
under the supplementary nuclear safety programme and the two Agency-sponsored 
conventions. They had already devised measures to increase nuclear safety at 

GC(XXXI)/OR.299 
page 42 


power plants and to enhance radiation protection, for example by maintaining 
high standards of quality in design, construction and operation; improving 
repair techniques and non-destructive and diagnostic in-service testing 
methods for equipment and piping, and introducing better personnel training in 
design, construction and operating procedures, in radiation protection 
procedures for staff, surrounding populations and the environment under normal 
operating and accident conditions, and in the prevention of accidents, the 
elimination of their consequences and the development of legal documents and 
conventions. Measures to redesign and modernize existing power plants were 
also proposed. 


152. The CMEA member countries believed that the issue of nuclear safety was 
inextricably linked with the halting of material preparations for nuclear 
war. Recognizing that nuclear arsenals threatened life throughout the world, 
the Soviet Union had put forward a programme supported by all peace-loving 
people to eliminate all nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction 
from the earth before the end of the century. 
153. The States members of the Warsaw Pact had reaffirmed, in the documents 
for the May 1987 meeting of the Political Consultative Committee, their 
conviction that the prevention of war and its perpetual elimination from 
peoples' lives, the maintenance of world peace, the halting of the arms race 
and a movement towards specific disarmament measures aimed ultimately at full 
and multilateral disarmament, would call for the joint efforts of all 
countries and all peace-loving forces. 
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m. 



GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
March 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDREDTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 24 September 1987, at 3.30 p.m. 


President; Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


General debate and annual report 
for 1986 (continued) 1-7 1 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Turkey 1 -8 
Yugoslavia 9 - 15 
Peru 16 - 22 
Uruguay 23 - 28 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 29 - 32 
Zambia 33 - 42 
Uganda 43 - 49 
Romania 50 - 56 
Tunisia 57 - 66 
Kenya 67 - 71 


Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat 72 104 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 3 November 1987 


[**] GC(XXXI)/818. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-1206 
2485e/0302e 



GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1986 (GC(XXXI)/800 and Corr.l) (continued) 


1. Mr. ERNER (Turkey) said that the nuclear accidents which had 
occurred in 1979 and 1986 had drawn the attention of world public opinion to 
the Agency as an unparalleled international institution for promoting 
co-operation in the field of nuclear safety. The Agency enjoyed a confidence 
and credibility which had not been acquired easily. Its credibility it owed 
to all those who, in spite of great difficulties, had worked for the Agency's 
success by applying consistent policies in the areas of technical co-operation, 
safeguards and nuclear safety. He wished to pay tribute to those who had 
conceived the Agency in the 1940s and early 1950s, and also to the scientists, 
statesmen and diplomats who had foreseen long in advance the dangers inherent 
in nuclear energy, particularly when used without control. They had understood 
very well that the spreading of nuclear techniques and means of production 
could not be limited to one or two countries. Over the years, despite its 
limited financial resources, the Agency had acquired the reputation of an 
efficient organization providing its Member States with very useful services 
ranging from the transfer of knowledge to safeguards, and those Members were 
thus rightly proud of it. 
2. In the past years, all countries had been obliged to reflect more 
deeply on the question of the safe operation of nuclear installations in 
general and of nuclear power plants in particular. Nuclear accidents with 
transboundary radiological consequences such as that at Chernobyl raised 
problems with multiple facets, economic, commercial, technical, political, 
administrative and legal, which called for international action and 
co-operation. The Agency should be commended for the work it had already done 
on the question of nuclear safety, and in particular on the NUSS programme, 
and the activities and publications following upon the Chernobyl accident had 
inspired a deserved confidence in the Agency, which had succeeded in creating 
a favourable atmosphere for effective international co-operation at the 
bilateral and multilateral level in the field of nuclear safety. 
3. His country considered that the Agency was entitled to the unreserved 
support of its Members in its efforts to play a more comprehensive and 
effective role in the field of nuclear safety, because another accident like 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 3 


that of Chernobyl would cause irreparable damage to nuclear power as a 
reliable source of energy which currently accounted for 15% of world 
electricity production. His Government would therefore fully support Agency 
activities aimed at improving nuclear safety at the international level, and 
it proposed that nuclear safety be made one of the Agency's objectives by an 
appropriate amendment of the Statute. 


A. He congratulated the Agency on the speed and efficiency of its response 
to the consequences of the Chernobyl accident, which had revealed serious 
defects in the arrangements for international co-operation in such cases. 
Turkey had signed the conventions on early notification and emergency 
assistance, but it considered that those conventions did not cover all nuclear 
accidents with transboundary consequences, whatever the source of the 
accident. Moreover, they did not give sufficient attention to safety 
questions related to the design and operation of nuclear power plants, or to 
the establishment of emergency plans. It would be desirable to set up a 
system whereby all Member States, and in particular neighbouring States, could 
communicate to each other, under multilateral or bilateral arrangements, all 
data relating to the safety of existing and planned nuclear facilities. 
5. Turning to the measures taken by Turkey as a result of the Chernobyl 
accident, he said that, in connection with the early notification convention, 
the establishment of an advance warning system consisting of 40 stations had 
been started in 1987, with the aim of detecting accidents with transboundary 
effects and taking efficient measurements of the radiation. Ten of those 
stations were to enter into service in 1987. 
6. He wished to thank the Director General and the Secretariat for having 
managed, despite the immense workload imposed by the Chernobyl accident, to 
implement the bulk of the regular programme for 1986. In particular, his 
country regarded the technical assistance and co-operation programme as one of 
the main pillars of the Agency and was grateful for the assistance it 
received. It had already pledged its share of voluntary contributions and 
programme costs at the assessed levels. On the subject of budget growth, the 
Director General had been right to say that there must be some limit to zero 
growth. Otherwise there would be a danger of no longer being able to satisfy 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page A 

the expectations of Member States, whether they be industrialized or 
developing countries, which would compromise the effectiveness and credibility 
of the Agency. 


7. Turkey had maintained close relations with the Agency for thirty years. 
It had sat four times on the Board of Governors, had participated actively in 
all sessions of the General Conference and in other meetings, and had also 
contributed to the drafting of the two conventions adopted the previous year. 
It had taken the Agency's safety guides as a basis for its own national 
legislation, and it had signed and ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material. 
8. In thirty years of technical co-operation with the Agency, Turkey had 
enjoyed the benefit of 302 fellowships, 27 individual scientific visits, 
252 training courses, 24 study tours and - since 1973 - 32 projects, of 
which 22 had already been completed. A RAPAT team had visited Turkey the 
previous year, and the Agency had carried out technical missions and launched 
a co-ordinated research programme on the probabilistic evaluation of research 
reactor safety there. 
9. Mr. KRSTIC (Yugoslavia), expressing his best wishes to the Agency 
on the occasion of its thirtieth anniversary, said that all those years had 
been a period of fruitful international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. It would be difficult to say which was the greatest merit of 
the Agency. Since its establishment, it had contributed to the solution of 
numerous problems relating to the development of the various applications of 
nuclear science and technology. It had played an invaluable role in 
strengthening international co-operation for development. Under its auspices, 
various important international agreements had been signed, including the 
conventions adopted the previous year, which had become elements of the 
institutional framework of international relations. 
10. It was only natural that the developing countries should wish to 
accelerate their economic growth and to acquire peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and technology. The establishment of the Agency had made progress in 
that direction possible. He commended the Agency on the implementation of the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 5 


programmes approved for 1986. His country had achieved useful results through 
its co-operation with the Agency, had benefited from considerable technical 
assistance and had itself arranged various training courses. 


11. Thanking the Director General for his very comprehensive opening 
statement, he said it was easy to understand that the report of the Brundtland 
Commission had given no answer to many questions relating to primary energy 
production as a source of environmental deterioration. The problem was that 
there probably was no right answer and that nuclear power, as everyone knew, 
was itself possibly a non-answer, even if it did not, or not to any great 
extent, add to the pollution risks mentioned in the report. 
12. Yugoslavia had one nuclear power plant and several research reactors in 
service. A long-term socio-economic development plan was under preparation. 
In that context, earlier plans concerning the total energy production 
capacity, including nuclear, were being reviewed. Preliminary evaluations 
showed that the existing capacity plus that of the plants under construction 
would be sufficient to meet the needs up to the year 2000, provided that the 
energy was used more rationally and the equipment more efficiently. Thus, the 
decision to build a further nuclear power plant had been postponed not because 
of the omnipresent problems relating to the applications of nuclear energy, 
but rather because a new development strategy had been adopted. 
13. Yugoslavia attached very great importance to fusion research and hoped 
to participate in the development work on any projects in that field. 
14. It seemed that among the various peaceful uses of nuclear energy it was 
always the generation of electricity which attracted the roost attention. That 
was perhaps natural, especially since that was the use which gave rise to the 
most controversies and which brought in the most money for the nuclear 
lobbies. Even so, the Agency must not neglect the other applications of 
nuclear techniques: in agriculture, medicine, industry or the many other 
fields which played an increasingly important role in the development of 
countries. Yugoslavia was satisfied with its co-operation with the Agency, 
which had enabled it to obtain good results, and it hoped that such 
co-operation would continue to be strengthened. During the present period of 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 6 


vital importance for the promotion of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, it was imperative to consolidate the Agency's 
programme and co-operation procedures in the interests of socio-economic 
development. The Agency could play a very important role in that context. 


15. In conclusion, he said that in order to be crowned with success, the 
present session of the General Conference would have to give a new impetus to 
the Agency so that a solution could be found to all the current problems which 
came within its province. 
16. Mr. NEGREIROS PORTELLA (Peru) said that the Agency's activities 
during the past thirty years had on the whole been fruitful and that his 
Government was particularly gratified at the success obtained in the field of 
international co-operation. Many thought that multilateralism was undergoing 
a crisis, but Peru believed it was approaching its maturity. Many thought 
they were on a road of confrontation, but Peru believed it to be one of 
agreement. The Agency had lived through such positive experience, and that 
was why his delegation was optimistic with regard to its work, one of the best 
expressions of understanding between peoples. There were various signs to 
show that such understanding reigned in the Agency: co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, commitments to nuclear safety, exchange of 
technology and scientific information, conventions on early notification and 
emergency assistance, and many others. 
17. Nevertheless, it would be wrong to ignore the existence of certain 
discouraging and disappointing factors. Unfortunately, too many Agency 
Members were falling into disquieting contradictions. States had committed 
themselves to accelerating and increasing the contribution of atomic energy to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world, but often they used it 
instead to increase uncertainty, discord and inequality and to continue the 
unrestrained and inhuman competition over the creation of devices for 
destruction. Thirty years previously, despite the serious political 
confrontations which had then existed, there had been no danger of conflicts 
at any moment leading to extremes that might jeopardize the very survival of 
the human race. That was now no longer the case, and he appealed to the 
countries concerned to respect the commitments which they had so far ignored, 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 7 


but which nevertheless remained in force. It was time for the negotiations 
between the nuclear superpowers to lead to concrete results. There were also 
contradictions with regard to safeguards. While certain countries were asked 
to submit their nuclear facilities to safeguards, it was hoped that such 
measures would not be required of other countries. However, it was not too 


late to put the situation right and to make the most of difficult experiences. 


18. The previous year, his delegation had informed the General Conference 
that Peru, despite its enormous economic and social difficulties, was 
successfully devoting its scarce economic resources to the basic sectors of 
its economy, among which the peaceful use of nuclear energy occupied an 
important place. With the same enthusiasm and interest, and on behalf of the 
democracy which existed in the country, Peru would continue to make the 
greatest efforts to achieve certain objectives in agriculture, medicine and 
industry, and in so doing it hoped to receive the valuable assistance of the 
Agency and other organizations such as the United Nations Development 
Programme. 
19. Among other achievements, he mentioned the construction and outfitting 
of the Nuclear Research Centre at a total cost of US $110 million; that had 
been carried out in collaboration with the Argentine National Atomic Energy 
Commission, and Peru was receiving active assistance from the Agency in making 
the Centre operational. The Centre included a radioisotope production 
facility, which was to come into service by April 1988 at the latest, at the 
same time as the Centre itself. It also included a national radiation 
protection centre which would ensure that optimum safety levels were observed 
in accordance with the Agency's standards and that facilities were used 
properly, in particular radiographic equipment, thus contributing to the 
protection of the population against the hazards arising from the use of 
ionizing radiation. 
20. In the training of technical personnel, Peru had continued to make use 
of the theoretical and practical training courses offered either by the Agency 
or by friendly governments or other regional sources of co-operation. A 
fourth class of nuclear engineers would soon be graduating from the Advanced 
Studies Centre and would go on to occupy posts in the Peruvian Nuclear Energy 

GC(XXXI)/0R.300 
page 8 


Institute (IPEN) and the Nuclear Research Centre. In that connection, his 
delegation thanked the Agency for having enabled more than 38 scientists to 
receive training abroad in 1986. 


21. Once the Nuclear Research Centre became operational, Peru would enter 
into a period of far more concrete activities. In the area of medical 
applications, the number of biomedical studies was to exceed 10 000 in 1987, 
with the help of the Arequipa and Trujillo centres. The National Agronomy 
University was continuing its work on obtaining precocious mutants of barley 
resistant to parasites and drought. It had played an important role in 
establishing the Institute for Nuclear Applications in Agriculture. The 
project for extracting uranium at Macusani continued to make progress, and it 
should be possible very soon to evaluate the uranium reserves, which were of 
the order of 5000 to 10 000 tonnes, more precisely. It would then be possible 
to launch a modular project, with low operating costs, for the extraction and 
treatment of the ore. In the field of industrial applications, the Agency had 
supported a project to provide IPEN with a multi-purpose irradiation facility 
and a liquid nitrogen production plant. 
22. All those activities showed clearly that the Peruvian Government wished 
to continue resolutely to support the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
international technical co-operation which, in the nuclear field, represented 
an ideal complement to the efforts made by the developing countries 
themselves. His Government therefore wished particularly to thank the Agency 
and its Director General, as well as the friendly Governments of Argentina, 
the Federal Republic of Germany, the United States of America, Italy and 
Finland. 
23. Mr. COSTANZO (Uruguay) recalled that his country had a 
long-standing tradition where institutions were concerned and had been among 
the pioneers in the creation, organization and development of innumerable 
international institutions. At the beginning of the century, a great 
Uruguayan statesman had wondered, during an international conference at 
The Hague, why, if so many alliances could be concluded to wage war, it should 
not be possible to create an alliance for peace. For the Uruguayans, that 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 9 


statesman's proposal had been the direct cause of the establishment of the 
League of Nations, the first attempt on a worldwide scale to settle 
differences between States peacefully. 


24. In Latin America, the Tlatelolco Treaty had arisen from the same high 
aspirations, and Uruguay had granted it full support, largely on a moral 
plane, but enriched by its exemplary democratic experience; in addition, it 
had had the signal honour that one of its most representative personalities 
had been twice appointed General Secretary of OPANAL. The hopes of the 
countries which had founded the Agency had been little different: to master 
the terrifying forces of nuclear energy in order to place them at the service 
of the peaceful development of countries. 
25. Uruguay had not rested content with advocating its rigorous conception 
of moral conduct by States in the international organizations: it had put it 
into practice. Peace was an indivisible set of measures which consisted both 
in containing the force of armies and in attempting to master nature, but it 
was also the consequence of a way of life, a moral conscience, and a balanced 
and equitable economic system. 
26. The nuclear section was important in Uruguay and, despite the economic 
difficulties, multiple efforts were being deployed to provide the country with 
an organization corresponding perfectly to its objectives. The recent 
establishment of a Directorate of Nuclear Techniques under the Ministry of 
Industry and Energy was a specific example of the Uruguayan Government's 
aspirations. That organization's mandate was to apply the policies and plans 
worked out by the National Atomic Energy Commission, which had so far been in 
charge of activities in that sector and which would henceforth be responsible 
for advising the executive power in matters of policy and planning and for 
co-ordinating relations with the Agency. 
27. His Government trusted that the support it had always given to the 
Agency would bear fruit in the near future, and it hoped that that 
collaboration would be intensified in those sectors which, like agriculture, 
could contribute to the economic and social development of the country. His 
Government approved without reservation of the ARCAL programme, in the 
conviction that it would achieve all its objectives. Uruguay also thanked the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 10 


Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission for its collaboration and for the 
role it played in co-operation between the international organizations 
responsible for nuclear matters in the region. 


28. As a small country with no nuclear potential, Uruguay nevertheless 
believed that it fulfilled a function by sharing the fruits of its efforts and 
aspirations; by its presence it bore moral witness to the imminent dangers 
represented by the uncontrolled forces of the atom. Uruguay would fight on 
all fronts in accordance with the law to preserve the safeguards and safety 
institutions offered by the Agency. In order to avoid the danger of total 
disaster, the small countries should join together in examining and solving 
problems, containing the forces of aggression, institutionalizing ever further 
the commitments to the defence of humanity, increasing awareness of dangers 
and constituting an example of what made progress possible. On the occasion 
of the Agency's thirtieth anniversary, Uruguay sent its best wishes that the 
Agency's moral strength would remain unassailed and inaccessible to any 
aspiration or tendency running counter to the interests of humanity. 
29. Mr. HONG (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that his 
delegation was convinced that the Agency would continue, as in the past 
thirty years, to contribute effectively to the establishment of peace, the 
improvement of the people's lot and the development of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, in accordance with the objectives and mandate assigned to it, 
and reiterated its congratulations on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary 
of the Agency's foundation. 
30. In 1986 the Agency had achieved many successes in all the fields with 
which it was traditionally concerned, in particular nuclear safety, radiation 
protection, nuclear power, the nuclear fuel cycle and technical co-operation. 
Since the first special session and the thirtieth regular session of the 
General Conference, Member States had taken greater interest in nuclear safety 
and radiation protection, and many countries had become parties to the 
conventions adopted during the special session. His delegation wished to 
express its deep gratitude to the Director General and the Secretariat for the 
preparation and implementation of the programmes on nuclear safety, radiation 
protection and technical co-operation, and hoped that the Agency would 
continue in the future to make every effort to improve matters in those areas. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 11 


31. At the present time, the nuclear question was not simply a scientific 
and technical one: it had acquired great importance through being linked with 
world peace and the very existence of humanity. Now that the danger of 
nuclear war seemed to be increasing, the peace-loving peoples demanded 
urgently that all international organizations, and in particular the Agency, 
take positive action to defend world peace and security and assure the 
happiness and prosperity of mankind. The Agency was contributing much to 
mankind's struggle for peace through its activities in the fields of 
safeguards and technical co-operation. 
32. His country, aware of its great responsibility for the defence of world 
peace, was doing all it could to turn the Korean peninsula into a peaceful 
zone free of nuclear weapons, within the framework of efforts to achieve peace 
and security in Asia and the rest of the world. That aim had taken concrete 
form in the proposal for disarmament and creation of a peace zone made by his 
country's Government on 23 July 1986. His Government was making a point of 
using nuclear energy to further the country's prosperity and development and 
to promote the well-being of its population. In that context, it was very 
interested in co-operation with the Agency and in bilateral technical 
co-operation with other countries. In conclusion, he reaffirmed his 
conviction that the Agency would continue to enjoy increasing success in its 
endeavours to attain its objectives. 
33. Mr. KASANDA (Zambia) said his Government was pleased that over the 
past thirty years the Agency had become an efficient driving force in 
strengthening co-operation and international understanding in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and was certain that the Agency would not fail 
to overcome the problems that would arise in the future. The considerable 
progress achieved would not have been possible without the devoted and 
indefatigable efforts of the Director General and his predecessors, and of the 
entire staff of the Agency. 
34. He reiterated his country's firm commitment to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and to the acknowledged possibilities which they offered for 
improving the quality of life for all people without any sort of 
discrimination. However, as a young developing country, Zambia still had a 

GC(XXXI)/0R.300 
page 12 


long way to go to acquire the necessary technology in that area. It was 
therefore grateful to the Agency for the assistance it continued to provide, 
which had enabled Zambia to undertake important initiatives with regard to the 
use of radioisotopes in sectors such as agriculture, public health, natural 
resources and industry, to set up nuclear analysis laboratories and a 
multi-purpose irradiation facility which had aroused great interest among 
numerous users, and to press forward with the project to strengthen the 
country's capacity in the area of nuclear instrument maintenance and repair. 


35. The Zambian Government also accorded great importance to the safe and 
effective use of nuclear techniques, and in particular to strengthening 
radiation protection services and to staff training in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear science and technology. In that connection, he wished to transmit to 
the Agency his Government's thanks for the fellowships which had been granted 
to it and to announce that it intended in 1988 to launch a national training 
programme in that field. 
36. His Government had noted with satisfaction the measures which the 
Agency had adopted as a consequence of the special session of the General 
Conference so as to restore confidence in the safe utilization of nuclear 
energy. Although Zambia did not have any nuclear facility, its Government was 
at present taking the necessary steps to accede to the conventions on early 
notification and emergency assistance in view of their value for mankind. 
37. It was gratifying to note that the Board of Governors had authorized, 
for 1988, an increase by 12% over 1987 in the financial resources available 
for technical assistance and co-operation. However, the financing of 
technical assistance was dependent upon voluntary contributions from 
Member States and was therefore not assured. Since the adoption of resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/388 in 1981, there had been no progress in the search for a 
lasting solution. The system of indicative planning figures was merely a 
provisional arrangement. The adoption of a system of firm financing 
commitments by the General Conference would be an acceptable compromise. 
Meanwhile, his Government promised to pay an amount equivalent to its share of 
the target fixed by the Board of Governors for the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1988. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 13 


38. With regard to safeguards implementation in 1986, he welcomed the 
Director General's statement that nuclear material under Agency safeguards in 
1986 had remained in peaceful nuclear uses or had been duly accounted for. 
39. Turning to the staffing of the Secretariat, he commended the Director 
General on the success of recent efforts to achieve a more equitable 
distribution of posts between all the geographical areas of the Agency. That 
distribution had compromised neither the efficiency nor the productivity of 
the Secretariat. The Director General should be encouraged to continue to 
take further specific measures in order to increase, pursuant to resolution 
GC(XXX)/RES/465, the number of staff members from developing countries, 
particularly in posts at the senior and policy-making levels. 
40. The amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute was a question which had 
been on the agenda for ten years now, but the objective remained to ensure 
that the principle of equitable geographical representation embodied in the 
Statute was applied for all areas, including those of the Middle East and 
South Asia and of Africa. It was disappointing that after so many meetings 
the Board of Governors was still not able to advise the General Conference on 
the appropriate means of at last resolving that problem. 
41. The. region of the world of which Zambia was part - southern Africa continued 
to be threatened by the nuclear capability of the racist regime in 
South Africa. Hundreds of black people were being murdered by the military 
forces of that regime, which was continuing the military occupation of Namibia 
and the exploitation of its resources, particularly uranium, in total 
disregard of the demands which had been addressed to it in resolutions of the 
United Nations General Assembly and of the Agency's General Conference. The 
neighbouring countries were being either invaded or exposed to the threat of 
attacks by South Africa. The international community was fully aware of the 
danger which South Africa's nuclear capability represented for peace in the 
world in general and in Africa in particular. During the past ten years, his 
delegation had never ceased to support proposals aimed at compelling South 
Africa to comply with those resolutions of the General Assembly and the 
General Conference which demanded that it refrain from acquiring a nuclear 
capability for military purposes. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 14 


42. His delegation therefore accepted with great pleasure the categorical 
recommendation of the Board of Governors to suspend South Africa's rights and 
privileges as a Member of the Agency until it complied with the relevant 
resolutions of the General Conference and behaved in accordance with the aims 
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It had also taken note 
with satisfaction of the Director General's report and was not surprised to 
learn that South Africa had made proposals intended either to force the Agency 
to stop negotiations or to make a farce of any agreements in which those 
proposals might be incorporated. His Government would give due attention to 
that question and hoped that the progressive States would continue their 
efforts to persuade South Africa to comply with the relevant resolutions of 
the United Nations General Assembly and of the Agency's General Conference. 
43. Mr. KAMUNANWIRE (Uganda), after thanking the Agency for the work 
accomplished during the past thirty years, said that his country had no 
nuclear programme, but had nevertheless signed the NPT. It had recently rid 
itself of the scourge of civil war and political agitation. For two decades, 
his country had known neither peace nor stability, the two pre-conditions for 
any constructive development or progress. Uganda had thus missed numerous 
occasions to benefit from the advice and support of the Agency in the 
applications of nuclear energy. 
44. With the return of peace, major reconstruction programmes had been 
launched. The task was enormous, and the problems to be solved were 
crushing. However, the determination which was being shown on the national 
level and the promise of assistance from friendly governments and 
organizations had caused hope to be reborn. Uganda intended to seek support 
and co-operation from Agency Member States in its efforts to derive more 
benefit from the applications of nuclear energy. 
45. Over the years, a number of Ugandan nationals had received training in 
various fields through the Agency's assistance. Several research workers had 
also received financial support under Agency co-ordinated research 
programmes. Research policies were under review, and it was expected that 
scientific research efforts would be increased so as to to broaden their scope 
and to encourage Ugandan scientists scattered across the world to return to 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 15 


their home country. Nuclear techniques would be used for research in fields 
such as plant selection and genetics, soil fertility and agricultural 
production, animal production and health, and the control of insects and other 
pests. Uganda had great need for assistance, both financial and technical, 
and it hoped that the Agency would be able to help it in seeking such 
assistance. 


46. Uganda was forced to deal with the serious problem of trypanosomiasis. 
Many years of bad management and negligence had led to disruption of 
operations to control the tsetse fly and to an increased incidence of that 
disease in both humans and domestic animals. Encouraged by the results 
achieved in Nigeria, his country hoped to adopt the sterile insect technique 
as a complement to the existing methods for controlling the tsetse fly. It 
had recently prepared a pilot project for the Buvuma Islands in Lake Victoria. 
Financial assistance had been requested for that project through the Agency. 
He hoped that the project would be successful and that analogous projects 
could be set up in other parts of the country. 
47. The establishment of a regional nuclear science centre whose function 
would be to strengthen national and regional scientific and technical 
capabilities had been under consideration since the Council of Ministers of 
the Organization of African Unity had adopted a memorandum on the question at 
its forty-fourth session, held in Addis Ababa in 1986. Uganda sincerely 
wished to be host to that centre, but would need financial and technical 
support. It intended to request the Agency to take part in that project. 
48. The Ugandan Cancer Institute recorded 1500 cases of cancer per year. 
The only available treatment was chemotherapy, which was generally expensive 
and ineffective. It had therefore been proposed to introduce radiotherapy. 
Moreover, it was intended to launch programmes for the radiosterilization of 
medical equipment. For those projects, Uganda planned to maintain constant 
liaison with the Agency, which it considered the main agent for the transfer 
of nuclear technology. 
49. The Ugandan Government had decided to undertake, with the Agency's 
assistance, an inventory of the country's uranium resources and to interest 
governments and international companies in the establishment and development 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 16 


of a national uranium mining industry. In the foreseeable future, Uganda 
would not require nuclear energy, since it had considerable hydroelectric 
potential which could be exploited both for internal needs and for export. 
Instead, it expected to be able to export uranium to earn foreign exchange for 
use in national development. 


50. Mr. IONESCU (Romania) commended the Agency on its efforts to 
develop international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
to enhance its role for the benefit of Member States. The present session of 
the General Conference was taking place in a period of tense international 
relations resulting from the intensified arms race, in particular where 
nuclear weapons were concerned. The deterioration in the world economic 
situation, moreover, was affecting all countries, in particular the developing 
countries, and was causing an ever greater gap between rich and poor. 
51. In the circumstances, his country attached primary importance to 
stopping the arms race and taking concrete disarmament measures, beginning 
with nuclear weapons, and to defending man's supreme right to peace, life and 
a free and dignified existence. At the same time, the realities of the modern 
world showed that the problems of economic development, and especially those 
relating to external debt and interest rates, could no longer be solved except 
through joint efforts and active co-operation by all States, whatever their 
size or social system. 
52. Faced with the present period of deep transformation, humanity had to 
find new ways of thinking to resolve in a constructive way the complex 
problems of war and peace and of economic and social development of peoples. 
As the President of the Socialist Republic of Romania, Mr. Ceausescu, had 
declared, it was a paradoxical and intolerable situation that vast resources 
were wasted on the perfecting and multiplication of ever more effective means 
of destruction while many serious economic and social problems remained 
unresolved. Specific steps should therefore be taken without delay to use 
science and technology for exclusively peaceful purposes, to redirect 
scientific and technical research away from the military field and towards the 
solution of the serious social and economic problems posed by the underdevelopment 
in which some two thirds of mankind lived, and jointly to find the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 17 


means whereby all countries and peoples could benefit, without hindrance and 
in full equality, from the latest achievements of the technical and scientific 
revolution. 


53. Romania was in favour of eliminating underdevelopment and introducing a 
new international economic order and of extending the role of the United 
Nations and its daughter organizations, including the Agency, in solving the 
major problems which mankind faced. The Agency could and must make a greater 
contribution to the development of international co-operation and the transfer 
of nuclear technology, and it should help Member States, especially developing 
countries, with the safe use of nuclear power and the other applications of 
nuclear energy. 
54. Romania commended the Agency on its efforts over the past thirty years 
to promote the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and international 
co-operation in that area: during that period, the Agency had achieved 
important results with regard to nuclear power, safety, radiation protection, 
technical assistance and personnel training. However, the attempts made to 
channel the Agency's activities towards safeguards functions could not be 
ignored. While appreciating the results obtained in that respect, his country 
considered that the Agency should, in the coming years, pay increasing 
attention to assuring the right of all States to benefit fully from the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
55. The primary objectives in the economic and social development of 
Romania were to make progress in the advanced sectors, to strengthen factors 
contributing to development, and to improve economic quality and efficiency. 
Nuclear energy used for peaceful purposes would increasingly contribute to 
meeting the growing energy needs of the national economy, to improving the 
standard and quality of life, and to introducing technical progress on a grand 
scale. 
56. His delegation wished to stress that the Agency's programme for 1988 
should reflect more appropriately the expanding role of the Agency and its 
contribution to the solution of certain major problems in priority areas such 
as nuclear power, nuclear applications in national economies, and technical 
assistance. Noting with satisfaction the Agency's achievements over the past 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 18 


thirty years, the good co-operative relations between Romania and the Agency, 
and the particularly useful and fruitful activities of the previous year, he 
expressed his conviction that the Agency would in the future make even greater 
contributions to the development of international co-operation and further 
strengthen its role in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


57. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) said that his delegation wished to pay 
tribute to the Director General and to the entire staff of the Secretariat on 
the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the Agency, which was considered 
one of the best run and most efficient organizations in the United Nations 
system. 
58. Since its establishment, the Agency had played a central role in 
fostering international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. The work 
it had accomplished in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - whether 
it related to nuclear power planning, to the applications of isotope and 
radiation techniques, or to safeguards agreements - was considerable. The 
technical co-operation programme had allowed many countries to benefit from 
the advantages of nuclear techniques. For an increasing number of developing 
countries, the applications of nuclear techniques in health and medicine, 
food and agriculture, and hydrology were of vital importance for their 
socio-economic development. 
59. The Third NPT Review Conference and the recent United Nations 
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful 
Uses of Nuclear Energy had proved, however, that efforts at international 
co-operation in that area could not play their full and proper role except in 
a world free from fear of the destructive effects which the vertical and 
horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons might bring. Fortunately, the 
thirtieth anniversary of the Agency was coinciding with the signature of an 
agreement between the United States of America and the Soviet Union aimed at a 
limited reduction of their nuclear missiles. 
60. In 1986, the development of nuclear power had remained very uneven in 
the various regions of the world. The installed nuclear capacity of the 
developing countries had represented barely 3.7% of world nuclear power 
capacity. Tunisia believed that the Agency had a significant role to play in 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 19 


that area. Like others, his delegation believed that the recommendations of 
the Senior Expert Group on the Promotion and Financing of Nuclear Power 
Programmes in Developing Countries should be used to prepare an action plan 
for the Agency in the years to come. 


61. In spite of the obstacles due to the financing of nuclear installations 
and to infrastructural difficulties, Tunisia accorded primary importance to 
the improvement of human resources and the training of high-level personnel 
with a view to expanding the dimensions and prospects of scientific research 
and accelerating the mastering of nuclear techniques, particularly in 
agriculture, industry, medicine, geology and hydrology. The programme of 
technical co-operation with the Agency was giving Tunisia full satisfaction. 
In 1986, as in the preceding years, the technical assistance provided by the 
Agency had been extremely valuable in several areas, particularly in that of 
long-term nuclear power planning. For that reason, his delegation wished to 
express its gratitude to the Department of Technical Co-operation and the 
Secretariat and to underline once again that technical assistance should be 
based on predictable, assured and adequate resources within the Regular Budget 
of the Agency. 
62. The post-Chernobyl period would probably be dominated by the acute 
problems of nuclear installation safety and radiation protection. By 
elucidating the conditions and causes for the Chernobyl accident, and by 
promoting the NUSS Codes and the exchange of information, the Agency had 
accomplished a considerable task for which it deserved praise. That 
achievement could be crowned by the preparation and adoption of an 
international convention prohibiting armed attacks against nuclear facilities. 
63. His country shared with other members of the Group of 7 7 the opinion 
that the Agency should strike a better balance between its statutory and 
promotional activities so as to preserve its credibility and its technical 
effectiveness and to conform fully with its Statute. For many years already, 
the developing countries had been pointing out that the financing of 
safeguards was absorbing increasing resources and thus jeopardizing the 
Agency's promotional activities. His delegation supported the Agency's 
safeguards system, of course, but it considered that the activities relating 
to nuclear power production and nuclear applications were equally important. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 20 


64. With regard to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, his delegation regretted 
to note that Africa had since 19 77 remained the region least equitably 
represented on the Board of Governors. Unfortunately, the absence of a 
consensus on the Board was holding up a solution to that important question 
with political implications. As long as the Board had not recommended a 
solution, the African States would not cease to denounce that unfair 
situation, which was damaging to the interests of Africa and its rights within 
the Agency. Tunisia hoped that a positive solution would emerge from the 
revision of Article VI as a whole. 
65. The Director General had indicated that the Agency's discussions with 
South Africa had made hardly any progress, which was in no way surprising. The 
climate in South Africa was characterized by the intransigence of apartheid, 
which was a crime against humanity and a threat to international peace and 
security. During the past twelve months, world public opinion had witnessed a 
recrudescence of violence and repression against the people of South Africa, 
the continuation by the racist regime of the illegal occupation of Namibia, 
State terrorism and the effects of a policy of destabilization aimed against 
the African States. Recalling the resolutions of the United Nations General 
Assembly, and more particularly resolution 41/35B, his delegation supported 
the recommendation of the Board of Governors contained in document GC(XXXI)/807 
and stressed that it was up to the General Conference, as the authority of 
last resort, to decide how such a recommendation could be implemented. 
66. The question of the Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat came within 
the statutory competence of the Agency. It seemed worth recalling that, on 
27 September 1985, the General Conference had adopted, by simple majority, a 
resolution submitted by the Scandinavian countries calling upon Israel 
urgently to place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. That 
same resolution had reaffirmed that any attack against a peaceful nuclear 
facility subject to Agency safeguards would constitute a serious threat to the 
Agency's safeguards system. At a time when the non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and the problems of nuclear installation safety were of great concern 
to the entire international community, it was the General Conference's duty to 
take the necessary measures to implement the resolutions which it had itself 
adopted. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.300 
page 21 


67. Ms. OLEMBO (Kenya) transmitted her country's most sincere best 
wishes to the Director General and the Secretariat on the occasion of the 
Agency's thirtieth anniversary. The impact of the Agency's work on promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was now being felt throughout the 
developing world, which had earlier stood aside from most nuclear activities. 
68. The co-operation between Kenya and the Agency had been satisfactory for 
years. In 1986, nine projects had been financed by the Agency, of which 
several had been in the fields of nuclear medicine and radiation protection. 
Her country was very grateful to the Agency for that co-operation, being aware 
of the financial constraints to which the Agency was subject. With regard to 
training, Kenya continued to receive support from the Agency in the form of 
fellowships and courses. However, in 1987, Africa had enjoyed the benefit of 
only four courses under the technical co-operation programme, whereas Asia had 
had 19 and Latin America 22. Her delegation therefore hoped that the number 
of such courses would increase for the African region. There could be no 
transfer of technology without training courses, and Africa had urgent needs 
in that area. 
69. Kenya fully supported the Agency in its attempts to strengthen nuclear 
safety at the national and international levels. It would soon be signing the 
conventions on early notification and emergency assistance. Moreover, it was 
in the course of working out with the Agency a safeguards agreement which it 
would also be signing soon. 
70. Her delegation supported the principle of universality in the Agency. 
However, that principle must in no case serve to accommodate the racist regime 
of South Africa and its odious practices of apartheid and violation of the 
rights of man. Everyone knew that South Africa itself did not respect the 
principle of universality within its own boundaries. Why, therefore, did the 
western industrial nations constantly invoke that principle when the question 
of South Africa came up? It could scarcely be for any reason but to protect 
the oppressor rather than the people of that country. South Africa should 
revise its policies in accordance with the principles of the rights of man 
which it pretended to respect. With regard to South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities, her delegation hoped that their development would be halted 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 22 


until the NPT entered into force for South Africa and all the facilities in 
that country were subject to Agency safeguards. South Africa apparently 
intended to sign the NPT: that would be a step in the right direction, and it 
was to be hoped that it would be followed by a full-scope safeguards agreement. 


71. The Kenyan delegation wished to pay tribute to the people of South 
Africa for all the suffering they had endured in their quest for liberty. It 
hoped that the apartheid regime would one day be destroyed and replaced by a 
democratic government which would make nuclear energy serve peace. In the 
meantime, her delegation asked the General Conference to adopt the draft 
resolution on South Africa's nuclear capabilities submitted by the African 
group. 
ISRAELI NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES AND THREAT (GC(XXXI)/808, 811, 812, 813 and 825). 


72. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that Israel had for a long time been 
following a nuclear policy aimed at developing its nuclear capabilities for 
military purposes and thus had sought, by its own means or in collaboration 
with the racist regime of South Africa and other countries, to acquire what it 
needed to produce the necessary material to make nuclear weapons and explosive 
devices, together with the aircraft or missiles needed for delivery to their 
targets. Published reports and information demonstrated that Israel had the 
capability of producing nuclear weapons and that it had, with the help of its 
friends, effectively built up an arsenal in the greatest secrecy. It had made 
statements and leaked obscure and contradictory information in order to sow 
terror so that it could more easily pursue its aggressive and expansionist 
policies in the Arab region. 
73. Israel's efforts to build up a nuclear weapons capability went back to 
the 1950s, when the administration of the late President Eisenhower had 
expressed its concern at Israel's progress in the nuclear field. Those 
efforts still continued, as was shown by the information which the Israeli 
technician, Mordecai Vanunu, had given to the Sunday Times in 1986 after 
leaving his job at the Dimona nuclear installations, and also by the testing 
of the Jericho-2 reactor. The effects of those efforts were being felt far 
beyond the Middle East, as far away as the Soviet Union, which had expressed 
its deep concern at those serious developments. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 23 


74. The information on Israel's nuclear capabilities and on the acquisition 
by Israel of a nuclear arsenal of 100 or even 200 nuclear warheads was well 
known and had come from different sources, including the two reports by the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations contained in documents A/36/431 and 
A/40/520, the discussions at the United Nations General Assembly some years 
previously, the records of Agency General Conference sessions - in particular 
those of the thirtieth regular session, the news leaked by the Central 
Intelligence Agency and published in a number of well-known newspapers such as 
the Times and the Washington Post, articles published by many newspapers and 
magazines such as Der Spiegel and the Soviet weekly New Times, and a variety 
of reports and books published by institutes for strategic studies such as 
those of Georgetown University, the Carnegie Institution and the Aumont 
Institute. It was equally useful to refer to statements by several Israeli 
personalities such as Yoval Niemann, by international personalities such as 
Paul Uarnke, the former United States Deputy Secretary of State, and by 
United States arms experts like Tony Crossman, Richard Seal and many others. 
75. The policy of successive Israeli regimes in the nuclear field had been 
not only to seek to acquire nuclear weapons, but also to make every effort and 
use every means to ensure that the Israeli entity remained the sole nuclear 
Power capable of imposing its terroristic, aggressive and expansionist 
policies in the region. The declared Israeli policy, as expressed by many 
Israeli officials, was to launch attacks on and to sabotage peaceful nuclear 
installations which Israel regarded as constituting a grave threat to its 
nuclear hegemony in the region: all those actions were only part of the 
Israeli nuclear armaments policy. It was in pursuance of that futile policy 
that the Israelis had planned and executed their armed aggression against the 
Iraqi nuclear facilities on 7 June 1981 and that the Zionist leaders had 
reiterated their determination to repeat their aggression against nuclear 
facilities which, in their opinion, endangered Israel or jeopardized its image 
as the sole nuclear Power in the region. 
76. The policy of armed attacks against peaceful nuclear facilities, which 
was an integral part of the Israeli nuclear armaments policy, was in reality a 
policy of aggression against the Agency, its objectives and its safeguards 
system, as had been recognized in General Conference resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 24 


adopted in 1981. It was therefore the duty of the General Conference to deal 
with the subject of Israeli nuclear armaments and capabilities as constituting 
a serious threat not only to peace and security, but also to the Agency, its 
functions and its safeguards system, and to the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
in general. 


77. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXI)/825 recalled in its 
preamble the most important resolutions of the United Nations Security Council 
and General Assembly and of the Agency's General Conference concerning the 
nuclear armament of Israel and calling upon Israel to place all of its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. The preamble referred also to the 
United Nations resolutions condemning the co-operation between the two racist 
regimes in Pretoria and Tel Aviv in building up their nuclear capabilities, 
thus creating a serious threat to security and peace in Africa and the 
Middle East. 
78. As to the most important operative paragraphs, the first was a 
reaffirmation of the demand made in an earlier General Conference resolution 
that Israel place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. Unless 
Israel - which was the only country in the region to have major nuclear 
facilities capable of producing materials for nuclear explosives - renounced 
nuclear weapons and accepted the safeguards system, the call for the creation 
of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East would be meaningless and would 
remain a mere political card played by Israel to disguise its real intentions 
and actions with regard to nuclear weapons. That call had been made by the 
Security Council in response to a unique and unprecedented act of aggression. 
79. Operative paragraph 2 requested the Director General and the 
Board of Governors to give due consideration to the United Nations 
General Assembly resolutions by taking steps, within the Agency's mandate, to 
implement the relevant provisions of those resolutions. It was the moral 
responsibility of the Agency, as a member of the United Nations family, to 
attach the greatest importance to Security Council and General Assembly 
resolutions. In that regard, the Agency should consider the suspension of all 
scientific or technical co-operation with Israel which could enhance its 
military nuclear capabilities. In operative paragraph 3, the Director General 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 25 


was requested to report to the Board of Governors and to the following session 
of the General Conference on the Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat. 


80. The subject of Israel's nuclear capabilities and threat was very 
important; it had a direct bearing on security and peace in the Middle East 
and also had implications for the Agency, its objectives, its safeguards 
system and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Such an important matter must 
be dealt with by correctly applying the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. The decisions of the General Conference which required a 
two-thirds majority were listed clearly and unequivocally in its Rules of 
Procedure. The Conference should not depart from those Rules under any 
circumstances; otherwise its credibility and that of its resolutions would be 
gradually eroded. 
81. Lastly, his delegation requested that the vote on that draft 
resolution, or on any other proposal under the present item, be taken by 
roll-call. 
82. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) recalled that the United Nations 
Security Council, the highest international authority concerned with world 
peace, had in a historic decision singled out Israel and called upon it to 
place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. The Council had 
never taken such a decision with regard to any other State, but Israel 
constituted a threat to the Middle East as well as to world peace. That 
threat had several characteristics. First, from its recent history it was 
clear that Israel was an aggressive State which was constantly waging wars, 
which annexed territories by force, and which was still occupying the lands it 
had acquired from previous wars. Second, it did not comply with the United 
Nations resolutions adopted in that regard, whereas it should have been the 
first State in the world to respect those resolutions, having itself been 
created by a resolution of that body. 
83. Two bombs had been sufficient to put an end to the Second World War, 
and Israel would not need to use more than four or five bombs against the 
neighbouring Arab capitals which it considered a threat to its security. It 
might therefore be asked why Israel needed to have such a large number of 

GC(XXXI)/OR.3O0 
page 26 


nuclear bombs. The Syrian Arab Republic believed that Israel's ambitions 
extended beyond the boundaries of the Middle East, and history would prove 
that to be so if no measures were taken before the expected disaster. 


84. On many occasions, Israeli officials had declared that they had a long 
arm, and they had actually demonstrated the truth of that claim by launching 
an attack against Baghdad and another against Tunis, not to mention their 
repeated attacks against the Syrian Arab Republic, Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt. 
Their arm had also reached as far as Latin America, but he did not wish to 
dwell on that particular event, which had been just as much an aggression 
against sovereignty as war was. More recently they had carried out operations 
in England and Italy: the kidnapping of Vanunu was still fresh in everyone's 
mind. Nor had France escaped their activities when they had attacked 
installations and hijacked ships not belonging to them in violation of French 
sovereignty. 
85. In those circumstances, his country felt a real danger from the Israeli 
military nuclear capabilities. The 1973 war, although fought with conventional 
weapons, had left its mark on most countries of the world. So one could well 
imagine what would be the repercussions of a nuclear war in the same region. 
As everyone knew, an industrial accident which had taken place in 1986 - the 
Chernobyl accident - had alarmed the whole world. What then would be the 
result of an explosion of nuclear weapons? 
86. The Middle East had a problem of which all were aware, which had not as 
yet been resolved and which had led to several wars. Efforts were still being 
made in the region to maintain a military balance. If Israel persisted in 
pursuing its military nuclear policy, a certain measure would have to be taken 
in a certain way in order to maintain a military nuclear balance such that 
Israel did not dominate the region of the Middle East. 
87. However, although such a balance between the two superpowers might have 
led to peace, as some claimed, it would not guarantee peace in the Middle East 
because it would in that case be quite different in nature. The United States 
and the Soviet Union had emerged from a major world war in which they had been 
on the same side, and so their nuclear and military balance had led to the 
present situation. No war had broken out between them because neither side 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 27 


had attacked the territory of the other or occupied part of it. A nuclear and 
military balance, were it ever to exist in the Middle East, would be completely 
different from that between the two superpowers because the region had been 
the scene of recent wars and there were still occupied lands and other aftereffects. 
The picture in the Middle East would be different and so would be 
the result. He hoped, therefore, that the Member States participating in the 
Conference would recognize that danger and co-operate in seeking ways and 
means of averting it. He was raising that matter not because it was a 
political one, but because it posed a real danger to the region and was 
related to one of the objectives of the Agency, namely to prevent the use of 
the atom for purposes of war and destruction. 


88. His delegation considered that, although the first four operative 
paragraphs of the draft resolution did not offer a sufficient solution for 
eliminating that danger, they could help the Conference to see it and try to 
reduce it. That would be only the beginning of the road towards solving the 
problem. The Syrian Arab Republic was willing to co-operate with delegations 
to the Conference that would support the draft resolution in order to arrive 
the following year at a better and more effective resolution aimed at 
eliminating that danger, which was the first mankind had faced since the 
inception of the Agency. That was the reason for the inclusion in the draft 
resolution of the fifth operative paragraph, which was intended to allow the 
subject to be discussed again in 1988 in co-operation with all peace-loving 
Member States with a view to eliminating the possibility of any form of 
nuclear war. 
89. The information provided by the Israeli technician Vanunu to the 
Sunday Times and authenticated by scientists in Europe, together with the 
action that Israel had taken against Vanunu, proved that the information 
supplied by him was true and reflected the status of Israel's military nuclear 
capabilities. 
90. He joined the delegate of Iraq in expressing the hope that participants 
in the Conference would deal objectively with the matter, without political 
wrangling, and that, recognizing the danger looming over the region, they 
would take a positive stand on the draft resolution. 

GC (XXXI)/OR. 300page 
28 


91. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that the General 
Conference should decisively reject the draft resolution before it - for many 
reasons, some general, arising from the overall effect of the measure, and 
others specific, arising from its particular provisions. 
92. Of the general reasons, the first was that the draft resolution was 
highly political and did not belong in the Agency's sphere. The matters which 
it raised could not be resolved within the Agency, and their further 
consideration would only damage the Agency's role as a technical agency 
devoted to nuclear safety, safeguards and technical co-operation. 
93. Secondly, it was a repetitive issue which had been considered and 
definitively dealt with at many past sessions of the General Conference. 
Keeping it on the agenda in perpetuity merely burdened the Conference with 
unproductive matters. Furthermore, since two resolutions on the subject were 
already on the agenda of the United Nations General Assembly in New York, he 
wondered whether it was necessary to consider the matter at the General 
Conference as well. 
94. Thirdly, the draft resolution was discriminatory. It singled out one 
nation for treatment and demands which were not addressed to other countries 
in a similar situation. 
95. Fourthly, the draft resolution was divisive. The debate on the issue 
would continue to polarize the Agency's membership at a time when a positive 
image of the Agency was badly needed in order to reassure public opinion that 
world nuclear affairs were being conducted in a unified and responsible manner. 
96. Moreover, the draft resolution was objectionable for specific reasons. 
Its very title was highly troubling. It necessarily implied that Israel was 
making some unspecified "nuclear threat", which was a serious matter. In 
resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/443 adopted in 1985, the General Conference had 
determined conclusively that Israel had committed itself not to attack nuclear 
facilities in Iraq or to attack other countries in the region. Thus, to 
include such a provision was false and misleading and specifically 
contradicted past findings of the General Conference. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 29 


97. The resolution's other preambular paragraphs demonstrated that the 
issue was stale and repetitious. No new evidence was offered to support any 
further action by the General Conference. Preambular paragraph (g) recited 
allegations of co-operation between Israel and South Africa which had been 
repeatedly denied by Israel and which had not been substantiated by any 
credible evidence. 
98. Operative paragraph 1 was redundant. It merely duplicated the call 
which the Security Council had addressed to Israel in 1981 to accept 
safeguards on its nuclear facilities. The Agency had no power to implement 
that resolution. It was for the Security Council itself, under the Charter, 
to monitor such implementation. 
99. Operative paragraph 2 requested the Director General to "consider 
implementation" of two United Nations General Assembly resolutions. It was 
not clear which aspects of the measures he was supposed to consider, or 
indeed, what such consideration would consist in. More significantly, the 
resolution would involve the Agency's Secretariat in an ambiguous and 
unprofitable review of past General Assembly resolutions, drawing Agency 
resources away from more important tasks. 
100. Furthermore, operative paragraph 2 was especially confusing and harmful 
on the issue of scientific co-operation with Israel, which was dealt with in 
the General Assembly resolutions. Under those resolutions, the Agency was to 
suspend any co-operation with Israel which could "contribute to its nuclear 
capabilities". As a matter of principle and under its Statute, the Agency did 
not engage in any such co-operation with any Member State. Thus, it was 
unclear why the Director General should be asked to consider implementing a 
provision which was manifestly meaningless. 
101. Operative paragraph 3 merely sought to keep the issue alive by 
requesting the Director General to report to the Board of Governors. The 
matter had been considered exhaustively by United Nations bodies and by the 
Agency, and no new report was needed. He understood that a revised study was 
soon to be issued by the General Assembly. It would be a misuse of the 
Agency's time and resources during a period of budgetary stringency to compel 
it to produce yet another inconclusive report on the subject. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.300 
page 30 


102. Operative paragraph 4 was superfluous. Under Article III of the 
Statute, the Secretariat was required to submit reports on its activities to 
the General Assembly of the United Nations, and such reports were submitted 
each year with the approval of the Agency's Board and General Conference. The 
proposed provision was thus unnecessary. 
103. Operative paragraph 5 was objectionable because it clearly indicated 
the intention of the sponsors to keep the matter perpetually on the agenda of 
the General Conference. That was an abuse of the Agency's procedures and 
diverted Member States' attention from the real work of the Agency. Such an 
"automatic" provision was bad for the Agency and for its Member States, and 
discredited the Agency in world public opinion. 
104. For those many reasons, the United States delegation urged that the 
draft resolution be rejected and that the Agency be allowed to return to its 
important business in the areas of safety, safeguards and technical assistance. 
The meetins rose at 6.15 p.m. 



GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
March 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 
on Friday, 25 September 1987, at 9.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda** Paragraphs 


Israeli nuclear capabilities and 


threat (continued) 1-6 9 


19 Examination of delegates' credentials 70 - 79 


Communication received by the Agency 
from the Permanent Mission of Bolivia 80 - 81 


Election of members to the Board of 
Governors 82 - 85 


18 South Africa's nuclear capabilities 86 - 125 


[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 16 October 1987, 


[**] GC(XXXI)/818. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-1200 
2396e/0266e 



GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 2 


ISRAELI NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES AND THREAT (GC(XXXI)/825, 825/Add.l and 2) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. KASANDA (Zambia) said that the issue under discussion was a 
very sensitive and important one, relating as it did to a real and legitimate 
concern of Member States of the Agency: the threat posed by Israel's nuclear 
capability. The Agency had been set up to promote the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy, not its open or secret military use; therefore, it could not 
stand idly by while nuclear technology was diverted into the construction of 
weapons of mass destruction. 
2. He had listened with interest to arguments against the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXI)/825, but had been dismayed by the assertion 
that the Agency was not the correct forum for the issues raised; the act of 
acquiring a nuclear capability and manufacturing weapons expressly for use 
against neighbouring countries was a political one, but it was within the 
competence of the Agency to deal with the matter and to find a lasting 
solution. Zambia considered that it was in the interest of the Agency and of 
its Member States to support the draft resolution in its entirety. If a fair 
and realistic solution were not found, the issue would continue to appear 
before the General Conference, since a very significant number of 
Member States regarded it as important; the wishes of those States must be 
respected, and it was for no one country to dictate the agenda of the General 
Conference. 


3. It was not to be expected that either Israel or South Africa, or their 
supporters, would admit to co-operation, but the truth was that there had been 
collaboration between Israel and South Africa. The resolution before the 
General Conference was clear and presented in due form, and he urged all 
Member States committed to preserving and promoting peace to support it. 
4. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) wished to comment on two points 
made by the United States delegation the previous day: firstly, in response 
to the assertion that the 1985 General Conference had already dealt with the 
issue and that no threat from Israel existed, he said that the matter in hand 
was not the same as that discussed by the General Conference in 1985, which 
had been the Israeli military threat against nuclear installations in 
neighbouring and other countries; what was at issue now was the Israeli 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 3 


nuclear capabilities and threat. Secondly, Israel was said to have given 
repeated assurances that it did not co-operate with South Africa, and indeed, 
after the positive, humanitarian stance adopted internationally against racial 
discrimination and against South Africa, Israel had been obliged to declare 
that it would not establish any agreements with South Africa; however, the 
Israeli position remained that existing agreements would be honoured. 


5. Turning to the question of the sale by Norway to Israel of heavy water 
for peaceful purposes which, according to various international news media, had 
been used instead for military purposes, he requested the President to invite 
the Norwegian delegate to explain his country's view of that transaction. 
6. Finally, in line with the statement made the previous day by the Iraqi 
delegate, he wished to state that the type of assistance to and co-operation 
with Israel which worried his delegation and which was mentioned in the United 
Nations General Assembly resolutions referred to in paragraph 2 of the draft 
resolution under consideration was that which helped to enhance its military 
nuclear capabilities. 
7. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) said that his country attached great 
importance to the examination of Israel's nuclear capability and the threat 
which it represented for the Arab countries. Tunisia considered the draft 
resolution well founded, and its purpose in keeping with the Agency's 
mandate. The issue was one of nuclear policy in the technical sense and thus 
fell within the normal scope of such policy in international law. The draft 
resolution was also in keeping with the statutory goals of the Agency in that 
it was concerned with the development of nuclear energy in a particular case 
and with avoiding the promotion of military applications. 
8. Only one aspect of the matter had been raised at the General Conference 
in 1985, that of the aerial destruction of the Iraqi nuclear reactor, which 
had been under Agency safeguards since 7 June 1981. That affair, indeed, was 
far from being relegated to the archives, for the good reason that operative 
paragraph 5 of resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/443 called upon Israel "urgently to 
place all its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards". Only a minimum of 
rationality and consistency was needed to see that the General Conference must 
seek ways and means to put its own resolutions into effect. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 4 


9. The assertion that the draft resolution discriminated against Israel 
seemed neither pertinent nor persuasive, to any member of the Arab League at 
least, given that successive Governments of Israel had always declared that 
they would never permit the Arabs to acquire a peaceful nuclear capacity lest 
they thus acquire the means of mass destruction. The truth of the matter was 
that Israel had never ceased developing its own nuclear capacity in order to 
equip itself with a nuclear arsenal and a complete delivery system. That was 
the end to Which Israel had built up its nuclear co-operation with South 
Africa and other Member States of the Agency. 
10. A look at the history and the precedents of the last twenty years 
showed that Israel's nuclear programme was aimed entirely against the Arabs; 
Israel had never given up its strategy of ambiguity and had kept open its 
nuclear option by developing nuclear deterrents, benefiting the while from 
major concessions, exemptions even, in the matter of non-proliferation. For 
that reason, some experts were of the view that the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) could not survive, in part because 
of the worsening discrimination against developing countries signatory to it. 


11. That the danger from Israel's nuclear capacity was real was 
demonstrated by the bombardment of Iraq's OSIRAK reactor on 7 June 1981, which 
had fortunately not been fuelled at the time. Had it been, the absurd 
bombardment might have resulted in a kind of small-scale Chernobyl accident in 
the Middle East, with unimaginable consequences. There was also the act of 
aggression perpetrated by Israel against his own country's sovereignty and 
territorial integrity on 1 October 1985, an act unanimously condemned by the 
Security Council as being in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, 
the rule of law and all standards of international conduct. Indeed, the 
Security Council, in its document S/17659, had urgently requested "the States 
Members of the United Nations to take measures to dissuade Israel from 
resorting to such acts against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
all States". 
12. In the light of the remarks made by the Arab delegations and of the 
considerations he had himself expressed, he called upon all Members to 
promote, in the absence of polemic or acrimony, the development through the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 5 


Agency of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, particularly south of the 
Mediterranean, in the Arab countries and in other developing countries. Such 
development, where everybody was aware what was at stake in commercial, 


industrial and political terms, implied that assurances must be given as to 
Israel's nuclear capabilities, and he therefore urged the General Conference 


to adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXI)/825. 


13. Mr. MORPHET (United Kingdom) considered that the item under 
discussion was essentially political in nature, although it did in some ways 
concern non-proliferation. Since the United Kingdom regarded non-proliferation 
as the keystone of its policy, it viewed acceptance by States of full-scope 
safeguards as highly desirable, both as a mark of their confidence in 
international safeguards and as a measure of assurance to the international 
community. The United Kingdom therefore strongly supported the extension of 
the Agency's safeguards regime, and had supported Security Council 
resolution 487 of 1981, which had called upon Israel to place all its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. 
14. However, the draft resolution under discussion did not call upon Israel 
to take that step, it demanded that it do so, and it was not for the Agency to 
demand that Israel or any other Member State should adopt full-scope 
safeguards. The matter was one for the State concerned; indeed, many Members 
present would be deeply offended if such a demand were made of them. 
15. In any case, demands could not be made in the absence of means to 
enforce them, and the Agency was not in the business of enforcement, either in 
terms of its Statute or in the real powers it had. The Agency could call 
upon, could negotiate, and it could regret; it could not and should not 
demand. 
16. Thus, the United Kingdom feared that there was a misconception at the 
heart of the draft resolution about what the Agency could and could not do, 
and it considered that resolutions should not be passed which were based on 
misconceptions. 
17. There were a number of other defects in the document, in particular the 
call to maintain the item on the agenda of the General Conference: his 
country was concerned about the effect on the Agency of repeated discussions 

GC(XXXI)/0R.301 
page 6 


on matters which were essentially of a wider political nature, which could not 
be solved in the present forum, and which would leave Member States divided to 
no good end. The root of that problem was a second misconception, one 
concerning the purpose of the Agency. 


18. The draft resolution failed also in that it did not mention Israel's 
undertaking, reproduced in resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/443, not to attack peaceful 
nuclear facilities in Iraq or anywhere else; surely that undertaking could 
not be considered irrelevant to a discussion of Israel's nuclear capabilites. 
19. Finally, the United Kingdom considered that the draft resolution failed 
in that it requested the Director General to perform tasks which he could not 
fulfil. Moreover, it was otiose to request the Director General to report 
back in a year's time to confirm that the Agency was not assisting Israel to 
develop a military nuclear capability, something it would scarcely assist any 
other State to do. 
20. In the light of those objections, and in view of the excessive claims 
on the Agency's limited time and energies which the issue made, he opposed the 
draft resolution. 
21. Mr. AL-MINAYES (Kuwait) said that his country demanded that Israel 
place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards, a step from which 
the Middle East could not but benefit. Kuwait believed the Agency to be the 
appropriate forum for the draft resolution, since it specialized in nuclear 
energy and would play a principal role in applying safeguards to Israel's 
nuclear reactors. Israel had openly threatened the Arab countries, and any 
other country which it supposed to constitute a danger, that it would not 
permit them to have nuclear reactors, but Israel itself had nuclear reactors 
for military purposes, thereby openly flouting the resolutions of the 
international community which wanted nuclear energy to be used to benefit 
mankind. The matter was too serious to be put aside unresolved, and it would 
remain before the Agency's policy-making organs, at the risk of some 
repetition, until a satisfactory solution was found. 
22. The victims of Israel's past aggression must be reassured that the 
matter was at least being considered, as the threat of attack was a continuing 
one, and Israel must be prevented from wielding nuclear terror. Israel had 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 7 


been singled out in the demand that it submit all its nuclear facilities to 
Agency safeguards because it had singled itself out as the only State to have 
destroyed a peaceful nuclear facility, one under Agency safeguards and still 
under construction. Kuwait therefore commended the draft resolution to the 
General Conference in the hope that Israel might thereby be deterred from 
wielding nuclear terror. 


23. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) remarked that Israel was not the only 
Agency Member State with significant nuclear activities which had not so far 
been willing to submit all its facilities to Agency safeguards. The 
Government of the Netherlands regretted that situation and had on many 
occasions called upon the Governments of Israel and of other countries in a 
similar position to reconsider their attitude to the application of full-scope 
safeguards. However, the draft resolution under discussion was one-sided in 
that it was directed exclusively against Israel, and not against those other 
Member States in a similar position. 
24. There was no obligation under the Statute of the Agency for any 
Member State to accept full-scope safeguards. The Netherlands was prepared to 
support efforts made by the Director General to persuade Member States to 
accept full-scope safeguards, but it could not accept the Agency's applying 
sanctions against Member States which did not so accept them. 
25. Operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution referred to General 
Assembly resolution 41/93, which called upon the Agency to refrain from any 
scientific co-operation with Israel which would contribute to that country's 
nuclear capability. The Netherlands took the resolution to mean that the 
Agency should refrain from contributing to Israel's nuclear-weapon capability, 
and the Agency of course never engaged in co-operation of that kind. That 
request in operative paragraph 2 was therefore superfluous. Moreover, the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations was soon to present an updated version 
of earlier reports on Israel's nuclear capabilities; since it could be 
assumed that the Secretary-General would perform that task perfectly 
adequately, the Netherlands could see no place for any useful contribution on 
the same subject by the Director General of the Agency. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 8 


26. Thus, considering the draft resolution to have serious flaws in many of 
its main paragraphs and to constitute a further deplorable attempt at 
politicizing the Agency, the Netherlands opposed its adoption. 
27. Mr. ERRERA (France) said that his country would be voting against 
the draft resolution for several reasons which would be explained in a joint 
statement to be made by the delegate of Denmark on behalf of the twelve member 
states of the European Community. The principal reason for France, however, 
was that the Agency's safeguards system was a confidence-building mechanism 
which was essential to international nuclear relations and which must not be 
used to exert pressure or apply sanctions against any State whatever. France 
did not consider itself to have the right to impose full-scope Agency 
safeguards on another State; the decision to apply safeguards could be taken 
only by the State concerned itself. 
28. France therefore rejected all the more strongly any idea of using the 
safeguards system for punitive purposes, as that would be the first step down 
an extremely dangerous road, on which the Agency would see its mission 
perverted, its actions deflected from their goal and its credibility rapidly 
and perhaps irrevocably compromised. The entire safeguards system, of whose 
usefulness none present could be unaware, would be endangered and the 
development of nuclear energy, too, would be jeopardized, and thus also the 
interests of many countries wishing, in the exercise of their sovereignty, in 
safety and to the exclusion of outside pressure, to develop on their own 
territory nuclear power programmes to meet their energy needs. 
29. It was in nobody's interest to walk down that road and thereby 
exacerbate divisions at the very moment when everything was impelling 
Member States to strengthen their solidarity within the Agency. 
30. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his country 
considered Israel's nuclear capability a serious threat to the health, 
security and prosperity of the world because the Israeli regime refused to be 
bound by any international commitments or moral values. The bitter experience 
of the use of nuclear weapons at Hiroshima and Nagasaki by Israel's greatest 
backer, the country which the Islamic Republic of Iran termed the Great Satan, 
left no doubt that there was a potential threat. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 9 


31. Only suspending Israel from the exercise of the privileges and rights 
of membership would guarantee the principle of universality, which was 
intended to serve as an umbrella for those countries which agreed to be bound 
by universally acceptable principles. It was incumbent on the General 
Conference to adopt measures to implement the statutory function of the 
Agency, namely to ensure the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
32. The violation of the spirit of the Agency's Statute and the persistent 
flouting of the Agency's resolutions by the Zionist regime of occupied 
Palestine had seriously damaged the Agency's credibility and would therefore 
justify the application of Article XIX.B of the Statute. 
33. The Islamic Republic of Iran, in a spirit of solidarity, supported the 
draft resolution, which seemed only a mild gesture towards the ultimate goals 
of bringing justice to the Agency and implementing its Statute in full. The 
Islamic Republic of Iran held those countries which had transferred nuclear 
technology and material to Israel, such as the United States of America, to be 
fully responsible for any political upheavals experienced by the international 
technical organization which the Agency was supposed to be, and therefore 
urged the General Conference to exert the necessary pressure to prevent the 
continuation of such unjustifiable co-operation. 
34. Mr. CONSTENLA (Costa Rica) said that his country opposed the draft 
resolution as being detrimental to the Agency's prestige and its scientific 
and technical mission, irrelevant to the Agency's mandate, and capable of 
undermining the kind of solidarity in nuclear matters which had been shown 
with the Soviet Union after the Chernobyl accident. The draft resolution also 
undermined the principle of universality and thus affected every Member State 
of the Agency. 
35. In any case, the General Conference had reiterated, year after year, 
its rebuttal of such resolutions against Israel, for there was no provision in 
the Statute of the Agency that would allow trespassing on the privileges and 
rights of a Member State. Moreover, if the desired goal were to make Israel 
confident that it would receive international backing once it reached 
equitable agreements in the Middle East, then obstacles such as a patently 
discriminatory and harmful text should not be put in its way. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 10 


36. It seemed worth recalling that Israel had invited its neighbours to 
negotiate with it a nuclear-free zone on the example of Latin America, an 
invitation which those States had declined, even though by accepting it they 
could have derived great benefits and the nuclear peace which they so 
desired. Instead, the draft resolution oozed a rancour which Costa Rica 
desired to see banished from international relations to the good of world 
peace. 
37. Mr. EMSAK (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that the arguments put 
forward each year by the United States of America to the effect that such 
draft resolutions as the present one did not serve the interests of the Agency 
were absurd and untrue. 
38. All present were aware that one of the main statutory objectives of the 
Agency, in accordance also with the Charter of the United Nations, was to 
bring under safeguards all nuclear facilities in all Member States - a point 
perhaps best passed over in silence where the superpowers were concerned. The 
Agency was thus an important instrument of non-proliferation, in accordance 
with the wishes of the whole international community and of almost every State 
Member of the United Nations. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya therefore deplored 
the fact that some Member States, one major power in particular, continued in 
their attempts to undermine resolutions taken by the General Conference. 
39. If the nuclear capabilities of the State some called Israel were indeed 
intended for the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, then there could be no 
reason why they should not be placed under Agency safeguards, as were those of 
other, peace-loving States, and even those of the superpowers. 
40. In response to the charge that the resolution was discriminatory, he 
said that indeed it was: discriminatory against aggression, against 
oppression, against the flouting of international law, against breaches of 
fundamental human rights, against injustice and against exploitation. Israel 
was against the Palestinian people, and not only that, against its neighbours, 
and against the world as a whole; the acquisition by Israel of nuclear 
capabilities could only serve to underpin its aggressive and oppressive ends, 
a fact of which he was sure the United States was well aware. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 11 


41. In reply to the further charge that the resolution was political in 
nature, he said that the Agency was a policy organ of the United Nations 
system which could not be assumed to take only apolitical decisions. The duty 
of the Agency was to fulfil its responsibilities and to take the right 
decision whenever and wherever necessary; in the case in point, it was of the 
utmost necessity that the resolutions which had mouldered for so long 
unimplemented be at last put into effect. 
42. Indeed, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya held that it was the United States 
which had been engaged in constant attempts to misuse the Agency for its own 
political objectives and for those of the State which the Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya considered a Zionist protectorate of the United States. In so 
doing, the United States had been no stranger to the language of threats and 
blackmail. 
43. Against the charge that the draft resolution singled out one particular 
State, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya would reply that that State had singled 
itself out from the international community by not complying with 
internationally agreed resolutions, and therefore had only itself to blame for 
its isolation. 
44. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya therefore commended the draft resolution, 
which it considered carefully and wisely conceived, to the General Conference. 
45. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) observed that, had he not 
intended to speak on the present issue in any case, he would have been forced 
to exercise his right of reply to some of the comments aimed directly at his 
country. The attacks on the United States of America by the Islamic Republic 
of Iran and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya were unacceptable and totally 
unwarranted and his delegation rejected them in their entirety. 
46. He had asked to speak because one of the sponsors of the draft 
resolution now before the Conference had said, most significantly, that the 
following year would see a further resolution which would be a more effective 
one in bringing about the results called for - namely to eliminate an alleged 
threat. In the United States view the real threat was to the Agency and its 
future. If the present draft resolution was only a prelude to events to come, 
it could be likened to a Trojan horse, bringing a new gift, one which many 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 12 


perhaps had not anticipated when looking at a resolution that seemed innocuous 
but was described by its own proponents as being not the end but the beginning 
of a process. 


47. Members should ponder on what was meant by the promise that a more 
effective resolution would be presented the following year. It was no 
rhetoric: it was a promise to continue the disruption of the Agency's 
proceedings in perpetuity, year after year. 
48. There must be some limit on the consideration and reconsideration of 
the present issue, and others like it, if the Agency was to survive. That was 
his delegation's concern and that was the threat that it saw. 
49. Mr. KATTAM (Saudi Arabia) said that he wondered why some States 
rejected the draft resolution, which was not political but merely demanded in 
the name of the Agency - that a Member State should abide by the Agency's 
safeguards system. 
50. The draft resolution was obviously not discriminatory. Israel, in 
precisely the same way as the racist regime of South Africa, had launched 
military attacks on neighbouring countries. It wanted sovereignty and control 
over them. Israel's nuclear capability and its acquisition of nuclear weapons 
were facts which only the politically motivated could ignore. No further 
proof was needed of the close co-operation between South Africa and Israel. 
51. In 1981 the matter had been discussed in the United Nations General 
Assembly and the Security Council. It was an issue that concerned security, 
interference by one State in the sovereignty of another. How were the 
resolutions of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Agency to be 
interpreted? Was Israel to be given the right to reject the will of the 
international community? As everyone knew, the Middle East was a highly 
sensitive region, living in daily threat of nuclear war. If such a war broke 
out, the effects would be world wide, threatening all people, not merely those 
of the Middle East. 
52. The issue came within the competence of the Agency and the Conference, 
since it involved nuclear activities which were contrary to the purpose of 
the safeguards system and NPT. The draft resolution merely asked the 

GC(XXX.i)/OR.301 
page 13 


General Conference to request that Israel should open its nuclear installations 
to safeguards - something that the United Nations had asked for again and 
again, especially after the attack on the Iraqi reactor in 1981, but which 
Israel had refused. In the years that had passed, there had obviously been an 
escalation of nuclear armaments in Israel which ran completely counter to 
NPT. The General Conference must adopt the draft resolution calling upon 
Israel to submit its installations to the safeguards system. That country's 
continued refusal to do so would then show that the sole purpose of Israel's 
nuclear activities was aggression and the furtherance of military plans. On 
the other hand, rejection of the draft resolution would be an obvious gift to 
Israel, with far-reaching repercussions on the prestige of the Agency. 


53. Inclusion of the item on the agenda for the 1988 session would make it 
clear that the General Conference wished to see the common will respected and 
to discharge its responsibilities. 
54. Mr. SHAKER (Egypt) said that he wished to record his delegation's 
support for the draft resolution before it was voted upon. At a time when 
efforts were increasing to achieve a just and durable peace in the Middle East, 
there was growing concern about the Israeli threat. The urgent need to apply 
full-scope safeguards in the explosive areas of the world and to reinforce the 
Agency's role there in the interests of maintaining international peace and 
security had been repeatedly stressed. Israel's acceptance of full-scope 
safeguards on all its nuclear facilities would be a major step towards 
establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, and thus towards 
achieving the people's desire for prosperity and security. 
55. Mr. CHIKELU (Nigeria), also supporting the draft resolution, said 
that Israel had defied resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security 
Council calling upon it to submit all its nuclear facilities to Agency 
safeguards. Israel's nuclear weapons capability compromised the safeguards 
functions of the Agency and was a threat to international peace and security. 
Furthermore, intelligence reports confirmed that Israel was actively 
collaborating with South Africa in the nuclear field. There was an urgent 
need for the Agency and the international community to put strong pressure on 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 14 


those two countries to respect international law, and his delegation saw the 
adoption of the draft resolution by the General Conference as one means of 
doing so. 


56. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said that his country was opposed to the 
draft resolution on Israel because the problem was a political one which 
should be dealt with in other United Nations fora. 
57. The delegations of countries like Paraguay came from far away in order 
to attend scientific meetings, not political ones, and they wanted to share 
experience with other countries. His delegation very much hoped that such a 
situation would not recur, otherwise it might no longer care to attend. His 
country's clear and unequivocal position was that it wanted to see friendship, 
not enmity, reigning in the community devoted to the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy for the benefit of mankind. 
58. Ms. ARYEE (Ghana) said that she wished to add her delegation's 
voice to those supporting the draft resolution. Some countries seemed to 
consider that the issue was not so much whether Israel should submit all its 
facilities to full-scope Agency safeguards, but whether the Agency was 
competent to demand that Member States do so. However, the issue was a 
crucial one, since it involved a kind of technology which, while offering many 
advantages, also entailed grave dangers in the event of something going 
wrong. Her country knew that Israel had the capabilities and was using them 
in a way that jeopardized peace in the Middle East. It was aware of the 
dangers facing everybody when countries used their nuclear energy for the 
purposes of war. She urged delegates to recognize that danger. It was not a 
question of some countries compelling other countries: it was a question of 
mankind ensuring that peace reigned instead of war. She hoped that good 
reason would prevail and that delegations would vote for the draft resolution. 
59. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no more speakers, invited the 
General Conference to vote on the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXI)/825. As had been requested by the delegation of Iraq, the vote would 
be taken by roll-call. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 15 


60. Canada, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


61. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour; China, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, Egypt, German Democratic Republic, 
Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, 
Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian 
Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe, Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, 
Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 


Against: Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, 
France, Federal Republic of Germany, Guatemala, Iceland, 
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, 
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, 
Paraguay, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of 
America, Uruguay, Australia, Austria, Belgium 


Abstaining: Chile, Cote d'lvoire, Ecuador, Greece, Kenya, Republic 
of Korea, Mexico, Peru, Spain, Venezuela, Argentina, 
Brazil 


62. There were 48 votes in favour and 29 against, with 12 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 


63. Mr. HIREMATH (India), explaining his vote, said that India's 
position of principle regarding the application of safeguards was well known. 


India was firmly committed to the provision in Article III.A.5 of the Statute 


that the Agency was authorized to apply safeguards "at the request of the 


parties, to any bilateral or multilateral arrangement, or at the request of a 


State, to any of that State's activities in the field of atomic energy". It 


would go even further and agree to the universal application of safeguards 


provided it were truly universal and non-discriminatory. 


64. At the same time, India was deeply committed to the restoration of 
peace in West Asia, which could not be achieved unless Israel withdrew from 


all Arab and Palestinian territories occupied by it, including Jerusalem, and 



GC(XXXI)/OR.301 


page 16 


restored the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their 


right to self-determination and a State of their own. That had unfortunately 
not happened, and the countries of the region continued to share a common 
threat from Israel's growing military strength. India therefore supported the 
demand of the Arab countries to impose a certain measure of discipline on 
Israel with regard to its nuclear capability. 


65. Mr. CHRISTENSEM (Denmark), speaking on behalf of the member states 
of the European Community, said that those countries had either opposed the 
draft resolution or abstained in the vote on several grounds. First, the 
question of Israel had already been dealt with in a resolution adopted by the 
General Conference in 1985. Secondly, the draft resolution singled out in an 
unbalanced manner the nuclear policies of one State. Thirdly, the draft 
resolution had the effect of politicizing the Agency in a divisive manner. 
Lastly, the member states of the European Community considered it desirable 
that safeguards be applied as widely as possible, in furtherance of the cause 
of non-proliferation. Since, however, the application of safeguards under the 
Statute was a matter for decision by the State concerned, the non-submission 
of a Member State's nuclear facilities and installations to Agency safeguards 
could not justify the action demanded in the draft resolution. 
66. Mr. SHIELDS (Canada), explaining his country's vote, said that, in 
the first place, his delegation could not accept the wording of preambular 
paragraph (h). Secondly, it regarded operative paragraph 1 as discriminatory. 
It was well known that Israel was not the only country which had not placed 
all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. Thirdly, the assessment 
of a military capability or threat was outside the Agency's mandate. Lastly, 
the Canadian delegation considered it unfortunate that a political issue of 
that nature had appeared on the agenda of the Agency's General Conference at 
ail; in particular, it objected to operative paragraph 5, which would make it 
a recurrent item. 
67. Mr. ORNSTEIN (Argentina) said that his delegation's reasons for 
abstaining had been explained in the general debate. His delegation was 
firmly convinced that, in order to maintain confidence in the Agency's 
safeguards system, it must be applied in full conformity with the Statute. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 17 


Consequently, any attempt to impose it in a binding manner, against the 
sovereign will of a Member State, would completely change its nature and 
detract from its ultimate credibility. Not even a consensus decision by the 
General Conference could alter the voluntary nature of the submission of a 
facility or installations of a Member State to safeguards. Still less could 
it render mandatory submission to full-scope safeguards, which were not 
covered by the Agency's Statute. Such submission would be legally binding 
only where a State freely adhered to an international instrument whose 
provisions were mandatory. Argentina did not regard as valid any decision by 
a policy-making organ which attempted to impose such an obligation on a 
Member State. 


68. Mr. YATABE (Japan) said that his delegation had voted against the 
draft resolution for the following reasons. Japan's basic position on the 
question of Israel in the nuclear field remained unchanged: it firmly 
be]ieved that Israel and other countries which had remained outside the NPT 
should become parties to it and should accept Agency safeguards on all their 
nuclear facilities. However, the Agency was an international organization 
having well-defined functions and purposes - specifically, it was entrusted 
with the functions of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy world wide 
and ensuring global nuclear non-proliferation. To introduce factors that were 
not relevant to its functions into discussions at the General Conference 
detracted from the Agency's original and genuine aims. In his delegation's 
view, the draft resolution contained elements which would jeopardize the 
normal conduct of the Agency's activities as defined in its Statute. 
69. The PRESIDENT, replying to a request by the delegate of Tunisia, 
explained that, in accordance with Rule 74 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference, he could not permit the Tunisian delegate to explain his 
vote, since he was a co-sponsor of the draft resolution. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXXI)/828) 


70. The PRESIDENT asked the Conference to consider document 
GC(XXXI)/828 containing the report of the General Committee, which had met to 
examine the credentials of all delegates, as provided for in Rule 28 of the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 18 


Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. Paragraphs 2-13 of the report 
described the Committee's procedure and conveyed the opinions expressed during 
the discussion. The Committee had agreed to recommend adoption of the draft 
resolution set forth in paragraph 14. 


71. Mr. AL-MUFTAH (Qatar), speaking on behalf of the Arab delegations 
members of the League of Arab States and participating in the work of the 
General Conference, drew attention to their reservations concerning the 
credentials of the Israeli delegate, which were set forth in the Attachment to 
document GC(XXXI)/820 annexed to the Committee's report. 
72. Mr. JAMALUDDIN (Malaysia) said that he wished to place on record 
his delegation's reservations concerning the credentials of the delegate from 
the so-called State of Israel and its endorsement of the views of the Arab 
States just mentioned by the delegate of Qatar. 
73. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his delegation's 
views on the present subject had been given in the General Committee and were 
recorded in paragraph 6 of the Committee's report in document GC(XXXI)/828. 
74. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that, since the 
Zionist regime of so-called Israel was based on illegal occupation of 
Jerusalem and Palestine, credentials issued in Jerusalem were not valid. He 
therefore expressed his Government's reservations on the credentials of the 
Israeli delegate to the present Conference. 
75. Ms. SUDIRDJO (Indonesia) reaffirmed her delegation's long-standing 
reservations concerning the Israeli credentials. 
76. Mr. SHAKER (Egypt) said that his country's position concerning 
Israel's illegal occupation of Arab territories on the West Bank, and 
especially Jerusalem, Gaza and the Golan Heights, and the need for a speedy 
end to that occupation, was a matter of principle and was well known, as was 
its position on the present subject. 
77. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that 
the USSR delegation was prepared to accept document GC(XXXI)/828 and the draft 
resolution it contained. Its views on the present question were stated in 
paragraph 9 of that document. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 19 


78. The PRESIDENT said that, since there were no more speakers, he 
took it that the General Conference was prepared to adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXI)/828. All observations and reservations put 
forward by delegates in regard to certain credentials would be reflected in 
the official records. The reservations expressed by members of the Arab Group 
concerning the credentials of the Israeli delegate were already annexed to the 
General Committee's report. 
79. The draft resolution contained in paragraph 14 of document GC(XXXI)/828 
was adopted. 
COMMUNICATION RECEIVED BY THE AGENCY FROM THE PERMANENT MISSION OF BOLIVIA 


80. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee 
had considered a request from Bolivia, reproduced in document GC(XXXI)/INF/254, 
that Article XIX.A of the Statute should not be applied to it and that Bolivia 
should be permitted to vote during the present session. The Committee's 
recommendation to the Conference was that it should not accede to that 
request. He took it that the Conference accepted that recommendation. 
81. It was so decided. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXI)/826) 


82. The PRESIDENT said that, pursuant to Rule 79 of the Rules of 
Procedure, the elections would be taken by secret ballot. The elective places 
on the Board which had to be filled were indicated in document GC(XXXI)/826. 
Paragraph 2 of that document set forth, for each of the geographical areas, 
the number of Member States to be elected so as to ensure that the Board would 
be constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute. Paragraph 4 
contained a list of 24 Member States which had been either designated by the 
Board of Governors at its June meetings for membership of the Board pursuant 
to Article VI.A.1 of the Statute, or elected by the General Conference in 1986 
in accordance with Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, and which would therefore be 
serving on the Board during the year 1987/88. 
83. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 members to the Board of 
Governors. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.301 
page 20 


84. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Brazilian 
delegation and a member of the United Kingdom delegation acted as tellers. 
85. The PRESIDENT, noting that the counting of votes would take some 
time, suggested that consideration of item 18 of the agenda be taken up in the 
meantime. 
SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXXI)/807, 827, 827/Add.l) 


86. The PRESIDENT noted that the item on South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities had been included in the agenda in accordance with General 
Conference resolution GC(XXX)/RES/468. Document GC(XXXI)/807 contained a 
report by the Board of Governors prepared in connection with operative 
paragraph 12 of that resolution. 
87. A draft resolution on the subject was also before the Conference, in 
document GC(XXXI)/827; it was co-sponsored by a great many delegations, to 
which that of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had been added. The 
delegate of Algeria would be introducing the draft resolution on behalf of its 
sponsors. 
88. Mr. MESLOUB (Algeria) began by saying that the French version of 
the draft resolution should be amended to bring it in line with the English 
text: in operative paragraph 1, "Decide de proceder a un echange de vues" 
should be replaced by "Decide d'examiner". 
89. The question of South Africa's nuclear capabilities was not a new one: 
the Agency had been considering the matter for a number of years in response 
to growing concerns within the United Nations about the corresponding threat 
to international peace and security, and in particular, to the security of the 
African States. It was precisely because South Africa had not budged from its 
refusal to comply with both United Nations and IAEA resolutions that the 
subject was still before the General Conference: holding to its reprehensible 
policy of apartheid, South Africa struck out constantly against its 
neighbouring States and committed untrammelled acts of destabilization. 
Flaunting international law, it was illegally occupying Namibia and exploiting 
that country's resources, particularly its uranium, which helped South Africa 
to expand its nuclear capabilities still further. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 21 


90. The Agency's Statute made membership conditional upon a willingness to 
act in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations 
Charter, as well as stipulating that every Member must carry out the 
obligations laid down in the Statute. It was clear that South Africa was in 
no way moved by such considerations. In fact, it constantly used delaying 
tactics and pretences to sidestep its obligations and the General Conference's 
repeated appeals. 
91. Accordingly, the Board of Governors had decided to recommend to the 
General Conference the suspension of South Africa from the exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership in accordance with Article XIX.B of the 
Statute - unless, by the present session of the General Conference, it had 
complied with the relevant General Conference resolutions and begun to conduct 
itself in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the 
United Nations. 
92. During the discussion which had preceded that decision, some Board 
members had expressed the hope that there would be encouraging developments 
between the Board's meetings in June and the present session of the General 
Conference. It must be acknowledged, however, that no changes had occurred; 
in fact, the racist regime had exacerbated its repression of the black 
population and penalized a number of white leaders who had tried to establish 
dialogue with the African National Congress of South Africa at a meeting in 
Dakar. 
93. The recent ploys of the South African regime, designed to lend credence 
to the idea that its policy might evolve, did not fool anyone. Its signing 
and ratification of the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency 
Assistance should be seen as another device to sow confusion, for there was 
clearly no connection between the signing of such documents and the question 
of South Africa's nuclear capabilities. Just recently, at the beginning of 
the present session, South Africa had published information which could be 
seen only as part of its diversionary tactics. It was impossible to believe 
in the good will of the South African regime when so many years' work had 
remained fruitless - and yet, on the very first day of the thirty-first 

GC<XXXI)/OR.301 
page 22 


session, South Africa had announced that it was willing to engage in 
negotiations which did not even fall in line with the provisions of the 
relevant Agency resolutions. 


94. The African Group and the Member States which supported it were not to 
be led astray by such transparent manoeuvres, whose obvious intent was to 
postpone a decision by the General Conference; nevertheless, moved by a 
desire for co-operation with those who believed in the possibility of a change 
in the attitude of the South African regime, the States concerned were 
submitting to the General Conference a draft resolution which would have the 
effect of postponing, until the thirty-second session, a decision on the 
Board's recommendation to suspend South Africa from the exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership in the Agency. The sponsors themselves 
were dissatisfied with the draft resolution but viewed it as a gauge of their 
will to co-operate with those who, out of their own sense of moral rectitude, 
continued to show forbearance towards a regime which had time and time again 
been condemned by the international community. 
95. In fact, the draft resolution was simply one of procedure: it referred 
to facts and situations amply documented in Agency publications and 
United Nations decisions and requested the Director General to take steps to 
ensure the implementation of a number of resolutions, particularly 
GC(XXX)/RES/468. The most important provision, obviously, was that which 
called for the postponement of consideration, until the thirty-second session 
of the General Conference, of a decision on the Board's recommendation to 
suspend South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of 
membership. He was convinced that he and his co-sponsors were justified in 
calling for the draft resolution's adoption by consensus: if that were not 
possible, he would invoke Rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure to request a vote 
by roll-call. 
96. Mr. CHIKELU (Nigeria) said that his delegation strongly supported 
the draft resolution. The Board of Governors had been fully justified in 
recommending, under Article XIX.B of the Statute, the suspension of 
South Africa from the exercise of its rights and privileges as a Member. The 

GC(XXXI)/0R.301 
page 23 


recommendation had been prompted by South Africa's persistent refusal to 
comply with a number of General Conference resolutions and by the fact that 
South Africa's policies were clearly inconsistent with the United Nations 
Charter, upon which the Agency's Statute was based. No responsible 
organization could retain among its members a country that was not prepared to 
abide by its regulations. The Agency was therefore both morally and legally 
justified in insisting on the suspension of racist South Africa; that course 
was surely the best one the Agency could take. 


97. Nevertheless, because representations had been made in some quarters, 
it had been decided to give racist South Africa another chance to comply with 
the General Conference's resolutions and to reform its policies in line with 
the United Nations Charter. In fact, that decision was a very generous offer 
reluctantly made to the racist regime in question. It was to be hoped that 
South Africa would read the handwriting on the wall and respect the principles 
of human dignity. It was not sufficient for South Africa to make statements 
of intent: what was required was action. The world would no longer be fooled 
by South Africa's specious promises. 
98. The African Group had fought a long battle: in 197 7, it had succeeded 
in having South Africa removed from the Board of Governors. It was still 
engaged in a war of survival, but no nation had ever lost when such a war had 
been justified. The Group would continue to fight, and was convinced that 
victory was in sight. 
99. Ms. ARYEE (Ghana) said that the subject under discussion was 
the business of the entire international community. General Assembly 
resolution 41/35B called upon Member States to exclude South Africa from all 
organizations within the United Nations system: although the Agency was not a 
part of that system, it was a member of the United Nations family and should 
therefore be bound by that decision. Moreover, in resolution 41/55B, the 
General Assembly called upon all States to end all forms of nuclear 
collaboration with South Africa. Many States had denied having collaborated 
with the racist regime, but South Africa could not have come as far as it had 
without such assistance. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 24 


100. Some States were claiming that the "universality" of an organization 
should not be jeopardized by excluding any of its members - but did not 
Articles IV and XIX.B of the Statute imply that States which persistently 
violated the rules of international organizations should be prevented from 
joining, or, if necessary, be suspended from membership? 
101. She had cited only some of the many resolutions adopted by the United 
Nations in an effort to encourage the racist regime to act in accordance with 
the simple rules of human dignity. However, South Africa's track record was 
one of nothing but persistent disregard for those rules. That attitude had 
prompted the United Nations to pass resolutions calling for comprehensive 
sanctions. 
102. South Africa had announced that it was considering signing NPT and 
thus, by inference, submitting its facilities to Agency safeguards. Yet how 
could a regime which was totally committed to the development of its nuclearweapons 
capabilities become a party to a treaty which enjoined its adherents 
to renounce nuclear weapons? Was it, perhaps, contemplating accession to the 
Treaty as a nuclear-weapons State? 
103. South Africa's refusal to implement United Nations decisions such as 
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) on Namibia, and bilateral agreements 
such as the Nkomati accord reached with Mozambique, showed that it was not to 
be trusted. The debate about whether South Africa was worthy of being a 
member of international organizations had only given that country a 
persecution complex which might drive it to push through a series of drastic 
measures to ensure white supremacy: no one knew whether the Botha regime, 
haunted by the fear of annihilation, might not then resort to the use of 
nuclear weapons. The argument that it was discriminatory to single out South 
Africa for condemnation begged the issue: South Africa was the only country 
in the world where discrimination on account of race was institutionalized. 
104. For those reasons, her delegation considered the draft resolution to be 
an extremely well-balanced one and urged all delegations to vote for it. 
105. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) said he agreed with those delegations which 
favoured the draft resolution's adoption. The fact that the issue had to be 
raised again and again was indicative of its importance for all countries, 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 25 


particularly the African States, which were persevering in attempts to rectify 
an anomalous situation which had prevailed for a number of years. The subject 
must be kept under discussion until South Africa responded constructively to 
the demands of the international community. 


106. It was unnecessary to provide further evidence of the threat 
represented by the racist regime of South Africa to the safety of the African 
continent. The Arab countries saw a direct link between that danger and the 
threat to the Middle East created by Israel's policies. The growing 
collaboration between South Africa and Israel in nuclear and military 
technology meant that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in either country 
affected both the Middle East and Africa. 
107. He did not agree that the Agency had no business to decide whether a 
given activity might have military applications. Article III.A.5 of the 
Statute referred to the Agency's responsibility for administering safeguards 
to ensure that special fissionable and other materials were not used to 
further any military purpose. Clearly, therefore, the Agency's mandate 
extended to investigating the use by any country of nuclear materials for 
military purposes, and so it was inaccurate to contend that the subject of 
South Africa's nuclear capabilities was outside the Agency's competence. 
108. The raising of the issue year after year should be seen, not as a waste 
of time, but as a sign of good will, since it provided an opportunity for the 
State which was failing to carry out the Statute's provisions to adjust its 
policies and comply with the wishes of the international community. He 
appealed, accordingly, to all delegations to support the draft resolution. 
109. Mr. AL-QARAGULI (Iraq) said that, because of the striking 
similarity between the South African and Israeli regimes, his delegation had 
received clear instructions to vote in favour of the immediate suspension of 
South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership, 
although Iraq was willing to go along with the suggestions made by the 
representative of Algeria. There was incontrovertible evidence of collaboration 
between the dangerous racist entities in South Africa and Israel, especially in 
the nuclear field: both regimes represented a threat to the international 
community and to its desire to live in peace, free of the spectre of nuclear war. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 26 


110. The South African statement issued as document GC(XXXI)/819 was merely 
a ploy designed to weaken the determination of the African countries to push 
for the suspension of South Africa's privileges and rights of membership. 
111. There was no legal justification for racism: it despoiled the dignity 
and rights of man and was an outrage to peoples throughout the world. His 
delegation therefore fully supported the draft resolution before the 
Conference. 
112. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that fourteen 
centuries had passed since the divine message of Islam had forbidden 
discrimination on the basis of skin colour, but still the intolerable racist 
oppression of the African nations and the exploitation of Namibia's natural 
resources, including uranium, by the apartheid regime of South Africa 
continued. 
113. In view of South Africa's consistent refusal to comply with Agency 
resolutions and its thwarting of the Director General's efforts to ensure that 
those resolutions were carried out to the letter, there seemed no justification 
whatsoever for South Africa's co-existence with the majority of Member States 
of the Agency. 
114. His delegation admired the Board of Governors for having recommended 
the suspension of the privileges and rights of membership of South Africa and 
had hoped the same sort of decision would be adopted by the General Conference. 
In a spirit of co-operation, however, it had joined in a consensus on the 
draft resolution which the Conference had before it as a first step towards 
the goal of ensuring that justice was served within the Agency. 
115. It was the countries that had transferred nuclear technology and 
material to the racist regime of South Africa which bore full responsibility 
for the current political conflicts within the Agency: he therefore appealed 
to all Member States to exert the necessary pressure to put an end to such 
nuclear co-operation. 
116. Mr. KASAMDA (Zambia) welcomed the decision by the Board of 
Governors to recommend that the General Conference consider suspending South 
Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership in the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 27 


Agency. The decision was intended to force the Pretoria regime to give 
serious consideration to complying with the General Assembly and General 
Conference resolutions aimed at persuading it to abandon its mobilization of 
nuclear programmes for military purposes, its military aggression against the 
majority black population and neighbouring independent States, and its illegal 
occupation of Namibia and exploitation of that country's uranium resources. 


117. His delegation did not accept the view that southern Africa would be 
better served if South Africa remained a Member of the Agency. While still a 
Member, South Africa had built up its nuclear capabilities with a view to 
military use and had perpetuated its racist policies and expansionist 
ambitions. Some Member States of the Agency had even collaborated with the 
racist regime in expanding its nuclear capabilities and supplied it with 
weapons for use against the independent States of Angola and Mozambique. Over 
the past 30 years, nothing had stopped the proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
and South Africa's membership in the Agency would not prevent it from pursuing 
its nuclear-weapons programme. 
118. To the contention that the subject was a political one and therefore 
should not be discussed by the Agency, he retorted that the Agency's 
overriding principle was to contribute to the peace and stability of the world 
by emphasizing the safe use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
Technical developments in nuclear energy had to be considered in relation to 
the welfare of all peoples. The build-up of its military might by the racist 
regime of South Africa was an eminent danger to the peace of southern Africa 
and to the entire African continent. The Pretoria regime was the only African 
Government which deployed its nuclear programme for military purposes, had 
institutionalized the systematic repression of the majority of its population 
and was now actively engaged in the illegal exploitation of another country's 
uranium. 
119. South Africa's announcement of its intent to sign NPT was a transparent 
propaganda ploy designed to buy time. Over the past ten years there had been 
more than enough time for it to change its attitudes. Moreover, resolution 
GC(XXX)/RES/468 did not call upon South Africa to accede to NPT, but to 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 28 


conduct itself in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United 
Nations, something it had always blatantly refused to do. 


120. He had endorsed the Board's recommendation to suspend South Africa from 
the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership and had only 
reluctantly joined in the consensus to postpone consideration of the matter 
until the thirty-second session of the General Conference. He therefore 
called on all progressive Governments, those which wished to see peace and 
stability in southern Africa, at least to support the draft resolution. 
121. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic), speaking on 
behalf of the socialist States, said that they had consistently condemned the 
apartheid policy of the minority regime of South Africa and favoured the 
adoption by the international community of agreed measures to combat apartheid 
as a destabilizing force in international relations. The socialist countries 
had always supported General Assembly and Security Council resolutions adopted 
to achieve that end, and in 1986 they had endorsed the majority position in 
favour of a resolution which had angrily condemned apartheid and called on the 
Security Council to apply comprehensive sanctions against South Africa, in 
full accordance with the United Nations Charter. 
122. The socialist countries believed that the threat to the peace and 
security of the African continent and of the entire world represented by the 
South African regime was greatly exacerbated by the regime, as possession of 
nuclear weapons, which dramatically increased the danger of further 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, undermined current efforts to achieve 
nuclear disarmament, and prevented mankind from opening the door to a 
non-violent and non-nuclear world. 
123. Like most of the Agency's Member States, his country was anxious to see 
the adoption of specific, practical measures to prevent South Africa from 
sabotaging non-proliferation and to counter its efforts to develop its nuclear 
capabilities, measures which must involve increased control by the Agency over 
South Africa's nuclear activities. The Agency must play a leading role in the 
international organizations' endeavours to force South Africa to renounce its 
nuclear ambitions and to ratify NPT. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.301 
page 29 


124. The socialist countries strongly advocated the adoption of any measures 
that would stop South Africa from becoming a nuclear threat to peace and 
ensure that its nuclear activities were placed under strict Agency safeguards. 
They further demanded that South Africa comply with the resolutions on its 
nuclear capabilities adopted by the United Nations and the Agency. The Board 
of Governors would be reconsidering the subject in February 1988, and the 
Director General should then report on any progress made in achieving those 
goals. It might also be possible for the February Board to analyse 
information from depositaries of the Non-Proliferation Treaty in order to 
ascertain whether South Africa was really doing what was required to ratify 
the Treaty. 
125. The socialist countries called upon all other delegations to use all 
their influence to induce South Africa to ratify NPT as soon as possible and 
to submit its nuclear activities to Agency safeguards. Meanwhile, the 
socialist countries would fully support the draft resolution submitted by the 
African group. 
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m. 



GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
March 1988* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 21-25 SEPTEMBER 1987 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center, Vienna, 
on Friday, 25 September 1987, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


ParaRraphs 


agenda** 


18 South Africa's nuclear capabilities 
(continued) 1 - 61 


8 Election of members to the Board of 
Governors (resumed) 62 - 81 


Oral report of the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole on the 
following items: 82 - 144 


- 
The Agency's accounts for 1986 97 
- 
Measures to strengthen international 
co-operation in nuclear safety and 
radiological protection 98 - 131 
- 
The Agency's budget for 1988 132 - 136 
- 
The Agency's relations with the 
- 
Scale of assessment of Members' 
contributions for 1988 137 
- 
United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization 138 
- 
The financing of technical assistance 139 
- 
The staffing of the Agency's 
Secretariat 140 
- 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute 141 
- 
Revision of Article VI of the 
Statute as a whole 142 - 144 
[*] A provisional version of this document was issued on 6 November 1987. 
[**] GC(XXXI)/818. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXI)/INF/246/Rev.3. 


88-0591 
2492e/0302e 



GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 2 


Item of the 
agenda** ParaKraphs 
20 Appointment of the External Auditor 145 146 
21 Elections to the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee 147 - 148 
22 Report on voluntary contributions 
pledged to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund for 1988 149 
Closing of the session 150 - 161 


GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 3 


SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXXI)/807 and Add.l, 819, 827) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his Government, 
which had closely followed developments concerning the issue at the Agency 
during recent years, was opposed in principle to draft resolution 
GC(XXXI)/827. Consequently, the United States delegation would vote against 
it. His Government's opposition stemmed from two basic considerations, namely 
the universality of the Agency and of other international organizations and 
respect for the Statute. The United States delegation believed that the draft 
resolution called into question those fundamental principles which should be 
respected by all States Members of the Agency. 
2. He recognized the fact that the sponsors of the draft under discussion 
had taken considerable care not to include provisions which would suspend 
South Africa from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership, as 
had been recommended at the June meetings of the Board of Governors. That was 
a positive point, showing that there was awareness of the harm which might be 
done to the Agency if a Member were to be excluded for purely political 
reasons, in a way that was incompatible with the Statute. The principles of 
universality and respect for the Statute led directly to the issue of the 
politicization of the Agency, destracting from its important work in the 
fields of safety, safeguards and technical assistance. It was above all for 
that reason that the United States delegation was opposed to the Agency taking 
up matters of that kind. 
3. His Government was not defending South Africa. Opposition to the draft 
resolution before the Conference in no way constituted support for the racist 
and oppressive regime in South Africa. The record of the United States in 
favour of human rights was clear to all. In the current year 1987 the United 
States was celebrating the 200th anniversary of its constitution, which had 
served as a model for the constitutions of numerous other countries 
represented at the present session of the General Conference. That 
constitution guaranteed equal rights for all. That was a vital task for all 
countries, but not one which had been assigned to the Agency. Political 
questions should be left to the General Assembly of the United Nations, the 
Agency remaining free to concentrate on its important nuclear responsibilities. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 4 


A. The United States delegation had a deep respect both for the sponsors 
of the draft resolution and for the views on which their approach was based, 
but it saw their arguments in a different light. Thus, the argument that a 
nation which denied universality to its own citizens should not enjoy the 
benefit of universality as it applied to membership of the Agency was in his 
opinion based on confusion over the meaning of the word "universality" which, 
in the context of international organizations, had a significance quite 
different from the one it had in the internal affairs of individual nations. 
5. Regarding the specific aspects of the draft resolution, his delegation 
first of all noted that the preamble was weakened by failing to take account 
of an important new development, namely the recent statement by the President 
of South Africa concerning his country's attitude to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). It believed that South Africa's 
accession to NPT would be a most positive development for the States in the 
region and for the world as a whole. It was difficult to understand why the 
numerous strong supporters of NPT who had sponsored the draft resolution had 
not been able to find any way to give support to the Treaty in the text. It 
thus appeared that the focus of attention in the draft resolution was not so 
much South Africa's nuclear activities as other questions of a political 
nature. 
6. Although paragraphs (a) and (b) of the preamble presented no difficulty 
for the United States delegation, that was not the case with paragraph (c), 
the essential purpose of which was to imply that South Africa had violated the 
Agency's Statute in such a way as to give grounds for action to suspend it 
from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. In that 
connection he believed that any attempt to incorporate, by reference, 
provisions of the United Nations Charter into the Agency's Statute was 
impermissible. He rejected the interpretation implied by the paragraph in 
question, believing that in a General Conference resolution it in no way 
strengthened the legal case for action under the Statute. In any future 
discussion of the matter the United States delegation would not consider 
itself bound by that interpretation. 
7. Preambular paragraph (d) also represented a problem, because it 
appeared to state that South Africa had already acquired a nuclear-weapons 
capability. The available evidence did not prove that it had. On the other 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 5 


hand, it was certain that acquisition of such a capability by South Africa 
would constitute a danger for the region and for international peace and 


security. That was why the United States Government had, for many years past, 
been pressing the Government of South Africa to submit the whole of its 
nuclear programme to safeguards and to accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 


8. It was above all the operative part of the draft resolution which 
caused the most difficulties for the United States delegation. The thrust of 
those paragraphs was to ensure that that political matter again appeared on 
the agenda for the following session of the General Conference and perhaps for 
all subsequent sessions as well. His delegation considered that the present 
politicized debate was harming the Agency and distracting it from its 
important safety and safeguards functions. More specifically, he was unable 
to accept operative paragraph 2 in which the Director General was requested to 
take all possible action to ensure the full implementation of the resolution 
adopted by the General Conference the previous year, and he recalled that the 
United States had voted against the draft resolution on that occasion. 
9. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the South African 
racist regime represented aggression against the native population of 
South Africa on a permanent basis and against the neighbouring States at 
regular intervals. That regime was refusing to apply the resolutions of the 
United Nations and, thanks to its military nuclear capability, constituted a 
danger for Africa and for mankind as a whole. That was why the Agency's 
General Conference had for more than ten years past been considering the 
matter of South Africa's nuclear capabilities and, as a result of a highly 
praiseworthy effort, the Board of Governors had at its meetings in June 1987 
adopted a historic resolution demanding that South Africa should be suspended 
from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. 
10. The Syrian delegation had hoped that the General Conference would adopt 
a resolution calling for the suspension of South Africa. However, document 
GC(XXXI)/819, issued by the South African regime and referring to the 
willingness of Pretoria to commence negotiations with a view to acceding to 
NPT and to submitting its nuclear facilities to safeguards represented a 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 6 


enticement for certain delegations to the General Conference. His own 
delegation, however, considered that the document in question was not serious, 
for if South Africa really wished to accede to NPT it would already have 
indicated its intentions during its consultations with the Agency. 


11. Recalling that the draft resolution under consideration made provision 
for including the item in the agenda for the following session, he said that 
his delegation, in solidarity with the African group, unreservedly supported 
the draft and trusted that the General Conference would adopt it unanimously; 
in the Syrian Arab Republic's view, anyone who failed to respect the principle 
of universality should not benefit therefrom himself. 
12. Mr. KELSO (Australia) stressed that it was essential to secure 
respect for the Agency's Statute and for the principle of the universality of 
both the Agency and other international organizations. Although the original 
text of the draft resolution had now been modified, it still tended to 
prejudge any future consideration of the suspension of South Africa from the 
exercise of the privileges and rights of membership pursuant to a 
recommendation by the Board of Governors, against which Australia had voted. 
Consequently, the Australian delegation would also vote against draft 
resolution GC(XXXI)/827. 
13. Australia, which condemned and abhorred apartheid as was attested by 
the wide range of sanctions it had taken against South Africa, believed that 
the Conference should not reject or appear to reject the offer by South Africa 
to consider acceding to NPT. Accession would represent major progress for 
peace and security throughout the world, and particularly in the neighbouring 
region, which would thus no longer be exposed to a nuclear threat by South 
Africa. Furthermore, the latter would accept a binding commitment not to 
acquire nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices, a commitment which would 
be verified through the application of Agency safeguards to all the country's 
nuclear facilities. Thus, the international community and the States Members 
of the Agency should make every effort to promote the accession of South 
Africa to NPT. For its part, Australia had already made appropriate 
representations to the South African Government, and would continue to urge it 
to take the necessary action. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 7 


14. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) said that he fully appreciated the 
grounds which had led the Board of Governors to adopt, in June 1987, a 
recommendation to suspend South Africa from the exercise of the privileges and 
rights of membership. The racist regime in South Africa was brutallyoppressing 
and exploiting the black population of the country, by robbing it 
of decent living conditions and of its rights. The system of oppression 
imposed by the racist Government of South Africa was rejected by the 
international community, and particularly by the non-aligned countries. Thus, 
the 350 000 black miners who had recently struck to defend their most 
elementary rights had enjoyed the solidarity of many governments throughout 
the world but, far from entering into a constructive dialogue, the racist 
South African regime had intensified its repressive measures, so that the 
strike had resulted in several deaths, hundreds of wounded and imprisoned, and 
thousands of workers dismissed. 
15. The repression perpetrated by the racist regime in Pretoria was not 
confined to its own territory but extended to that of neighbouring countries. 
Thousands of South African soldiers were illegally occupying the territory of 
Namibia and spending vast sums on waging a colonial war there. Furthermore, 
South Africa was illegally exploiting Namibia's natural wealth, particularly 
its uranium. In addition, the implementation of a large-scale nuclear 
programme and the existence of installations intended to expand that.programme 
for patently military purposes meant that South Africa constituted a threat to 
international peace and security, particularly vis-a-vis the neighbouring 
States. 
16. Cuba rejected the arguments put forward by certain delegations against 
depriving South Africa of its privileges and rights of membership, since 
numerous international organizations had already done so. In any case, 
suspension would not release South Africa from its obligations as a Member of 
the Agency and would merely legalize action which was already being taken in 
practice. International pressure had already forced Pretoria to accept 
certain compromises, as indicated by the very doubtful promise which it had 
recently made regarding accession to NPT. The moment had thus come to apply 
additional measures which would oblige South Africa to behave in the way 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 8 


demanded by the international community. Consequently, although regretting 
that the proposed measures were not more drastic, Cuba would vote in favour of 
the draft resolution under consideration and would call for strict application 
of its provisions. 


17. Mr. CHRISTENSEM (Denmark), speaking on behalf of the twelve Member 
States of the European Community, stressed that the Community countries fully 
shared the abhorrence of apartheid felt by the sponsors of the draft 
resolution. However, the question at issue was not the South African system 
of government but a fundamental principle of the Agency. To suspend South 
Africa or any other Member State from the exercise of the privileges and 
rights of membership would run counter to the fundamental principle of the 
universality of United Nations bodies. That would weaken the international 
safeguards system and might create a precedent endangering the participation 
of other countries in the Agency. That was why the Member States of the 
European Community were opposed to any action which could lead to the 
suspension of South Africa's membership privileges and rights - a possibility 
clearly envisaged in operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution GC(XXXI)/827. 
The Member States of the European Community would thus not be able to support 
the draft resolution. They had taken note of the statement by the South 
African State President on 21 September, which in their view called for 
further explanation. 
18. Mr. ERRERA (France) said that, like the delegate speaking on 
behalf of the European Community, he was opposed to the draft resolution; he 
wished to explain the various reasons for his stand. During the June meetings 
of the Board of Governors, the French delegation had declared its opposition 
to recommending to the General Conference that South Africa be suspended from 
the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership. A recommendation of 
that kind represented an assault on the principle of Agency universality, a 
principle which France, in the interests of the Agency and of its Members, 
would defend whatever the State was whose legitimate rights were being 
unjustifiably-subjected to attack and whatever the views which one might have' 
regarding the policies of the State in question. In that connection he wished 
to stress, in case there was any doubt about the matter, that the French 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 9 


delegation's opposition to the resolution could in no way be construed as any 
kind of endorsement of the policy of apartheid, for which France had always 
expressed its deepest aversion. 


19. The French delegation would be voting against the draft resolution also 
because it firmly believed that the misuse of the Agency's Statute was 
contrary to the interests of all and held the seeds of the destruction of the 
Agency's very foundations. It further considered that the present draft 
resolution, in its preambular paragraphs (c) and (d), contained unacceptable 
features; the text also referred in its operative part to resolution 
GC(XXX)/RES/468, against which France had voted the previous year. Finally, 
the draft resolution called for the consideration, at the following session of 
the General Conference, of a Board recommendation to which France had already 
indicated its opposition. It was impossible for his Government to associate 
itself with a procedure which constituted a first step towards the possible 
suspension of a Member State from the exercise of its privileges and rights of 
membership. 
20. Mr. OLUMOKO (United Nations Council for Namibia) said that his 
delegation unreservedly supported draft resolution GC(XXXI)/827, of which 
Namibia was a co-sponsor, and noted the Board's recommendation to suspend 
South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership 
pursuant to Article XIX.B of the Statute. 
21. The continued illegal and colonialist occupation of Namibia by South 
Africa, in defiance of numerous resolutions by the General Assembly and the 
Security Council and of the advisory opinion of the International Court of 
Justice dated 21 June 1971, constituted an act of aggression against the 
Namibian people and a challenge to the authority of the United Nations, which 
was directly responsible for Namibia until independence. The occupation was 
being accompanied by a series of repressive measures, including arbitrary 
imprisonment of SWAPO leaders and the killing and torture of innocent 
Namibians. 
22. South Africa was the only country in the world whose system was based 
on institutionalized racism, in violation of the principles and purposes of 
the United Nations Charter and of the Agency's Statute. For decades past, 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 10 


South Africa had been refusing to respect the numerous resolutions by the 
General Assembly, the Security Council and the General Conference, calling 
upon it to put a stop to its reckless and illegal plunder of Namibia's natural 
resources, particularly its uranium deposits, which were part of the heritage 
of the Namibian people. Moreover, the South African authorities had sited a 
nuclear waste depository near the Namibian border, on the pretext that the 
area was uninhabited. However, in the language of apartheid, "uninhabited" 
merely meant that there were no whites living in the area, so that the blacks 
could be left to suffer from exposure to radiation. 


23. For all those reasons the delegation of the United Nations Council for 
Namibia recommended the General Conference to adopt draft resolution 
GC(XXXI)/827. 
24. Mr. SUCRE FIGARELLA (Venezuela) said that his delegation would 
vote for the draft resolution in accordance with the position which it had 
adopted at the June meetings of the Board of Governors. Developments since 
then had confirmed the seriousness of the matter of South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities, but nevertheless it was necessary to consider carefully the 
Board's recommendation to suspend South Africa from the exercise of its 
privileges and rights of membership. The Venezuelan delegation thus 
unreservedly approved that operative paragraph of the draft resolution which 
proposed to defer a decision on the subject to the following session of the 
General Conference. 
25. Regarding the argument to the effect that suspension of a sovereign 
State for any reason whatever was contrary to the principle of universality of 
the United Nations, his delegation believed that that argument was not valid 
in the case of South Africa. Since that State had erected racism into a 
constitutional principle, it could not expect to be treated as a State to 
which current international law was applicable. South Africa was certainly an 
established State, but owing to its character it was an atypical State which 
failed to respect one of the basic requirements laid down in the United 
Nations Charter, namely the principle of racial non-discrimination, which had 
been one of the chief motives for the establishment of the United Nations. 
That was why Venezuela believed that a top moral and legal priority in 

GC(XXXI)/0R.302 
page 11 


international relations was not only to condemn the racist regime in South 
Africa but also to fight it by appropriate measures in all fora and at all 
levels in order to bring about its destruction. 


26. It had been said that a technical organization such as the Agency 
should not entertain such considerations. However, the case of South Africa 
was the exception which proved the rule. His delegation was particularly 
concerned at the fact that South Africa, as a Member of the Agency, was not 
conforming to Article XIX.B of the Statute. His delegation experienced the 
same concern vis-a-vis all Member States which did not accept a thorough-going 
policy in the field of safeguards. Nuclear safety affected everyone, and it 
would be dangerous to lay down discriminatory criteria in that sphere. That 
was why his delegation welcomed the statement by the South African Government 
to the effect that it wished to accede to NPT, and he trusted that the 
relevant negotiations would be completed successfully. 
27. Finally, the Venezuelan delegation wished to stress that its attitude 
was not governed by any search for political confrontation but was the 
legitimate expression of moral indignation and a desire to create a world 
where non-proliferation would be the responsibility of all. It believed that 
deferment of the item to the following session of the General Conference would 
help create a climate of detente and negotiation, which would yield a solution 
acceptable to all. 
28. Mr. MORPHET (United Kingdom) explained that his delegation, whose 
attitude was reflected in the statement made on behalf of the countries of the 
European Community, was likewise not in a position to support the draft 
resolution. The United Kingdom Government had frequently expressed its 
abhorrence of apartheid, and its attitude had not changed. His delegation's 
opposition to the draft resolution in no way implied approval of the South 
African regime, but ensued from the stance it had adopted at the June meetings 
of the Board of Governors. Complete exclusion of South Africa would make the 
possibility of that country's submitting its nuclear facilities to Agency 
safeguards even more remote. It was also highly desirable that South Africa 
should accede to NPT, and in that connection the United Kingdom delegation 
believed that the statement issued by the South African Government on 
21 September deserved further attention. 



GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 12 


29. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) stated that his Government, while 
being firmly opposed to apartheid, likewise attached great significance to the 
principle of the universality of the United Nations system, including the 
Agency. It was in the interests of the latter that that principle should be 
respected. Hence the Netherlands delegation had viewed with great concern the 
recommendation by the Board of Governors to suspend South Africa from the 
exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. 
30. Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/827 proposed to resume study at the 
recommendation of the following session of the General Conference, and it was 
to the credit of the authors of the draft that they had not insisted on the 
item being put to the vote immediately. The Netherlands appreciated the 
efforts made to reach a consensus, while at the same time regretting that 
those efforts had not been successful. South Africa appeared to be moving 
towards modification of its nuclear policy, and it should be given the chance 
to do so. In that connection the Netherlands Government welcomed the 
statement by State President Botha on 21 September, although a number of 
questions were left unanswered, and it appealed to South Africa to sign and 
ratify the Non-Pro1iteration Treaty during the coming months. 
31. The Netherlands delegation would vote against the draft resolution, not 
only in view of that important new development and of the paramount 
significance which the Netherlands attached to the principle of universality 
but also because operative paragraph 2 of the draft requested the Director 
General to take all possible measures to ensure the full implementation of 
resolution GC(XXX)/RES/468, against which the Netherlands had voted. 
Furthermore, preambular paragraph (c) passed judgement on the behaviour of 
South Africa as a member of the international community. However, that type 
of judgement did not lie within the Agency's competence. Finally, it had not 
been proved that South Africa, as was claimed in preambular paragraph (d), had 
acquired nuclear weapons capability. 
32. Mr. QIN (China) said that South Africa was ignoring the basic 
claims of the African population. South Africa's apartheid policy, together 
with its policy of expansion, had been condemned by numerous countries. Hence 
the Board of Governors, at its June meetings, had recommended that South Africa 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 13 


be suspended from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. A 
majority of countries wished to force South Africa to abandon that policy, and 
China entirely appreciated such a completely legitimate desire. 


33. In the light of new developments and after reconsidering the matter, a 
number of countries had recently proposed that a decision on suspension of 
South Africa from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership 
should be deferred to the following session of the General Conference. China 
considered that that proposal was a realistic one in that the countries 
concerned had a genuine desire to preserve the role of the Agency, and his 
delegation therefore supported draft resolution GC(XXXI)/827. 
34. Mr. EMSAK (Libyan Arab Jamahirya) pointed out that the item before 
the General Conference was extremely important by reason of its possible 
implications for the reputation of the Agency and of its Member States, since 
the draft resolution under consideration called upon a Member of the Agency to 
accept the latter*s ruling. The racist regime in South Africa, as emerged 
from other Agency documents on that country's nuclear capabilities, 
represented a threat not only to the neighbouring countries but also to 
international peace and security. It was pursuing its policy of apartheid and 
oppression of the African peoples and was illegally occupying Namibia in 
flagrant violation of all United Nations resolutions. His delegation 
considered that such behaviour constituted sufficient justification to suspend 
South Africa from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. 
There were, however, also other events which proved that South Africa was not 
obeying the decisions of the General Conference or of the Board of Governors, 
particularly those indicated by the Director General in paragraph 44 of his 
report for 1986. 
35. The Libyan delegation hailed the courageous line taken by the Board of 
Governors in June 1987, when it had recommended that South Africa be suspended 
from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership, in accordance 
with the provisions of Article XIX.B of the Statute. He called upon the 
General Conference to take the appropriate decision before it was too late to 
undertake anything. The draft resolution before the Conference was fully in 
the spirit of NPT and would prevent South Africa from becoming a threat to 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 14 


international peace and security. Even if the present version did not make it 
possible fully to attain that objective, it was not less good for the Agency's 
credibility on that account. 


36. Mr. HAMAS (Egypt) remarked that in submitting the draft resolution 
under consideration the delegate of Algeria had accurately explained the 
situation and that his own delegation, as a co-sponsor of the draft, naturally 
subscribed to everything which that delegate had said and requested. In fact, 
the draft resolution remained far short of what the African countries wanted, 
and represented a compromise which bore witness to the understanding shown by 
the African group in connection with the matter. The vast majority of 
delegations had declared themselves in favour of the draft, and any objections 
had been of a minor and limited character. 
37. His delegation had taken note of the statements by certain delegates in 
favour of a regime practising a policy of apartheid condemned by the rest of 
mankind. It was essential that South Africa should accede to NPT, and hence 
the degree of opposition to the draft resolution before the Conference seemed 
to him rather unexpected. What the world was now waiting for the Agency to do 
was to adopt the draft resolution without a vote. If certain delegations had 
a particular attitude on the subject, they could always express it in the form 
of a reservation after adoption. The message which the General Conference 
should address to the racist regime in South Africa was one of condemnation. 
Acting with complete solidarity, the General Conference should take the matter 
seriously and adopt a firm position without recourse to any more delaying 
tactics. 
38. Mr. HIREMATH (India) said that his delegation, which had taken an 
active part in adopting resolution GC(XXX)/RES/468, expected that the General 
Conference would, at its present session, adopt the recommendation addressed 
to it by the Board. 
39. However, it appeared that certain recent developments had induced the 
sponsors of draft resolution GC(XXXI)/827 to propose deferring a decision on 
the Board of Governors recommendation until the following year. In the 
opinion of the Indian delegation and in the light of past experience, those 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 15 


so-called "new developments" had not materially altered the situation. He 
commended the patience and maturity shown by the African States in their long 
march to restore human decency in South Africa. The Indian delegation trusted 
that those countries would not be let down yet again, and that all peoples and 
all countries which, in a spirit of justice, had expressed their abhorrence of 
apartheid would assist them in attaining their principal goal. In the 
meantime, the Indian delegation fully supported draft resolution 
GC(XXXI)/827. 


40. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan), recalling that his delegation had favoured 
the Board's recommendation appearing in document GC(XXXI)/807, strongly 
supported draft resolution GC(XXXI)/827, which was inspired with the same 
spirit as the Board recommendation, and he expressed the hope that an 
appropriate decision would be taken at the thirty-second regular session of 
the General Conference. 
41. The PRESIDENT observed that draft resolution GC(XXXI)/827, before 
the General Conference, was not unanimously accepted and should therefore be 
put to the vote. 
42. At the request of the delegate of Algeria, a roll-call vote was taken. 
43. The United Arab Emirates, having been drawn by lot by the President, 
was called upon to vote first. 
The result of the vote was as follows: 


In favour: United Arab Emirates, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, 
Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Albania, Algeria, Argentina, 
Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Cameroon, China, Cote d'lvoire, 
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, German Democratic 
Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Republic of 
Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, 
Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, 
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics. 



GC(XXXI)/0R.302 
page 16 


Against: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
United States of America, Australia, Austria, Belgium, 
Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, France, Federal 
Republic of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Iceland, 
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, 
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, 
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland. 


Abstaining: Uruguay, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador. 


44. There were 60 votes in favour and 28 against, with 4 abstentions. 
Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/827 on South Africa's nuclear capabilities was 
adopted. 
45. Mr. COSTANZO (Uruguay), explaining his vote, said that his 
Government's attitude to the political aspects of the matter under discussion 
was well known. The President of Uruguay had categorically rejected the 
policy of apartheid practised by South Africa, as violating the most 
elementary human rights. Uruguay's position had not changed and would not 
change for as long as South Africa failed to honour international undertakings 
protecting human rights and continued to apply a policy of discrimination 
which was an affront to the moral conscience of nations. 
46. However, his delegation did not consider it appropriate on the present 
occasion to abandon the principle of the universality of international 
institutions, in particular of an organization such as the Agency, which had 
proved itself capable of dealing rapidly and effectively with the problems 
presented by nuclear energy. Any suspension of South Africa from the exercise 
of its privileges and rights of membership or even the deferment of the item 
would only damage the interests of the international community as a whole, by 
placing South Africa outside the reach of controls which represented a 
guarantee of world peace. 
47. That was why the Uruguayan delegation had abstained at the vote, in 
accordance with its policy and its ideals which provided for categorical 
rejection of apartheid and the defence of the principle of universality of 
international organizations. As he had already stressed during the general 
debate, those were the keystones of Uruguay's international policy. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 17 


48. Mr. SHIELDS (Canada) first recalled that Canada detested the 
system of apartheid, to which it was utterly opposed. His Government had 
taken a number of significant and extremely concrete steps which testified to 
that opposition. It was maintaining a firm line against apartheid in the 
United Nations General Assembly, the meetings of Commonwealth Heads of 
Government and other international fora. Furthermore, there was no nuclear 
co-operation between Canada and South Africa. 
49. Nevertheless, Canada was a strong proponent of the principle of 
universality, in the Agency and in other multilateral organizations. In spite 
of its firm attitude towards South Africa, the Canadian Government considered 
that the suspension of that country from the exercise of its privileges and 
rights within the Agency would jeopardize the principle of universality and 
would do harm to the aims and the effectiveness of the Agency, particularly as 
regards nuclear non-proliferation and safeguards. 
50. Canada considered that political issues should be dealt with by other 
United Nations bodies and not by the Agency's General Conference. Although 
the resolution on which a vote had just been taken postponed for a year the 
question of suspending South Africa from the Agency, the Canadian delegation 
had voted against it not only on the general grounds he had mentioned but also 
because its preamble, particularly paragraphs (c) and (d) thereof, prejudged 
the issue. 
51. He wished to add that his Government would strongly welcome the 
accession of South Africa to NPT. It urged South Africa to follow up its 
statement of intention by beginning negotiations with a view to concluding a 
full-scope safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
52. Mr. WALKER (New Zealand) said that there could be no doubt 
regarding New Zealand's total abhorrence of the policy of apartheid carried 
out by South Africa. The uncompromising opposition of the New Zealand 
Government to the racist policy and practices of that country was well known 
and had been enunciated in every appropriate international forum. The way in 
which the New Zealand delegation had just voted implied no dilution of that 
opposition. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 18 


53. However, New Zealand had always been opposed to the intrusion of 
political issues in the work of technical agencies, because it believed that 
such politicization distracted them from their proper responsibilities and 
damaged their credibility. New Zealand upheld the principle of universality 
of membership for the Agency, in the belief that the international community 
was better able to encourage governments that were Members to comply with the 
Agency's principles. There was no such obligation on States that were 
isolated and outside international organizations. 
54. It was New Zealand's aim that all States should submit their nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards, the acceptance of which was an important 
non-proliferation measure. In that regard New Zealand called7upon South 
Africa to put all its nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards. 
Furthermore, his Government expected South Africa rapidly and honestly to 
implement its declared intention of signing and ratifying NPT. South Africa's 
actions in that respect over the following twelve months would be convincing 
evidence of its regard for the principles which were implicit in membership of 
the Agency. 
55. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) explained that he had voted against the 
resolution because the Agency was a scientific and not a political 
organization, as he had already recalled in the case of Israel. Furthermore, 
suspension from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership would 
deprive the country of its inalienable rights as a free and independent 
State. Similarly, it would deprive the Agency of the possibility of 
monitoring South Africa's actions, and would accord the latter country 
complete freedom to develop its nuclear activities without any control on the 
part of the Agency. That view of things in no way implied that Paraguay 
supported the racist practices of South Africa, on the subject of which the 
Paraguayan delegation had already explained its position in the United 
Nations. 
56. Mr. NEGREIROS PORTELLA (Peru) wished to emphasize his country's 
adherence to the principle of universality of international organizations. 
Noting that there were different ways in which that principle appeared to be 
under attack, his Government trusted that it would nevertheless be invoked and 
applied likewise in other organizations where measures were being taken which 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 19 


seemed to be undermining it. Peru considered that the suspension of a Member 
State from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership would not 
solve the real question at issue, and that it would be preferable to make 
every effort to find a solution within the framework of obligations which had 
been entered into, in accordance with international law and the United Nations 
Charter. 


57. Mr. YATABE (Japan) said that his Government's attitude to South 
Africa's completely unacceptable apartheid policies was perfectly clear and 
had been repeatedly stated in various fora. In that respect, he fully shared 
the concern and indignation of the sponsors of the resolution. 
58. On the other hand, Japan firmly believed that South Africa, as well as 
other countries, should accede to NPT as soon as possible, and submit all its 
nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. On that subject his delegation had 
noted with great interest the recent declaration by the South African 
Government of its intention to accede to NPT, and appealed to that Government 
to complete the accession procedure as soon as possible. 
59. As had been stated in the general debate, the Japanese delegation was 
firmly convinced of the need to preserve the universality and the technical 
character of the Agency, and to avoid all politicization of its activities, so 
that the organization could proceed effectively with promoting the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons throughout 
the world. That was why the Japanese delegation had voted against the draft 
resolution, which, inter alia, provided for the suspension of South Africa 
from the exercises of the privileges and rights of membership. 
60. Mr. GONSTENLA (Costa Rica) said that his country, which firmly 
supported the Agency and its vital activities, was opposed to pursuing any 
political controversy. For essentially political reasons, the Board of 
Governors had recommended the General Conference to suspend South Africa from 
the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership, thereby forgetting 
the very principle of universality. Costa Rica rejected apartheid, but it 
feared that the action that had been proposed would be liable to cause serious 
problems for the Agency itself, seeing that South Africa was a major world 
exporter of uranium and - since it was necessary to know what happened with 

GC(XXXI)/0R.302 
page 20 


the uranium exported - Agency safeguards were required to supervise those 
transactions. If South Africa were irrevocably suspended from the exercise of 
the privileges and rights of membership, the resulting loss of information 
would give rise to uncertainties regarding the supervision and use of nuclear 
materials throughout the world. In addition, South Africa had a nuclear 
programme and, if suspension were imposed, access to information on that 
programme might be restricted, which would compromise nuclear safety not only 
in South Africa itself but also in other areas, particularly the neighbouring 
States. The action contemplated would thus create difficulties for many other 
countries without, however, putting an end to apartheid. 


61. Mr. CUENI (Liechtenstein) explained that his delegation had voted 
against the draft resolution for three reasons. First, Liechtenstein was a 
strong partisan of the principle of Agency universality, and therefore could 
not support resolutions incorporating recommendations in favour of suspending 
a country from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership. 
Second, Liechtenstein deplored the growing politicization of the discussions 
in the Agency's General Conference. Finally, while being strongly opposed to 
the apartheid system, as it had repeatedly stated, Liechtenstein believed that 
the Agency's General Conference was not an appropriate venue for discussing 
the political system of any country. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS. TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXI)/803) (resumed) 


62. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of 
the voting. 
63. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Latin 
America was as follows; 
Abstentions; 18 
Valid votes: 164 
Required ma.iority: 42 
Votes obtained: 


Colombia 81 
Cuba 83 


64. Having obtained the required ma.iority, Colombia and Cuba Were elected 
to the Board. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 21 


65. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Western 
Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 16 
Valid votes: 166 
Required ma.iority: 42 
Votes obtained: 


Spain 83 
Turkey 83 


66. Having obtained the required ma.iority, Spain and Turkey were elected to 
the Board. 
67. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Eastern 
Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 13 
Valid votes: 169 
Required ma.iority: 43 
Votes obtained: 


Hungary 84 
Yugoslavia 85 


68. Having obtained the required ma.iority, Hungary and Yugoslavia were 
elected to the Board. 
69. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was 
as follows: 
Abstentions: 24 


Valid votes: 156 


Invalid votes: 2 


Required majority: 40 


Votes obtained: 


Ghana 1 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 69 
Morocco 1 
Senegal 85 



GC(XXXI)/OR.302 . 
page 22 


70. Having obtained the required ma.iority. the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and 
Senegal were elected to the Board. 
71. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 84 
Invalid votes: 1 
Required ma.iority: 43 
Votes obtained: 


Kuwait 84 


72. Having obtained the required majority, Kuwait was elected to the Board. 
73. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Far East 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 22 
Valid votes: 67 
Invalid votes: 2 
Required ma.iority: 34 
Votes obtained: 


Democratic People's Republic of Korea 2 
Republic of Korea 64 
Philippines 1 


74. Having obtained the required ma.iority. the Republic of Korea was 
elected to the Board. 
75. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific or of the Far East 
(so-called "floating seats") was as follows: 
Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes: 82 
Required ma.iority: , 42 
Votes obtained: 


Indones ia 82 



GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 23 


76. Having obtained the required ma.jority, Indonesia was elected to the 
Board. 
77. Mr. LAVINA (Philippines) explained that his Government had 
withdrawn its candidature in an official note addressed to the Secretariat a 
few days before the election of members to the Board of Governors. He 
congratulated the Republic of Korea on its election, and also thanked the 
delegation which had voted for the Philippines. 
78. Ms. ARYEE (Ghana) indicated that, in a spirit of African unity, 
Ghana had decided to support the candidatures of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
and Senegal. Nevertheless, she wished to thank the country which had voted 
for Ghana and to congratulate all those which had just been elected to the 
Board. 
79. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) stated that Morocco had likewise not been a 
candidate for election to the Board. 
80. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members who had just 
been elected, recalled that, in accordance with Article VI.D of the Statute, 
they would hold office from the end of the current session of the General 
Conference until the end of the thirty-third regular session, i.e. for a 
period of two years. 
81. He thanked the delegations of Brazil and the United Kingdom, which had 
provided the tellers, the tellers themselves, and their Secretariat 
assistants. 
ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


82. Mr. GUYER (Argentina), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the report by the Committee on items 9 to 17 of the agenda. 
83. Under item 9, "The Agency's accounts for 1986", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution appearing 
on page III of document GC(XXXI)/801. 
84. Under item 10, "Measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
nuclear safety and radiological protection", the Committee recommended that 
the General Conference adopt draft resolutions GC(XXXI)/830 and 831. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.302 
page 24 


85. In addition, the Committee of the Whole recommended that the General 
Conference request the Director General to place on the provisional agenda for 
its following regular session an item entitled "Status and implementation of 
conventions for which the Agency is depositary: (a) Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material; (b) Convention on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident; (c) Convention on Assistance in Case of 
a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency; (d) Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage." 
86. Under the same item, the Committee had considered the question of the 
sharing of nuclear-safety-related information, but had not been able to agree 
on a recommendation for the General Conference. That was why the Conference 
now had before it a draft resolution, GC(XXXI)/829, which was being submitted 
directly by Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Panama and 
Tunisia. Finally, the Committee had discussed the question of armed attacks 
on nuclear installations, and recommended that the General Conference adopt 
draft resolution GC(XXXI)/832. 
87. Under item 11, "The Agency's budget for 1988", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt draft resolutions A, B and C set 
forth in Annex III to Part I of document GC(XXXI)/802, the level of the 
Agency's Working Capital Fund in 1988 recommended in draft Resolution C being 
$2 million. 
88. Under item 12, "Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 
1988", the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt draft 
resolution GC(XXXI)/810. 
89. Under item 13, "The Agency's relations with the United Nations 
Industrial Development Organization", the Committee recommended that the 
General Conference adopt draft resolution GC(XXXI)/809. 
90. Under item 14, "The financing of technical assistance", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt draft resolution GC(XXXI)/822. 
91. Under item 15, "Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt draft resolution GC(XXXI)/821. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 25 


92. Under item 16, "Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute", the 
Committee recommended the adoption of draft resolution GC(XXXI)/823. 
93. Under item 17, "Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole", the 
Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt draft resolution 
GC(XXXI)/824, 
94. The PRESIDENT suggested that the draft resolutions relating to the 
agenda items which had been referred to the Committee of the Whole might now 
be considered by the Conference with a view to their adoption. 
95. Mr. KOREF (Panama), raising a point of order, proposed that in 
view of the lateness of the hour and of the excellent work which the Committee 
of the Whole had done, the General Conference should adopt the oral report by 
the Chairman of the Committee as a single item. 
96. The CHAIRMAN, while appreciating the grounds for the proposal by 
the delegate of Panama, pointed out that the General Conference was called 
upon to adopt the oral report by the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole 
item by item. 
The Agency's accounts for 1986 


97. The draft resolution on page III of document GC(XXXI)/801 was adopted. 
Measures to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear safety and 
radiological protection 


98. The draft resolutions in documents GC(XXXI)/830 and GC(XXXI)/831 were 
adopted. 
99. The PRESIDENT said that if there were no objections he would take 
it that the General Conference requested the Director General to include on 
the provisional agenda for the following regular session an item entitled 
"Status and implementation of conventions for which the Agency is depositary: 
(a) Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material; (b) Convention 
on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident; (c) Convention on Assistance in 
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency; (d) Convention on 
Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage". 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 26 


100. It was so decided. 
101. The CHAIRMAN invited the delegate of Pakistan to present draft 
resolution GC(XXXI)/829 on the sharing of nuclear-safety-related information. 
102. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) explained that the draft resolution had 
already been examined by the Committee of the Whole, which had decided to 
transmit it to the General Conference for a decision. Without wishing to 
repeat all the arguments in favour of the draft, he would recall that at the 
1986 special session of the General Conference Mexico had submitted, on behalf 
of the Group of 77, a draft resolution together with a number of proposals on 
the subject of safety, which the General Conference had decided to transmit to 
the Board. Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/829 was a new version of the previous 
year's text, taking account of the discussions in the Board and the various 
points of view put forward on the subject, the aim being that the resolution 
should enjoy maximum support. Its purpose was to prevent or to assist in 
preventing any nuclear accident which might result from the failure of a 
supplier State to communicate nuclear-safety-related information to a 
recipient State. Supplier States had a technical and moral responsibility to 
continue co-operating with recipient States by furnishing them with relevant 
information throughout the operational life of the nuclear facilities 
delivered by them. It was up to supplier States to co-operate with the Agency 
and with the recipient States in that respect. Adoption of the draft 
resolution by a large majority would strengthen the international safety 
regime, would promote wider acceptance of nuclear energy and would assist 
recipient States by providing them with relevant guarantees. He requested 
that draft resolution GC(XXXI)/829 be put to the vote. 
103. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) recalled that his 
Government, as was well known, was strongly in favour of the sharing of 
nuclear-safety-related information and that it had in that connection 
concluded numerous wide-scope agreements with many countries. However, he was 
equally convinced that nuclear co-operation agreements - including the 
provision of safety-related information with regard to specific plants or 
types of plant - had inevitably to be linked with voluntarily undertaken 
international non-proliferation commitments. Any resolution regarding the 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 27 


sharing of nuclear-safety-related information should reflect that 
interrelationship. Regarding operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, 
his delegation considered that the role of the Agency envisaged therein should 
be governed exclusively by the Agency's statutory mandate to facilitate the 
exchange of scientific and technical information on the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy, including nuclear safety, through its standard programme 
activities. That was how the United States looked at any resolution presented 
for adoption on the subject, and it would act accordingly. 


104. Mr. BAEYEHS (France) said that the French delegation could not 
support the text proposed in draft resolution GC(XXXI)/829, mainly owing to 
the terms of operative paragraph 2. The French Government had repeatedly 
stated that it was entirely in favour of international co-operation in nuclear 
safety. However, the draft resolution dealt with the specific situation of 
communication of information in the context of the supply of nuclear 
facilities. The communication of safety-related information accompanying any 
export operation could take various forms. It might be regarded as an 
integral part of the commercial transaction, and the relevant procedures were 
then governed by the agreements or contracts concluded between suppliers and 
recipients. But it generally went further than that, and might be the subject 
of co-operation agreements between governments or the competent authorities in 
the partner countries, which would, for example, enable the recipient country 
to train its safety staff and experts in case of need. The provision of 
safety-related information thus assumed a highly specific aspect which forbade 
recourse to a single solution. The matter should be dealt with on a 
case-by-case basis, within a bilateral framework, and should take account of 
the particular features of each transaction, the particular requirements 
of the recipient country, and the type of facility, the legitimate 


interests - including industrial and commercial interests - of both partners 
being thus respected. 


105. Mr. SHIELDS (Canada) recalled that Canada made extensive 
contributions to multilateral nuclear safety information networks, in 
particular, to the Agency's International Nuclear Information Service. Also, 
Canada had recently decided to contribute directly to the Agency's Incident 
Reporting System. Furthermore, where appropriate bilateral arrangements 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 28 


existed, Ganada provided its nuclear co-operation partners with complete 
information on the safe operation of a CANDU reactor throughout its 
operational life. 


106. Nevertheless, the Canadian delegation was unable to support draft 
resolution GC(XXXI)/829, and there were two important reasons for that. 
First, Canada could only undertake to supply nuclear technology - including 
safety technology - bilaterally where an appropriate bilateral nuclear 
co-operation agreement existed. Such an agreement would emphasize that 
nuclear co-operation could best take place within the framework established 
under NPT. Those delegations which had expressed doubt regarding the 
relevance of NPT to safety questions should bear two important points in 
mind: on the one hand, information regarding the safe operation of a nuclear 
facility in many cases could not be distinguished from reactor technology as a 
whole; and on the other hand, even technology or equipment that could be 
regarded as solely safety-related might be contributing to the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons if it were provided for an inadequately safeguarded 
facility or a country that had not entered into a binding international 
commitment to non-proliferation. 
107. The second reason why the Canadian delegation could not support the 
draft resolution was connected with procedure. A decision on activities to be 
undertaken by the Agency should be made within the context of the Agency's 
programme and budget as approved by the Board and the General Conference. It 
should be recalled that, as was made clear in the report contained in document 
GC(XXXI)/816, the Board had not arrived at a consensus on instructing the 
Agency to play a part in relation to bilateral activities in that field. 
108. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) remarked that the importance of nuclearsafety-
related information was now undisputed, particularly for developing 
countries wishing to adopt nuclear techniques. It was true that certain types 
of information relating to nuclear safety should be considered on a 
case-by-case basis, but there was also a need for an internationally 
recognized base of such information, for an obligation on the supplier to 
respect certain minimum conditions and, in particular, for the acceptance of 
certain nuclear safety conditions. If the exporter and the importer were left 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 29 


to settle the safety issue in each individual case, universality would be 


lost. As the preceding year had shown and as discussions had amply 
demonstrated, safety was not an individual or a bilateral matter, but a 
problem facing the international community as a whole. 


109. He had considerable difficulty in understanding the connection between 
nuclear-safety-related information and NPT. Information of that kind was 
indeed directly connected with reactor technology, but it was hard to accept 
the idea that the matter should be handled within the context of NPT. His 
delegation therefore associated itself with those supporting draft resolution 
GC(XXXI)/829, and appealed to the General Conference to make a positive 
response. 
110. Mr. LOOSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) said that his country was 
keenly interested in as complete an exchange of safety-related information as 
possible, which it viewed as one of the ways of ensuring a maximum level of 
safety wherever activities connected with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
were in progress. As was well known, in the Federal Republic of Germany 
responsibility for the supply of a nuclear facility was primarily incumbent 
upon the industry concerned. That type of operation naturally called for an 
export licence issued by the Government and, in the case of a private 
supplier, the Government approved the communication to the customer of safetyrelated 
information on as continuing a basis as possible. That was how his 
delegation interpreted, in particular, operative paragraphs 2 and 3 of draft 
resolution GC(XXXI)/829; it was accordingly in a position to join a consensus 
if one emerged. 
111. Mr. HAWAS (Egypt) associated himself with the statement by the 
delegate of Pakistan. The matter of nuclear-safety-related information had 
been discussed exhaustively at the special session of the General Conference 
held the previous year, when the need to adopt a resolution on the subject had 
been stressed. His delegation therefore expected the General Conference to 
adopt draft resolution GC(XXXI)/829 by consensus at the present session. The 
work of the Committee of the Whole had, unfortunately, been hampered by the 
opposition of two or three delegations, but he trusted that those delegations 
now understood that it was a matter of the welfare of all. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 30 


112. Mr. MORPHET (United Kingdom) said that the idea underlying the 
draft resolution was quite understandable and there was no doubt about the 
importance to the recipient States of maintaining nuclear safety. However, as 
the delegate of the Federal Republic of Germany had explained, the subject had 
to be viewed in the context of governmental powers, and since relationships 
between suppliers and recipients were largely of a commercial nature, his 
delegation did not think that governments had a part to play in the matter. 
113. Mr. ALER (Sweden) recalled his delegation's view that the supplier 
State was under an obligation to communicate to the recipient State all 
information relating to nuclear safety during the entire operational life of 
the supplied facility, provided that the recipient State honoured its 
undertakings towards the supplier State, particularly as regards safeguards. 
However, his delegation also noted with regret that the draft resolution did 
not appear to take account of the Swedish Government's position and 
consequently his delegation would be unable to support it. 
114. Mr. GUMPS (Belgium) said that he substantially shared the views 
expressed by the delegates of the United Kingdom, France and the Federal 
Republic of Germany. In principle, Belgium also believed that 
nuclear-safety-related information was really a part of the transaction 
between commercial undertakings, a field in which governments could scarcely 
exercise a regulatory function. His delegation also considered that the 
Agency could not in any case lay down binding regulations for its Member 
States. He wished to stress that in practice Belgium had always adopted a 
very positive attitude on the subject. It was the regulatory character 
imparted to the draft resolution which raised certain difficulties for his 
delegation. At all events, the Belgian delegation would not oppose draft 
resolution GC(XXXI)/829. 
115. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) reminded the Conference that Norway strongly 
supported any action to enhance nuclear safety, particularly in the form of 
sharing nuclear-safety-related information. His delegation would be prepared 
to join a consensus, but it experienced certain difficulties in that 
direction, particularly because draft resolution GC(XXXI)/829 made no 
reference to an appropriate non-proliferation regime, which was a basic 
prerequisite for bilateral and multilateral exchanges of information. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 31 


116. Mr. LAVINA (Philippines) remarked that the item of nuclear-safetyrelated 
information had been studied since the previous year by the Asian 


group and by the Group of 77, and that both groups supported the draft 


resolution. 


117. The PRESIDENT, stating that all the explanations which had just 
been offered would be duly reflected in the record of the meeting, proposed 


that the General Conference should vote on draft resolution GC(XXXI)/829. 


118. At the request of the delegate of Egypt a roll-call vote was taken. 
119. The Islamic Republic of Iran, having been drawn by lot by the 
President, was called upon to vote first. 


In favour: Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, 
Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, 
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Spain, 
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, 
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United 
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, 
Zaire, Zambia, Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Austria, 
Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Cote d'lvoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, German 
Democratic Republic, Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, 
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia. 


Against: Monaco, Sweden, United States of America, Canada, 
France, Greece. 


Abstaining: Japan, Luxembourg, Norway, United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia, Belgium, Costa 
Rica, Denmark, Finland, Holy See, Ireland. 


120. There were 71 votes in favour and 6 against, with 11 absentions. Draft 
resolution GC(XXXI)/829 was adopted. 


121. The PRESIDENT recalled that under item 10 of the agenda the 
Committee of the Whole had also submitted draft resolution GC(XXXI)/832 on the 


protection of nuclear installations against armed attacks. If there were no 


objections he would take it that the General Conference adopted the draft 


resolution in question. 



GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 32 


122. It was so decided. 
123. Mr. BAEYENS (France) said that his delegation had not opposed the 
formation of a consensus on resolution GC(XXXI)/832 when it had been discussed 
in the Committee of the Whole, and that it had also not opposed it during the 
present plenary meeting. However, he was quite unable to subscribe to 
preambular paragraphs (c) and (d) of the resolution. The additional protocols 
to the Geneva Conventions already contained provisions concerning 
installations liable to release dangerous forces. At the time when those 
protocols had been drafted, there had been no reason to make a distinction 
between nuclear installations and others, and there was no more reason to do 
so today, since that would have the effect of establishing small denuclearized 
zones around civil nuclear installations - a situation which the French 
Government would be obliged to oppose. 
124. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his delegation, 
without opposing the consensus, had reservations on the subject of resolution 
GC(XXXI)/832 because it was firmly convinced that the protection of nuclear 
installations against armed attacks did not lie within the Agency's 
competence. That was a problem of international security which, to the extent 
necessary, should be dealt with by an appropriate international body armed 
with the necessary terms of reference and competence. That was why the United 
States delegation was opposed in principle to the resolution and to any other 
Agency initiative in the field in question. 
125. In any case, he was unable to subscribe to certain parts of the 
resolution, particularly preambular paragraph (d), since that paragraph 
prejudged the aims of the Conference on Disarmament. No consensus existed in 
that Conference regarding the need for a convention on the subject. As for 
preambular paragraph (c), it assumed that it was necessary to prohibit armed 
attacks on nuclear installations and that it was urgent to conclude an 
international agreement on the subject, whereas in fact that was just not the 
case, seeing that no consensus had emerged at the Conference on Disarmament. 
The United States delegation firmly believed that it was inappropriate for the 
Agency to make such statements. The preparation of new measures of protection 
against armed attacks raised a number of difficult questions in the military, 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 33 


tactical and juridical fields. On the subject of operative paragraph 2, the 
United States delegation noted that the resolution quite rightly stated that 
the Agency should act only at the request of competent international organs, 
and within the limits of its technical competence and statutory 
responsibilities. In conclusion, he pointed out that the possible financial 
implications of the proposal would have to be examined within the framework of 
the Agency's normal budgetary procedures. 


126. Mr. CUMPS (Belgium) said that his delegation had not opposed a 
consensus on resolution GC(XXXI)/832, although it was not in a position to 
support it because, as he had pointed out in the Committee of the Whole, 
certain features of the resolution created difficulties for the Belgian 
Government. That applied in particular to preambular paragraph (c), for the 
General Conference should not lose sight of the fact that various political 
problems of that kind were already being discussed in the appropriate fora. 
The Belgian delegation was not opposed to operative paragraph 2, but it 
certainly expected that the Agency would remain within the general framework 
of its terms of reference in undertaking any tasks which might be entrusted to 
it by the organs in question. 
127. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that an armed attack on a nuclear 
installation would present considerable transfrontier radiological hazards. 
His delegation was therefore most favourable to the adoption of an 
international convention prohibiting armed attacks on all nuclear 
installations, and in that connection called upon the Agency to play its 
appropriate technical part with a view to gaining that objective. 
128. Mr. BADRAH (Jordan) indicated that his delegation associated 
itself with those supporting resolution GC(XXXI)/832. The prohibition of any 
armed attack on a nuclear installation was one of the most important matters 
which the Agency had considered since the affair of the Israeli attack on an 
Iraqi nuclear installation. The Jordanian delegation therefore considered 
that resolution GC(XXXI)/832 represented a step in the right direction. 
129. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) regarded the protection 
of nuclear installations against armed attacks as an important matter and 
considered that the Agency was the most suitable organization to take it up, 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 34 


naturally in co-operation with other competent international organizations. 
As it had indicated in the Committee of the whole, the Iranian delegation 
would have preferred that the resolution should make explicit mention of 
terrorist attacks and not only armed attacks, so as to acquire as wide a scope 
as possible. In that connection he wished to draw attention to document 
A/C0NF.108/L.16 (Prohibition of terrorist and armed attacks against all 
nuclear installations) submitted to the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy, a document supported by the Group of 77 at the last plenary meeting of 
that conference. 


130. Pointing out that any attack or threat of attack on a nuclear 
installation under construction would compromise the promotion of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, he said his Government assumed that the delegations 
attending the General Conference genuinely condemned terrorist or armed 
attacks against any nuclear installation, under construction or in operation. 
Finally, he called upon all peace-loving countries to co-operate in concluding 
an international agreement on the subject. 
131. Mr. EMSAK (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) emphasized that his delegation 
supported resolution GC(XXXI)/832. 
The Agency's budget for 1988 


132. Draft resolutions A, B and C contained in Annex III to Part I of 
document GC(XXXI)/802 were adopted. 
133. Mr. LAVINA (Philippines) reminded the Conference that only two 
thirds of those present in the Committee of the Whole had voted in favour of 
the draft resolutions on the Agency's budget for 1988. Mindful of the 
consensus principle, the Philippine delegation had not requested that the 
plenary meeting of the Conference should again vote on those draft 
resolutions, although it was opposed to them. 
134. Although a budgetary growth rate of 0.6% seemed reasonable at first 
sight, the fact still remained that that represented, for certain developing 
countries or for small countries with a heavy burden of debt, substantial 
budgetary contributions, bearing the scale of assessment in mind. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 35 


135. The Philippine delegation was also opposed to certain of the Board's 
procedures. Those countries which were not members of the Board had hardly 
any possibility of taking part in its discussions on matters of primary 
interest to them, such as the draft budget. They were even unable to make 
their opinions heard since normally the Board member for a given area did not 
concern himself with the interests of the other members in his area, which 
could even be diametrically opposed to his own. The area of the Far East 
comprised six States which were not permanent members of the Board, and owing 
to the current system of rotation each of them had to wait 12 years before 
being eligible for re-election to the Board. That was scarcely a democratic 
state of affairs when compared with the governing bodies of other 
international organizations, which wrote to non-represented countries inviting 
them to send observers to their meetings. 
136. It was therefore unjust that countries which were not members of the 
Board should be unable to take part in the discussions at which their 
contributions or their assessments were fixed. He wished to recall in that 
connection the wise remarks of Mr. Goldschmidt who, at the opening meeting of 
the present session, had referred to the frustrations experienced by the 
countries of the Group of 77 right from the Agency's earliest years. 
Countries which were not members of the Board were at present victims of such 
frustrations and strongly desired that the Board should take the matter up at 
its next series of meetings. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1988 


137. Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/810 was adopted. 
The Agency's relations with the United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization 


138. Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/809 was adopted. 
The financing of technical assistance 


139. Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/822 was adopted. 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


140. Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/821 was adopted. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 36 


Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


141. Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/823 was adopted. 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole 


142. Draft resolution GC(XXXI)/824 was adopted. 
143. Mr. ALESSI (Italy) said that, although his delegation had not 
opposed the formation of a consensus on resolution GC(XXXI)/824, he 
nevertheless wished to recall that Italy had, along with Belgium, Portugal, 
Spain and Sweden, proposed an amendment to Article VI of the Statute which 
appeared in document GC(XXX)/780 and provided for an improved and balanced 
representation on the Board. That proposal could still serve as a basis for a 
realistic compromise in the interests of the Agency as a whole rather than of 
a particular group of countries. 
144. The Italian delegation would have preferred the Committee of the Whole 
to examine the substance of the proposal rather than the procedural questions 
associated with it. It nevertheless hoped that the procedure which had just 
been adopted would enable the next session of the General Conference to find a 
rational and just solution to the problem of the composition of the Board of 
Governors. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 


145. The PRESIDENT recalled that the term of office of the present 
External Auditor, who was the Comptroller and Auditor General of Kenya, would 
end after he had completed auditing the Agency's accounts for 1987, and that 
it was therefore necessary for the Conference at its present session to make 
an appointment to provide for the auditing of the accounts for 1988 and 1989. 
He had been informed that the Comptroller and Auditor General of Kenya would 
be prepared to serve as the Agency's External Auditor for a further period of 
two years, and he proposed that the General Conference appoint him as External 
Auditor to audit the Agency's accounts for 1988 and 1989. 
146. The President's proposal was accepted. 

GC(XXXI)/0R.302 
page 37 


ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


147. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was at present 
represented on the Agency's Staff Pension Committee by two members -
Mr. Morales Pedraza (Cuba) and Mr. Sreckovic (Yugoslavia) - with Mr. Bamsey 
(Australia) and Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) as alternates. Mr. Bamsey and 
Mr. Sreckovic being no longer available to serve on the Committee, he 
proposed that Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) should be elected as member and that 
Mr. von Preuschen zu Liebenstein (Federal Republic of Germany) and Mr. Itoh 
(Japan) should be elected as alternates. 
148. Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) was elected as a member of the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee and Mr. von Preuschen zu Liebenstein (Federal Republic of 
Germany) and Mr. Itoh (Japan) were elected as alternates, Mr. Morales Pedraza 
continuing to serve as a member. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1988 


149. The PRESIDENT said that, by 6.30 p.m. on 24 September 1987, the 
total of voluntary contributions pledged by Member States to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund amounted to $16 798 123. Since then, 
Viet Nam had announced a voluntary contribution of $500. That thus brought 
the total amount pledged to $16 798 623. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


150. Mr. SHIELDS (Canada), speaking on behalf of the North American 
group, praised the President for the efficiency and wisdom with which he had 
guided the work of the General Conference. His indefatigable labours would 
enable the Agency to pursue its vital tasks in 1988, particularly in the area 
of safeguards, nuclear safety and technical co-operation. 
151. He also offered congratulations on their work to the Vice-Presidents of 
the General Conference, to the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and to 
the entire Secretariat. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 38 


152. Mr. ERNER (Turkey), speaking on behalf of the West European group, 
congratulated the President on the success of the General Conference. There 
was no doubt that his wisdom, his patience and his personal prestige had been 
the essential factors in that success. He also wished to express his 
appreciation to the Director General and his staff. 
153. Mr. COSTANZO (Uruguay), acting as spokesman for the Latin America 
and Caribbean group, congratulated the President, the Director General and the 
Secretariat on the success of the General Conference, and also 
Mr. Roberto Guyer, who had chaired the Committee of the Whole. 
154. Mr. HIREMATH (India), speaking on behalf of the Middle East and 
South Asia group, paid a tribute to the President for the skill with which he 
had guided the deliberations of the Conference. Highly appreciated as he 
already was in the scientific and technical fields, he had now acquired an 
excellent reputation as a diplomat, thanks to his ability to combine firmness 
with charm. He also wished to thank the Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole, the Director General and the Secretariat for the 
excellent work which they had done during the session. 
155. Mr. KOLYCHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic), speaking 
for the eastern European socialist countries, congratulated the President on 
the masterly way in which he had directed the session of the General 
Conference. He also thanked the Director General and his staff, together with 
all the delegates whose co-operation had made it possible to solve in an 
acceptable manner the important and difficult problems which faced the Agency 
in a world full of contradictions but at the same time a single entity. In 
conclusion, he gave an assurance that the countries in his region would 
continue to make a constructive contribution to the fruitful and effective 
work of the Agency. 
156. Mr. MESLOUB (Algeria), speaking for the African countries, paid 
tribute to the President for his valuable contribution to the smooth running 
of the present commemorative session. He also praised the Director General 
for his keen sense of justice and his high awareness of his responsibilities. 
Finally, he offered his thanks to all those delegations which had displayed 
their solidarity with the Africa group on the occasion of the adoption of the 
resolution on South Africa's nuclear capabilities. 

GC(XXXI)/OR.302 
page 39 


157. Mr. WALKER (New Zealand) congratulated the President on behalf of 
the area of South-East Asia and the Pacific for his skill in conducting the 
work of the thirty-first session of the General Conference, and also the 
Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and the 
Secretariat. 
158. The PRESIDENT thanked all the delegates for their kind words. It 
had been a privilege for him to preside over the thirty-first regular session 
of the General Conference. He wished particularly to thank the members of the 
General Committee and the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole for their 
assistance in the conduct of the Conference's work. The present session had 
been marked by lively discussions and consultations on a number of difficult 
matters, and he was happy to observe that the Agency had emerged from those 
discussions possessed of new strength. 
159. On behalf of the General Conference, he wished to express his gratitude 
to the Austrian authorities and to the city of Vienna for their hospitality 
and for the facilities of the Austria Center. Similarly, he thanked the 
Director General and his staff, the Secretariat of the Policy-making Organs 
and all those who had contributed to the smooth running of the Conference. 
160. Before closing the session, he invited the delegates to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation, in accordance with 
Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


161. The PRESIDENT declared the thirty-first regular session of the 
General Conference closed. 
The meetinR rose at 6.40 p.m. 



