GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
11 October 1988 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 19 September 1988, at 10.20 a.m. 
Temporary President: Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) 
President: Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


provisional 
agenda* 
Pars W raphs 
Opening of the session 1 9 
Election of the President 10 -24 
Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 25 -29 
Procedural remarks by the President 30 -34 
Message from the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations 35 -43 
3 Statement by the Director General 44 -110 
5 Voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1989 111 
General debate and annual report for 1987 112 -180 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 
India 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Japan 
112 
137 
150 
166 
-
-
_ 
136 
149 
165 
180 

[*] GC(XXXII)/834 and Add.1. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXII)/INF/262/Rev . 2 
88-4717 (3853e/0458e) 



GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirty-second regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT said that the year since the thirty-first 
session of the General Conference had seen positive signs of international 
co-operation. It had also seen the continuing - often emotive - impact on 
public opinion of the Chernobyl accident. 
4. In his opening statement to the thirty-first session he had stressed 
the importance of international co-operation in solving the problems besetting 
the nuclear sector. During the year since then, the Agency, under the capable 
guidance of the Director General, had performed excellently in providing an 
effective forum for such co-operation. Particularly important activities in 
the area of nuclear safety and radiation protection had included revision of 
the NUSS Codes of Practice and the work of the International Nuclear Safety 
Advisory Group (INSAG) on basic safety principles for nuclear power plants, as 
well as examination and implementation of juridical means for better defining 
liability for nuclear risks. The Agency had also paid increasing attention to 
the problems of the Third World, including work on the development of nuclear 
technology for non-energy uses and the growing applications of nuclear 
technology in medicine, industry, food and agriculture; and it had given 
increased priority to health and environmental protection. He hoped that that 
trend would continue so as to avoid any short-term check to global economic 
growth, to the detriment particularly of the developing countries. 
5. Looking at the more distant future, he was happy to note the Agency's 
important initiatives in nuclear fusion and welcomed the launching of the 
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) programme. 
6. In order to achieve the short-term and long-term objectives, it would 
be necessary to strengthen the climate of mutual trust and so dispel fears of 
a nuclear threat. He hoped for a constantly widening and improving safeguards 
system, and was convinced that rigorous and universal application of the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 3 


non-proliferation regime, both horizontally and vertically, was an essential 
condition for greater diffusion of nuclear power throughout the world. There 
had been encouraging results in the past year in respect of vertical 
proliferation, which should help to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. 
If the Agency was to play a really significant role, as many countries as 
possible should be involved in its decision-making process and make 
contributions to its policy-making organs, to ensure that they reflected the 
trends and issues that made up the many-faceted international energy picture. 


7. The present session would have to face complex problems, and he urged 
that every effort should be made to overcome conflicts and tension by adopting 
the spirit of goodwill which was essential in international relations. He 
trusted that the search for co-operation and constructive dialogue which had 
characterized the thirty-first session, and had facilitated the Agency's 
activities during the past year, would not suffer the deadening effects of 
excessive politicization, but would inspire the current session as well. 
8. The spirit of constructive co-operation was encouraged by the climate 
of reciprocal understanding now being established between the great Powers. 
It was heartening to see the growing role of the United Nations in ensuring 
world peace. The untiring efforts of the Secretary-General, 
Mr. Perez de Cuellar, in bringing two of the Agency's Member States to the 
negotiating table, after years of armed conflict, merited the highest praise. 
9. At a difficult and delicate moment, when humanity's future was under 
discussion and when all countries would have to take decisions that would 
affect the living conditions of generations to come, participants must 
concentrate on the really relevant problems, brushing aside differences which 
could have a negative influence on their work. On the basis of experience 
during the thirty-first session and from many contacts, both with the Agency 
and with a number of Member States, he believed that the broader vision - the 
spirit of tolerence and reciprocal understanding - could be realized. He 
hoped that it would continue to flourish and that the thirty-second session of 
the General Conference would take place in an atmosphere of mutual trust and 
productive co-operation, in the interests of all Member States. He wished the 
President, the other officers and the delegates the most fruitful and 
constructive work. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 4 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


10. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
11. Mr. WILSON (Australia), speaking on behalf of the South East Asia 
and the Pacific regional group, proposed Mr. Abdul Halim bin Ali, delegate of 
Malaysia, as President of the General Conference at its thirty-second regular 
session. Mr. Halim was Resident Representative of Malaysia to the Agency and 
a distinguished and senior representative of his country, having served in 
diplomatic posts in India, Indonesia, and Japan. He had been Malaysia's 
Deputy Permanent Representative to the United Nations in New York, Ambassador 
to Viet Nam, and, until his arrival in Vienna in the present year, a Deputy 
Secretary-General of the Malaysian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He would 
bring to the Presidency a wealth of experience and outstanding personal 
qualities which would be essential in steering the Conference through its 
demanding agenda. 
12. He represented a country which had a significant programme of research 
into the non-power applications of nuclear energy in hydrology, agriculture, 
medicine and other fields, and was an active participant in the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific Region. 
13. Mr. BAEYENS (France), speaking on behalf of the Western countries 
in Europe and elsewhere, seconded the nomination of Mr. Halim. 
14. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico), speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 
of which he was Chairman, and Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland), speaking on behalf of the 
countries of Eastern Europe, supported the nomination. 
15. Mr. Halim (Malaysia) was elected President of the General Conference 
for its thirty-second regular session by acclamation. 
16. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT congratulated Mr. Halim on his election. 
17. Mr. Halim (Malaysia) took the Chair. 
18. The PRESIDENT expressed his sincere appreciation to all 
delegations for the honour conferred on him and his country. He would do his 
utmost to fulfil the responsibility placed upon him. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.303 
page 5 


19. He also, on behalf of the General Conference, commended Mr. Colombo for 
his skill and guidance as President of the thirty-first regular session of the 
Conference. 
20. At its thirty-second session the General Conference would be 
considering a number of issues related to the Agency's role as the central 
forum for scientific and technical co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy, and he earnestly hoped it would reach decisions that would further 
enhance the Agency's contribution to a better, safer and more prosperous world. 
21. The rapid development of nuclear technology in the past few decades had 
resulted in a myriad of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, such as electricity 
generation, the development of resources including food and agriculture, 
medical sciences and other projects designed to improve the quality of life. 
Today, thanks to the Agency's technical co-operation programme, nuclear 
technology was no longer the preserve of the rich industrial societies, but 
was available to developing countries. The Agency's efficient handling of the 
technical co-operation programme was a matter of great satisfaction to Member 
States, and it was to be hoped that it would continue to receive the high 
priority and support that it deserved, so that it could carry out the transfer 
of technology that was needed to fulfil the Agency's objective of accelerating 
and enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world. In that context, he appealed to recipients 
to ensure, at a time when financial resources were scarce, that the assistance 
they received was used as efficiently as possible. 
22. Members of the Agency were proud of the establishment of an effective 
system of safeguards to verify that nuclear material and installations 
designed for peaceful use were used only for that purpose. It was reassuring 
that the safeguards system, coupled with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), provided a barrier to the spread of nuclear weapons, 
but it would be even more so if all members of the international community 
could accept full-scope safeguards and accede to NPT. The international 
community must continue to seek ways and means of strengthening the 
non-proliferation regime so as to make it truly universal and thus help to 
remove doubts and fears about the nuclear intentions of individual States. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 6 


That, of course, was no substitute for global nuclear disarmament, but it was 
to be hoped that the current dialogue between the superpowers and the momentum 
created by the signing of the Treaty between the United States of America and 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of their 
Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles (INF) would bring that goal 
closer. Meanwhile, the international community should support any effort by 
regional States to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones, as for example in 
South East Asia, and should respect any such treaties already entered into by 
other regions. 


23. The spreading applications of nuclear energy for development - already 
a fact of life - placed an ever increasing demand on the Agency to elaborate 
and promote further safety and radiation protection standards to cope with the 
rising number of nuclear installations that would be in operation and the 
growing volume of nuclear material to be handled internationally. Demand for 
safeguards and the need for better management of nuclear waste would likewise 
increase, and a mechanism must be found for dealing with those who polluted 
the environment and endangered life through non-compliance with established 
procedures or through illegal dumping of waste. There was a compelling need 
for all Member States to ensure that the Agency succeeded in meeting the 
challenge. Failure would increase support for those who continued to cast 
doubts on the advantages of nuclear energy. 
24. The heavy agenda before the Conference reflected the vast role and task 
of the Agency. He hoped that the spirit of understanding, goodwill and 
co-operation that had prevailed among members in the past would continue at 
the present session. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


25. The PRESIDENT said that, while informal consultations were still 
in progress on the appointment of the General Committee, some area groups had 
already put forward nominations. On the basis of those nominations he 
proposed that the delegates of the following Member States be elected as 
Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: Norway, Tunisia, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics and United States of America. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 7 


26. He also proposed, pursuant to Rules 34 and 40 respectively of the Rules 
of Procedure of the General Conference, that Mr. Laviria of the Philippines 
should be Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, and that the delegates of 
the following Member States should be elected as additional members of the 
General Committee: Bulgaria, Canada, Ireland, Liechtenstein and Nigeria. 
27. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
28. The PRESIDENT suggested that further consideration of the matter 
be deferred until the informal consultations had been completed. 
29. It was so agreed. 
PROCEDURAL REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT 


30. The PRESIDENT said that document GC(XXXII)/INF/263, entitled 
"Statement of financial contributions to the Agency as at 16 September 1988", 
contained a list of those Member States to which Article XIX.A of the Statute 
had applied on 16 September 1988. Article XIX.A stated that any Member in 
arrears in the payment of contributions should have no vote if the amount of 
the arrears equalled or exceeded the amount of contributions due for the 
preceding two years, but that the General Conference could permit such a 
Member to vote if it was satisfied that failure to pay was due to conditions 
beyond the control of the Member. He drew attention in that connection to 
document GC(XXXII)/INF/258, a communication from the Resident Representative 
of Panama, requesting that Article XIX.A not be applied to Panama during the 
current session of the General Conference. A similar request had been 
received from Lebanon in document GC(XXXII)/INF/261. 
31. He suggested that, in accordance with Rule 42(b) of the Rules of 
Procedure, the matter be referred to the General Committee for consideration. 
32. It was so agreed. 
33. He further suggested that, as in previous years, pending the report of 
the General Committee on the agenda, the Conference take up items 2, 3, 5 
and 6 of the provisional agenda, which were formal items or items specified in 
the Statute. 
34. It was so agreed. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 8 


MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


35. Ms. SELLAMI-MESLEM (Representative of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations) said that she wished to convey to the General Conference a 
message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
36. The Secretary-General had great pleasure in extending greetings to the 
participants in the thirty-second regular session of the General Conference of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
37. During the coming days the Conference would be working its way through 
a heavy agenda, reflecting the specific mandate of its important agency. Much 
of the work would have a direct bearing on aspects of the general questions of 
peace and economic and social advancement of peoples, also to be discussed at 
the United Nations General Assembly starting the following day. 
38. Some of those issues were of crucial importance for the future of 
humanity: preserving the natural environment, providing the energy needed for 
economic and social development, containing the spread of nuclear weapons, 
curbing the arms race and bringing about genuine disarmament. 
39. In 1983 the United Nations had set up the World Commission on 
Environment and Development (WCED) as an independent body to propose a 
long-term strategy for achieving lasting development sustained by the 
environment. The Commission's report, the "Brundtland Report", issued over a 
year earlier, had attracted wide attention and become the subject of serious 
review in many forums, including the 1987 United Nations General Assembly. It 
emphasized the environmental consequences of energy production and stressed 
that development must have enough energy at reasonable cost. 
40. Discussion of that important subject by the Conference would be most 
welcome. There was no single, simple solution. The noxious consequences of 
burning fossil fuels were known; renewable sources of energy were not at 
present adequate; nuclear energy also presented threats to the environment; 
and the resulting lack of public confidence in nuclear energy made its further 
expansion difficult. Thus, there was much work still to be done by 
scientists, engineers, administrators, politicians and the mass media. The 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 9 


Agency must continue to provide an objective, impartial framework for that 
international co-operation and discussion which alone could safely realize the 
potential of nuclear energy. 


41. In June 1988 the United Nations General Assembly had held its third 
Special Session Devoted to Disarmament, preceded by the ratification by the 
United States of America and the Soviet Union of an important arms reduction 
agreement. The recent gains in international understanding and progress 
towards resolving some important regional conflicts should further improve the 
conditions for success in disarmament. The Agency's contribution to 
disarmament lay not only in its essential verification role under NPT, but 
also in its development of a safeguards system which constituted the world's 
first multilateral on-site inspection programme, whose practical importance to 
disarmament had been described by the Director General at the Special Session 
of the General Assembly. 
42. There were significant parallels between the safeguards system and 
United Nations peace-keeping operations. Both could be used only with the 
agreement of the States on whose territories they were to act; neither the 
blue helmets nor the safeguards inspectors were meant to intervene directly they 
were international observers with a duty to report; and the work of both 
should be regarded not as an expression of distrust but rather as a measure to 
build and instil confidence. Thus, both were important examples of the unique 
contribution of the United Nations system to peace, world-wide security, and 
the sense of international confidence on which they depended. 
43. In peace-keeping and inspection, in the complementary work of the 
General Conference and the General Assembly, the value could be clearly seen 
of a strong system of mutually reinforcing international organizations. In 
that spirit, he wished the Conference a fruitful session with much progress on 
the problems and goals to which all were devoted. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


44. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that the year since the Agency's 
thirtieth anniversary had seen some steady progress in the nuclear field and 
also some turmoil. During 1987, 22 new plants had come on-line in 9 Member 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 10 


States, bringing the total to 417 operating nuclear power plants in 
26 countries. The installed nuclear capacity had increased by 8% to almost 
300 000 MW(e), and generation had amounted to 1650 TW»h. As a result, the 
contribution of nuclear power had increased to more than 16% of the world's 
total electricity production, and 13 countries now produced more than 25% of 
their electricity with nuclear power. Operating statistics showed an increase 
in the overall average nuclear plant availability to 71.3%. In some countries 
the improvement in performance had been remarkable, with high plant 
availability, a low number of unplanned stoppages, and low exposure of 
personnel to radioactivity; but the world situation was still uneven, with 
some plants performing much better than others, indicating a need to learn 
from the best performers. That was precisely what the Agency sought to 
achieve through its programme, which was designed to promote the exchange of 
experience and data through meetings, data banks and documents with a view to 
transferring the best existing practices. The Agency therefore also welcomed 
the fact that the nuclear industry itself was now instituting exchanges 
through the new Worldwide Association of Nuclear Operators (WAN0), which he 
was sure would help achieve high safety standards and good performance. 


45. Thus, nuclear power globally showed consistently improving results in 
respect of economics and safety; nevertheless, attacks on the use of nuclear 
power had increased in many countries - and that was not the only apparent 
paradox which could be found in the nuclear energy field. For example, some 
opinion polls showed that majorities of those interviewed were concerned about 
nuclear safety, but at the same time convinced that nuclear power would be a 
primary source of electricity in coming decades. Another example was that of 
a country where nuclear power operations were prohibited, although nucleargenerated 
electricity continued to be imported from a neighbouring country in 
which new nuclear power plants were still being built. Similarly, nuclear 
experts might be convinced that there were no major scientific or technical 
problems standing in the way of safe disposal of radioactive waste for many 
thousands of years - indeed, they might even think that if other industries 
had emulated the high standards set for nuclear waste disposal, the 
environments today and tomorrow would have looked very different; nevertheless, 
the man in the street, asked whether the nuclear waste issue was solved, would 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 11 


most probably say "No!". The issues of waste and safety - like those of cost 
and proliferation - were not exactly new in the discussion of nuclear power, 
but there was now a far greater public and political awareness of 
environmental problems connected with other sources of energy, notably the 
enormous emissions of carbon dioxide inevitably associated with the burning of 
fossil fuels, but absent in nuclear power. 


46. The report of the World Commission on Environment and Development 
(WCED) - mentioned in the Secretary-General's message - which had been drafted 
in the period immediately following the Chernobyl accident, was articulate on 
the grave consequences for forests, lakes and global temperatures of sulphur 
dioxide, nitrogen oxide and carbon dioxide emissions from the burning of 
fossil fuels, but failed to mention that nuclear power did not give rise to 
any of those problems. What it did offer was a long catalogue of issues 
relating to nuclear power on which it said international agreement must be 
reached, suggesting in addition that all States should undertake to accept 
safeguards in accordance with the Statute of the Agency. The Commission 
concluded its discussion by stating that the generation of nuclear power was 
justifiable only if there were solid solutions to the as yet unsolved problems 
to which it gave rise, and that the highest priority should be accorded to 
research and development on environmentally sound and economically viable 
alternatives and to means of increasing the safety of nuclear energy. The 
Commission also advocated the vigorous promotion of energy-efficient practices 
in all energy sectors. 
47. While the WCED had concerned itself with all environmental consequences 
of energy production, the recent World Conference on the Changing Atmosphere, 
held in Toronto under Canadian sponsorship, had focused on the risks of global 
warming, and had adopted the recommendation that an initial world-wide goal 
should be to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by approximately 20% of 1988 
levels by the year 2005. In pursuing that goal, according to the Toronto 
Conference, the industrialized nations would clearly have to lead the way, 
both through their national energy policies and through their bilateral and 
multilateral assistance arrangements. Apart from efficiency measures, the 
desired reduction would require: switching to lower carbon dioxide emitting 
fuels; reviewing strategies for the use of renewable energy, especially 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 12 


advanced biomass conversion technologies; and considering the nuclear power 
option, which had lost credibility because of problems related to nuclear 


safety, radioactive wastes and nuclear-weapon proliferation. If those 
problems could be solved, through improved engineering designs and 


institutional arrangements, the Toronto Conference could see a role for 
nuclear power to play in lowering carbon dioxide emissions. 


48. He would not comment in detail on the points made by the WCED and the 
Toronto Conference, but it seemed worth noting, firstly, that a consensus 
existed that the current level of burning of fossil fuel for energy production 
raised alarming environmental problems, notably that of global warming, 
secondly, that nuclear generation of electricity did not contribute to those 
problems, and thirdly, that nuclear fission, according to the WCED and the 
Toronto Conference, did raise other grave problems. 
49. If the situation was as serious as depicted by the Toronto Conference and 
an increasing number of scientific reports seemed to confirm that it was the 
time would appear ripe for discussions between the "Greens", those who 
favoured the use of nuclear power, and others who were unsure where they 
stood, to consider without acrimony what practical measures could be taken to 
avert disaster. 
50. There was nothing wrong with a critical examination of such questions 
as to how much energy would be needed in the coming decades for industrial and 
social development in both advanced and developing countries; how far 
efficiency gains in energy production and use could offset increased needs; 
how far sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide could be eliminated from fossil 
fuel emissions and at what cost; what realistic contribution renewable sources 
such as solar energy, wind power and biomass could make to global and regional 
energy balances, and at what cost; how far away nuclear fusion was; or what 
alleviation of the problems of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxide and carbon 
dioxide could be achieved by wider use of natural gas and nuclear power. The 
problems that the WCED and the Toronto Conference saw in nuclear power should 
be discussed in depth to determine whether those concerns were justified and 
whether they were susceptible of settlement. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 13 


51. There was no world authority that could adopt global energy policy 
decisions by majority and enforce them, however much that might be necessary 
for global survival. The essential concerted action could come only from 
common conviction and mutual accommodation emerging from discussion between 
the world's governments, perhaps in a non-specialized forum such as the United 
Nations General Assembly or the Economic and Social Council. The Agency had a 
role to play in contributing expert knowledge to such a discussion, of which 
the main issues might be the following. 
52. The first and fundamental question concerned the magnitude of future 
world energy needs. An extrapolation based on past trends and expected 
population figures would be generally considered unrealistic. Many saw a 
scope for energy saving, and there was no disagreement on the need to produce 
and use all energy as efficiently as possible. Considerable progress had 
already been achieved in that regard, for instance in motor vehicles, 
refrigerators, and light bulbs. Except for the cost aspect, that was hardly a 
controversial subject. 
53. It was also an established fact that in OECD countries - not in 
developing countries - there had been a levelling out of primary energy 
consumption, especially in the form of oil and coal. The recession brought 
about by higher energy prices had led to lower industrial activity and to more 
efficient utilization. As a result, the energy used per unit produced had 
gone down. 
54. An important breakthrough had been the switch in many industrial 
processes from oil to electricity, which was both cleaner and more efficient 
in end use. Thus, electricity consumption was not levelling out, but 
increasing with growing gross national products. Moreover, conservation 
scenarios for the future relied on expanded electricity use. In developing 
countries, which had three quarters of the world's population but only 
one third of its energy consumption, no such levelling out could be expected indeed, 
the demand for electricity there would accelerate. 
55. It was thus clear that world electricity generating capacity would have 
to be expanded. In addition, many of the existing electricity generating 
plants were getting old and needed to be replaced. A key question, therefore, 

GC(XXXI1)/0R.303 
page 14 


was how all that electricity should be generated: by solar cells, wind power, 
biomass, hydroelectric or nuclear plants, or by new plants burning fossil 
fuels? Account must be taken of costs, the energy independence factor and the 
safety and environmental factors. 


56. If the global burning of fossil fuels had to be reduced over a longer 
period, and if the developing countries could not reasonably be expected to 
reduce their consumption, but rather must increase it, tightening up on the 
use of fossil fuels must fall to the industrial countries - which were also 
the greatest consumers. Utilities and governments had the unpleasant task of 
planning the future energy mix in the face of a public opinion that was 
divided and bewildered. A factor that might ease their task was that until it 
had to choose, the public naturally showed a negative attitude to all energy 
options in which it saw a risk, and since all significant energy options 
carried some risk, little guidance could be expected from the public before a 
decision had to be made. But when it finally came to choosing a concrete 
option or mix of options, whether coal, nuclear, biomass or savings, the 
public would make its comparisons and show its preference. Comparative 
studies of the available options were thus clearly vital for an intelligent 
choice to be made. In that connection, the Agency had joined with the United 
Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), the United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization (UNIDO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) in an 
inter-agency project on assessing and monitoring health and environmental 
risks from energy and other complex industries. That project had met with 
great interest, and 15 countries were preparing case study proposals and 
wished to participate in the project. 
57. Although hydroelectric power was by no means free of environmental 
consequences and safety risk, it would evidently continue to be exploited and 
accepted where it was economically reasonable, since it did not add to 
atmospheric pollution or the greenhouse effect. Fossil fuels would 
necessarily continue to be used extensively, not only for heating and 
transport, but also for electricity production. However, the awareness that a 
drop in global consumption below present levels must be achieved had increased 
drastically during the past year. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 15 


58. Experience showed that, with the exception of hydroelectric power, new 
and renewable sources of energy - solar, biomass, wind - were not easily 
harnessed for large-scale economic production of electricity. However, it 
should not be difficult to reach a consensus in favour of more research into 
and experimentation with those sources, as no one was against them. Advances 
in photovoltaics were most welcome, and even if biomass was not ideal for 
electricity production, it might play a role in replacing the burning of 
fossil fuels for purposes other than electricity generation. While 
deforestation added to atmospheric carbon dioxide, and for that and other 
reasons was disastrous, the use of biomass combined with continuous replanting 
was neutral with respect to the carbon dioxide balance of the atmosphere. 
Massive reforestation would certainly be necessary, and that, over a longer 
period, would bind carbon and thus help to limit carbon dioxide. That aspect 
of the atmospheric carbon dioxide balance should not be ignored, nor should 
the other gases which together with carbon dioxide were responsible for the 
warming effect be forgotten. 
59. While new and renewable resources were not without prospects, with the 
exception of hydroelectric power they did not offer significant and 
economically viable answers to the need for increased electricity generation 
in the immediate and intermediate term. It was becoming increasingly plain 
that most authorities and utilities seeking sources of expanded electricity 
production looked chiefly to fossil fuels, notably coal, and to nuclear power. 
60. The nuclear power issues that had been mainly of concern to the WCED 
and the Toronto Conference, namely safety, waste disposal and proliferation, 
were in fact central to the Agency's activities, together with radiation 
protection, non-power applications of nuclear energy, and transfer of 
technology, and so his discussion of them could form part of his report on the 
Agency's work. 
61. To begin with nuclear power safety, it was frequently suggested in 
international discussions on that subject that nuclear power would be more 
acceptable if new reactors with greater "inherent" or "passive" safety were 
developed. However, if such a discussion was to be realistic, it must from 
the outset recognize that for a long time to come, the issue of nuclear power 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 16 


safety would be largely identical with the issue of safe operation of the more 
than 400 nuclear power reactors already working - to which a growing part of 
the Agency's activity was devoted. Especially since the Chernobyl accident, a 
large number of international measures had been taken through the Agency in 
addition to those adopted by individual countries. 


62. The WCED had suggested that an international regulatory function was 
required, including international inspection of reactors, and that that 
function should be quite separate from the role of the Agency in promoting 
nuclear energy. The idea that an organ responsible for nuclear safety should 
be separate from those which actually operated nuclear power plants was 
generally accepted by governments, and indeed established in the Agency's 
safety codes. However, the Agency was an intergovernmental organization which 
neither sold nor operated any nuclear plants, nor was it associated with any 
other branch of the nuclear industry, and so it was questionable whether any 
organ outside the Agency would offer greater independence. If such a 
regulatory function was intergovernmental - and it was hard to imagine any 
other structure - then the same governments and governmental experts who now 
governed and advised the Agency would be involved, whether the function was 
placed within the Agency or elsewhere. It was true that under its Statute the 
Agency was to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It did so in the 
same way as the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) promoted 
civil aviation and the International Maritime Organization (IMO) promoted 
shipping. No one had so far claimed that those organizations could not be 
regulatory because they were promotional. The argument was simplistic, since 
in reality public regulation was a form of promotion. 
63. In the post-Chernobyl discussion there had been suggestions in favour 
of binding international safety regulations coupled with inspection, but it 
had become abundantly clear that that was not acceptable to governments. That 
did not mean there could be no harmonization of national rules, no 
international standards or no international review of operational safety at 
the national level. The system evolving in the Agency was more subtle than a 
mere copy of the national model of legislative, supervisory and executive 
functions. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.303 
page 17 


64. First, there were the five NUSS Codes of Practice, whose revision and 
updating had now been completed so as to make them reflect current thinking 
and experience in accident prevention and management. They were being 
supplemented by a number of safety guides (on siting, design, operation, etc.) 
which were in process of being updated. While the Codes were not legally 
binding on Members, they had considerable authority and had been much used in 
the elaboration of national regulations. China, for example, was adopting the 
NUSS standards as the sole basis of its national regulatory requirements to 
govern its emerging nuclear programme. Member States had recently been asked 
to provide information - or, in some cases, had volunteered it - on the 
consistency between their national regulations and NUSS. Most important were 
the new Basic Safety Principles for Nuclear Power Plants (INSAG-3), a 
pioneering exercise which the International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group 
(INSAG) had completed during the present year. Through those principles, 
INSAG had established exacting but realistic safety targets for existing and 
future plants, and its work should stimulate discussion and suggestions on the 
next steps to be taken by the Agency and its Member States - for safety should 
never be a static concept. 
65. The nuclear safety standards did not constitute binding international 
regulations, nor was their observance subject to international inspection. 
While under the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Tlatelolco Treaty safeguards 
inspection was mandatory on all nuclear plants in non-nuclear-weapon States, 
inspection of safety was a national function - for the simple reason that no 
one could be more interested in the safety of a plant than the authorities of 
the country in which it operated. Yet, after the Chernobyl accident there had 
been a growing interest in the safety of nuclear plants, wherever located. 
Operational safety review teams (OSARTs) had been established within the 
Agency to visit nuclear plants at the invitation of Member States and as a 
service to them. Their recommendations were not mandatory, but could be 
expected to command the same respect as competent expert advice. To date, the 
Agency had sent 25 OSART missions to more than half the countries which 
operated nuclear power plants. The fact that several countries had invited 
two or more OSART missions showed that they were found valuable. They helped 
to promote good operating practices all over the world, and enabled a country 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 18 


to show a certain openness to international interest in the safety of its 
reactors. After an initial period of experience with OSARTs, Member States 
might wish to consider inviting those missions at regular intervals. It would 
also be helpful if Member States continued their generous provision of experts 
for participation in them. 


66. While on the subject of nuclear reactor safety, it seemed worth 
mentioning also the Agency's efforts to promote operational safety in the 
326 research reactors now operating in 55 countries. More than 70% of them 
were at least 20 years old, and until recently there had been little 
international safety guidance to help national efforts. The Agency was now 
updating many of its safety publications which were relevant to research 
reactors, for instance those dealing with siting and design, modification and 
emergency planning. It also intended to revise the Code of Practice for 
research reactors (Safety Series No. 35). A programme offering Members an 
integrated safety assessment of research reactors had been initiated and had 
proved very useful. 
67. Although the international framework within which States operated 
nuclear power installations thus did not constitute binding safety 
regulations, governments had concluded binding conventions in a number of 
areas relating to safety. The Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material, incorporating rules that applied mainly to international 
transport, had entered into force in 1987 after 21 States had ratified it - an 
example he would urge others to follow. Whether internationally binding rules 
regarding physical protection should be applied to nuclear material in the 
domestic sphere as well was a question that needed serious consideration: 
while so far there had been some reluctance to approach it, there was no doubt 
that all States had an interest in the universal observance of satisfactory 
standards for the protection of nuclear material in their territories. 
68. The Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident had entered 
into force, and the Agency's emergency response system should be fully 
operational and able to ensure fast global communications under the Convention 
by 1989. Before the end of 1988, an Emergency Notification and Assistance 
Technical Operations Manual should also be available. In that context he 
wished to thank Member States which had helped to prepare guidance for 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 19 


operating the system, and also the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) for 
its generous assistance in making the Global Telecommunication System 
available for fast transmission of data. Also in that context, the Soviet 
authorities had informed him, in connection with the uncontrolled re-entry of 
the Cosmos-1900 satellite, that they would observe the requirements of the 
Early Notification Convention, should it be applicable. 


69. The Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency had been invoked by Brazil in connection with the 
radiological accident at Goiania in September 1987, and the existence of an 
international focal point for offers of contributions in support of the 
competent action taken by the Brazilian authorities had proved very useful. A 
data base on national resources that could be mobilized for emergencies would 
enhance the efficacy of the Agency's emergency response unit, and he urged 
Member States to co-operate in supplying such information. He also appealed 
to governments to accelerate the process of ratification of the two 
Conventions. Of the 72 States which had signed the Early Notification 
Convention, only 30 had ratified it; in the case of the Emergency Assistance 
Convention, the corresponding figures were 70 and 30 States; in that 
connection, he welcomed the fact that the United States Government had 
recently deposited its instruments of ratification. 
70. Where damage from nuclear installations had occurred despite accident 
prevention and mitigation, liability must exist under both national and 
international rules. It was therefore gratifying that the Joint Protocol to 
the Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy 
and the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage had been 
drafted, extending the benefits of each Convention to the parties to the other 
and eliminating problems that might arise from simultaneous application of 
both. He trusted that the Joint Protocol would be adopted by consensus at the 
international conference to be held during the week for that purpose and that 
it would help to attract wider adherence to the two Conventions. The question 
of an instrument establishing State liability in the event of nuclear 
accidents was still before the Board of Governors, and might perhaps be dealt 
with more actively now that a major problem pertaining to the civil liability 
conventions had been removed. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 20 


71. Just as motor cars and aeroplanes were made safer and more reliable 
through new designs and inventions, the safety technology of nuclear power 
reactors must continuously be developed. It was a common misunderstanding 
that the current types of nuclear power reactor were so complicated that 
operating them safely would require unattainable human perfection; but in fact 
the current designs tolerated many human errors, since much redundance was 
built into their safety systems. All the same, that was no reason for 
neglecting the search for designs which incorporated more "inherent" or 
"passive" safety. Their emergence might facilitate greater reliance on 
nuclear power in many countries where substantial new electricity generating 
capacity would soon be needed. Developing countries in particular might be 
attracted by advanced versions of current, tried and tested types of reactor 
offering standardized and simpler designs, more passive safety features and 
smaller sizes. Working groups existed within the Agency to carry on an 
information exchange on that subject, and a first report on the status of 
advanced light-water reactor design and technology was now in print. 
72. The further development, simplification and improvement of current 
types of nuclear power reactor should not stand in the way of the designing, 
construction and testing of new reactor types, however. There was no doubt 
that the "nuclear recession", with new orders for power plants being reduced 
and public opposition to the nuclear option being expressed in many countries, 
had affected national research budgets for nuclear power, and it was scarcely 
surprising if the nuclear industry moved only slowly in a climate where both 
governments and public showed reluctance or indifference to the further 
development of nuclear power. All the same, a number of existing or emerging 
reactor designs had attractive features which might spark renewed interest on 
the part of governments and public, and - although commercial competition 
might make it difficult to establish joint international projects on them - it 
would be desirable for governments to discuss how they might promote research 
and development on those new types of reactor. Working groups had already 
been set up within the Agency for the discussion and exchange of experience on 
such reactors and governments would do well to make greater use of those 
groups. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 21 


73. For several reasons, the development of breeder reactor technology was 
not receiving very high priority in the United States and in Western Europe. 
Considering the long-time perspectives and uncertainties faced in the energy 
fields, it seemed unfortunate that that technology option, which made very 
efficient use of the energy content of uranium, was not being examined more 
broadly. The world might yet come to need that option. On the other hand, it 
was gratifying that a joint design effort pooling the resources of the world's 
four major fusion research programmes had been launched under Agency auspices 
in 1988: the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) 
project. It was evident that the design and construction costs of some modern 
technologies, including nuclear technology, were often of such dimensions that 
projects jointly pursued by several governments or industries or a combination 
thereof were the most economic and reasonable avenue to success. 
74. The issue of nuclear waste management and disposal still loomed large 
in the public mind. The WCED had noted that nuclear waste technology had 
reached an advanced level of sophistication, but nevertheless held that the 
problem of nuclear waste disposal remained unsolved, chiefly because the 
technology had apparently not been fully tested or utilized. That was clearly 
a question of judgement and perspective; while it would not be true to say 
that there were no problems in the field of nuclear waste management and 
disposal, it could confidently be stated that, unlike the users of other 
fuels, the civilian users of uranium had been fully conscious from the outset 
of the need to isolate the waste products from the biosphere, and had acted on 
that knowledge. The Agency served as a major centre for the exchange of 
information, for agreeing upon prudent standards, and for assistance and 
advice in relation to nuclear waste management and disposal. 
75. The most recent major meeting organized by the Agency in the field of 
waste management had been the International Symposium on Management of Lowand 
Intermediate-Level Radioactive Wastes held jointly with the Commission of 
the European Communities in May 1988 in Stockholm. That meeting had confirmed 
earlier assessments that safe management of low- and intermediate-level 
radioactive waste was not a real technical problem. The participants in the 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.303 
page 22 


symposium had been given an opportunity to visit the sub-seabed Swedish Final 
Repository for Reactor Wastes which had just been commissioned at the Forsmark 
power station. 


76. One of the Agency's most important functions was to work out 
internationally agreed standards and criteria. In 1985, such criteria had 
been established for low- and intermediate-level waste. A document on safety 
principles for the underground disposal of high-level radioactive waste was in 
the final review stage. Like the NUSS, it would not be binding, but it might 
be expected to have considerable authority as the first fully international 
document setting basic criteria for the disposal of high-level waste. 
77. The issue relating to radioactive waste that had attracted the most 
public attention during the past year had been reports that toxic wastes, 
including nuclear wastes, were being dumped in developing countries. Those 
reports had sparked protests by the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and 
the Agency had circulated the OAU's resolution on the subject. At the request 
of a Member State, the Agency had also sent an expert to examine whether 
dumped waste actually contained radioactive material: the result in that case 
had been negative. The Agency would continue to assist Members that had 
reason to believe they had been the subject of such dumping and did not have 
adequate resources of their own for checking. A first basic principle was 
evidently that each State generating radioactive waste should ensure that it 
was disposed of in accordance with acceptable safety standards; the transfer 
of such waste to any country that lacked the technical or administrative 
capacity to handle it safely was patently irresponsible. Initiatives had been 
taken to establish principles for the export of hazardous non-radioactive 
wastes, and Member States might wish to consider the idea of developing some 
Agency guidelines for international radioactive waste transactions. 
78. The Agency devoted considerable attention to the problems faced by 
developing countries in the safe handling and disposal of spent radioactive 
sources. A Waste Management Advisory Programme (WAMAP) had been initiated 
in 1987; so far five missions had been carried out, four more were scheduled 
for the current year, and ten further missions were planned for 1989. The 
role of the missions was to advise on the establishment of an adequate 

GC(XXXII)/0R.303 
page 23 


regulatory framework and infrastructure for the management of radioactive 
wastes. Several accidents involving spent radioactive sources had occurred in 
the past, the latest and most severe of them being the Goiania incident in 
Brazil; thanks were due to the Brazilian authorities for hosting a 
post-accident review meeting during which it had been possible to draw lessons 
from that accident for the benefit of the international community. It was 
desirable that any accidents of significance involving radioactive materials 
should be followed by such an international review. 


79. The safety of nuclear power and of nuclear waste disposal were 
significant parts of the much broader question of radiation protection. In 
that context, he wished to pay tribute to the 60 years of work of the 
International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP), the 
non-governmental scientific body whose recommendations underlay all the 
radiation protection standards adopted by the Agency. It was somewhat 
paradoxical that the well-developed and prudent thinking of that respected 
body had not been translated into public understanding - for public 
perceptions of the risks of radioactivity were very far from the reality with 
which mankind lived and with which the ICRP, the Agency and governments had to 
contend. 
80. According to the latest report by the United Nations Scientific 
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR), 75% of the radiation 
dose received by the world's adult, population came from natural sources, with 
more than half of that dose being derived from the indoor inhalation of 
radon-222 and its short-lived decay products. Exposures from medical 
irradiation amounted to 20-50% of the natural radiation, with about 95% being 
attributable to diagnostic X-rays, mainly for populations in the 
industrialized world. A nuclear power plant in normal operation at full power 
released only negligible amounts of radioactive materials to the environment. 
Although the installed electricity generating capacity of nuclear reactors in 
the world had more than doubled since the 1982 UNSCEAR report, the present 
annual radiation doses per capita received by the world's adult population 
from all activities in the nuclear fuel cycle still represented only a tiny 
fraction, namely 0.1%, of the natural radiation doses to the population. 
According to UNSCEAR, moreover, the average dose commitment for all future 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 24 


time for the population of Europe and the European part of the Soviet Union 


due to the Chernobyl accident was equivalent to some 40% of the radiation 


doses which that population received each year from natural sources. For the 
most highly exposed population in Byelorussia, the first-year average dose had 
been of the order of one year's exposure to natural radiation. Elsewhere in 
Europe, first-year doses had varied, representing 25-75% of the doses people 
would receive in one year from natural sources. Those figures were reassuring 
and deserved dissemination. A wealth of such information had also been 
provided at a conference organized in Kiev on the medical aspects of the 
Chernobyl accident. The very large epidemiological study which was being 
undertaken by the Soviet Union in consultation with WHO and the Agency could 
be expected to yield valuable knowledge in the long term. 


81. Those figures were not in the least intended to obscure the fact that 
individuals and groups who had been subjected to very high doses of radiation 
in connection with accidents, such as those in Chernobyl and Goiania, ran 
special risks, but fortunately the number of such individuals was not very 
high. 
82. Consequences of considerable economic and practical significance must 
be drawn from the available scientific information about radiation levels: 
for example, reducing radon in houses was a very important task, and X-rays 
should be used with some restraint in the medical field. 
83. While in the immediate post-Chernobyl period different countries had 
established widely diverging levels of radioactive contamination as making 
foodstuffs unfit for human consumption, WHO and the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), in co-operation with the Agency, 
recently had jointly proposed values for radionuclides in food below which no 
health hazard was thought to exist and therefore no restrictions need be 
applied in international trade. Those levels had been considered in July 1988 
by the Codex Alimentarius Commission - the body setting international food 
standards - and were being finally reviewed for acceptance in 1989. It was to 
be hoped that one of the more confusing and least confidence-inspiring 
features of government action after the Chernobyl accident would thereby be 
laid to rest. There should be no reason for any country to adopt national 
levels lower than those laid down by the Codex Commission. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.303 
page 25 


84. During the International Conference on Radiation Protection in Nuclear 
Energy, held in April 1988 in Sydney, Australia, radiation protection 
principles and policy issues had been discussed in the light of the latest 
scientific knowledge. Concern had been expressed about the practical 
implications of excessive reliance on the linear dose relationship. It had 
been warned that resources which might do much to avert or reduce real and 
known health risks if employed elsewhere might instead be devoted to the 
entirely hypothetical risks of low-level radiation effects. The 
much-publicized calculations of future cancer cases to be expected as a result 
of radioactive fallout from the Chernobyl accident also were based on the 
linear-dose hypothesis, not on empirically proven knowledge. 
85. Another important event of the past year had been the consensus reached 
by the Agency and the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) over the principles for 
deciding what types of radiation source and practices should be exempt from 
regulatory control because they represented only trivial hazards. 
86. The Agency provided a significant service to Member States in helping 
to implement the radiation protection standards. Radiation protection 
advisory teams (RAPATs) had visited more than 35 Member States to review 
existing infrastructures and practices and advise on how they could be 
strengthened. Technical assistance and co-operation programmes supplemented 
those advisory missions. 
87. Co-operation with and transfer of technology to developing countries 
formed a large part of the Agency's activities; two thirds of the resources 
used for such purposes were devoted to non-power-related nuclear techniques. 
For example, almost 1000 crop varieties derived from radiation-induced 
mutations were grown world wide. Over 50 technical co-operation projects 
aimed at improving water supply and water resource management in developing 
countries were under way. Assistance was also being given in the field of 
nuclear medicine: the fact that every second patient in industrial countries 
was benefiting from one or another diagnostic nuclear technique showed how 
important those techniques had become and how necessary it was to ensure that 
developing countries could also employ them. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.303 
page 26 


88. A nuclear technique of potentially great benefit to developing 
countries was food irradiation, and many of them had already experimented 
extensively with it. The Codex Alimentarius Commission had cleared the use of 
the technique, and prudent limits had been set for the doses to be applied to 
different foodstuffs. However, the post-Chernobyl concern regarding food and 
radioactivity had raised new obstacles to the adoption of the technique, which 
used radiation to disinfest and preserve foods. Wider use of the technique 
would also help to protect health in the industrialized countries. Thus, a 
number of salmonella cases in Sweden in the past year had been traced to the 
use of contaminated spices, and would not have arisen if the spices had been 
irradiated. In December 1988, the Agency would be co-sponsoring together with 
a number of other United Nations bodies, an international conference on the 
acceptance, control of and trade in irradiated food, with the aim of producing 
an internationally agreed document on food irradiation recognizing the 
process's potential to reduce the incidence of food-borne disease and to cut 
down on post-harvest food losses. 
89. As could be seen from the document which had been prepared to show what 
Agency activities were relevant to sustainable development (document 
GC(XXXII)/COM.5/62), a considerable proportion of technical co-operation was 
concerned with protection of the environment, for instance against overuse of 
fertilizers or pesticides, or with the optimum utilization of resources, as in 
food irradiation. One large project to which the Agency was providing 
assistance in that connection was a Brazilian one involving the use of isotope 
techniques to investigate the effect of changing land use on the ecology and 
climate of the Amazon Basin. It was of prime importance to Brazil to know 
what exploitation of the forest resources and agricultural potential of that 
region could take place without having an impact on the rainfall, destroying 
fragile soils and affecting the river systems of the area. 
90. The Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) 
continued to develop well: resources were being provided by the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and by five Member States in the region: 
Australia, China, India, Japan and the Republic of Korea. While the RCA had 
traditionally centred on the application of isotope techniques in industry, 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 27 


medicine, agriculture and basic nuclear science, there had recently been an 
expansion of activities into energy and nuclear power planning, and radiation 
protection. 


91. The Regional Co-operative Arrangements for Latin America (ARCAL) now 
had 14 participating countries. In 1988, 11 projects had been under way in 
such fields as radiation protection, nuclear instrumentation, nuclear 
information, radioimmunoassay in animal reproduction studies, and food 
preservation. ARCAL was also exerting a strong influence on the upgrading of 
laboratories for local nuclear instrument maintenance and repair. The 
experience gained from RCA and ARCAL would be applied when possibilities were 
assessed for similar arrangements in other parts of the world, notably Africa. 
92. Although the Agency's technical co-operation programme was small in 
size compared with those of other United Nations organizations, it was closely 
monitored and, despite occasional failures, achieved a great deal. There was 
an increasing number of well-functioning local institutions - partly thanks to 
the Agency's assistance - and an increasing number of nationals of developing 
countries now served as Agency experts. Only 4 out of 23 training courses, 
or 17%, had been held in developing Member States in 1980. By contrast, 
in 1987, 44 out of 66, or 667o of such courses, had been organized in the 
developing world. That achievement alone indicated that technology transfer 
was taking place at quite a rapid pace. 
93. The General Conference provided an opportunity for all Member States to 
demonstrate their commitment to technical co-operation through the Agency, by 
pledging and paying their contributions. The adoption by consensus of a new 
schedule of indicative planning figures during the June 1988 meetings of the 
Board of Governors was a welcome development. The indicative planning figure 
system brought a measure of stability and predictability to the planning of 
the technical co-operation programme. In 1988, however, there had been a 
shortfall of US $4.2 million in pledges against the target of US $34 million. 
Fifty-one Member States had made no pledge at all, and 14 had pledged a 
contribution that was below their share of the target. He appealed to 
Member States to make a special effort so that the Agency could reach the 
target for 1989. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 28 


94. The safeguards verification performed by the Agency had long been a 
unique case of international on-site inspection. It offered countries which 
allowed the transfer of nuclear technology or material verification of the 
pledges given that such technology would be used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. It was worth noting that countries importing nuclear technology or 
material might be just as anxious as exporters to invite safeguards 
verification in order to avoid any misunderstandings about their activities. 
Without such a system of verification, nuclear trade could hardly have 
developed to its present level. 
95. The value of safeguards depended entirely on their credibility. Only a 
system with high credibility could provide the confidence it was meant to 
give, and for that purpose co-operation by the Member States hosting the 
verifications, and competence and efficiency on the part of the Agency in 
operating the safeguards, were required. Where national systems of 
accountancy were excellent, co-operation between the Secretariat and the 
national authorities was smooth and the Secretariat's activities were 
efficient, confidence would be high and costs low. The ambition must be to 
operate a system that gave a maximum of confidence at a minimum cost. 
Development and improvement of the safeguards system was facilitated by advice 
from the eminent experts who formed the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGSI) and by the large volume of work performed under 
national support programmes on constructing very specialized instruments or 
designing new approaches. 
96. Naturally, in an undertaking of the magnitude and complexity of 
international safeguards, delicate matters sometimes arose, involving 
trade-offs between efficiency and intrusiveness, or costs and confidentiality, 
for example, and in the last resort difficulties often had to be settled by 
the Board of Governors on the basis of facts presented by the Secretariat in 
its annual Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR), in its draft programme and 
budget, or in separate proposals and suggestions. The members of the Board 
had invariably shown confidence in the conclusions outlined in the SIR, and he 
regretted that the 1986 and 1987 issues of the report - which was written 
exclusively for scrutiny by governmental experts - had become public: 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 29 


selective quotations and misconstructions had been used in an attempt to 
undermine confidence in safeguards. Member States and the Secretariat must 
evidently make a better effort to explain safeguards to the public and to 
dispel misunderstandings and erroneous conclusions. 


97. A more serious difficulty lay in the resource problem. In times of 
budgetary stringency, governments were naturally unhappy to increase funding 
for safeguards, and urged that efficiency gains should be made in that area. 
That was a reasonable request, but it must be recognized that the number of 
nuclear facilities and the quantity of nuclear material to be safeguarded and 
in many instances the sophistication of the facilities as well - had 
steadily increased, while the safeguards budget had remained at zero growth 
for a number of years. The Secretariat was engaged in a perpetual search for 
greater efficiency through innovative techniques and organizational change, 
but in the long run efficiency gains could not offset the need for additional 
resources to fulfil the Agency's new obligations under agreements already 
entered into. He therefore urged Member States to do everything in their 
power to facilitate the inspection task and thereby reduce costs. 
98. It was gratifying that Agency safeguards were serving as a source of 
inspiration for the establishment of other on-site inspection systems; 
conversely, it would be desirable for useful innovations made in such new 
systems to be considered for adoption in the safeguards system. 
99. The Board of Governors had just approved the voluntary offer agreement 
between China and the Agency. Such agreements had now been reached with all 
five nuclear-weapon States, and so all countries in which a nuclear reactor 
was operating had now accepted Agency safeguards on all or part of their 
nuclear activities. 
100. In 1989, the formal preparations for the fourth NPT Review Conference, 
to be held in 1990, would begin, and the Agency was ready to make its 
contribution by preparing papers on how it applied safeguards within States 
parties to the Treaty and on the extent to which the Agency's technical 
assistance programme was affected under Article IV of the Treaty. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 30 


101. The Agency's role under NPT was limited but clear, and gave it a 
particular interest in the outcome of the fifth Review Conference, which would 
be deciding whether the Treaty should continue in force indefinitely or be 
extended for an additional period or periods. That decision would affect the 
very basis of much of the Agency's safeguards responsibility, since Clause 26 
of INFCIRC/153, the model for NPT-type safeguards agreements, laid down that 
such agreements should provide for their remaining in force as long as the 
State was party to NPT. 
102. Turning to the portions of the agenda which were not directly related 
to the Agency's main working areas, but which had important and difficult 
non-technical aspects, he drew attention to the comment by the Resident 
Representative of Israel, reproduced in document GC(XXXII)/849 (Appendix 1, 
Annex 1, Attachment 2), that the issue of full-scope safeguards could be 
satisfactorily settled within a nuclear-weapon-free zone. He trusted that, in 
view of the new and hopeful trend in the world towards solution of many longstanding 
conflicts, Members of the Agency would want to consider, not only how 
an agreement on such a zone could be negotiated, but also how full-scope 
safeguards might be established and operated in such a zone. 
103. Another issue which the General Conference would tackle related to 
South Africa and its possible adherence to NPT; some information on contacts 
between the South African Government and the depository States for NPT on that 
subject was given in document GC(XXXII)/844. He had made it clear on behalf 
of the Secretariat that an agreement on full-scope safeguards following South 
African adherence to NPT should follow the same lines as the safeguards 
agreements negotiated by the Secretariat with other parties to NPT. The 
latest statement by the Government of South Africa on the subject had been 
circulated as document GC(XXXII)/848. 
104. On the whole, the Agency had been functioning well during the past 
years, and it was pleased and proud at its reputation for efficiency and 
competence, although it was aware that further improvements were always 
possible. The reality in which the Agency operated was continuously changing, 
and so were the needs of Member Governments. That called for continuous 
adjustments in the programme of the Agency and its modes of operation. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 31 


105. The major challenge facing the Agency in the past few years had been to 
cope with increased demands, especially in operating safeguards, expanding 
nuclear safety and radiation protection and promoting the transfer of 
technology, while living with a Regular Budget at zero real growth. With some 
shortfalls, and by often operating within dangerously narrow margins, that 
challenge had been successfully met. One major reason had been the increase 
during that period in resources contributed outside the Regular Budget, in 
particular for technical co-operation and in support of the safeguards 
programme; also, the Agency had been offered more cost-free experts. A 
further major reason had been a continuous transfer of budget resources from 
the administrative side to the programme side, and a third very important 
reason was the hard work of the Agency's loyal staff. 
106. When efficiency could be improved purely by internal streamlining, so 
much the better, but further savings were also obtainable through more 
co-operative measures being taken by Governments and their authorities and 
fewer demands being made for some administrative services. Simplification in 
the procedure for designation of safeguards inspectors could save both time 
and money, as could greater co-operation by States in the negotiation of 
facility attachments under safeguards agreements. A reduction in the amount 
of administrative and financial reporting would also relieve pressure on the 
Secretariat. The Agency was trying to meet the growing number of requests 
from Member States for ever more comprehensive and transparent documentation. 
The Secretariat was usually praised for producing those documents - but not 
for presenting the bills for them. Similarly, Member Governments liked 
extensive consultations to be arranged with them about the programme and 
budget, beginning a year in advance. Such procedures certainly enabled all to 
participate fully and, perhaps, facilitated a consensus in the end, but it 
must be remembered that such procedures were costly. 
107. It was somewhat paradoxical that after a year-long period of 
consultation and the adoption by consensus of a programme and budget, one of 
the first things the Secretariat had to do was to work out a contingency plan 
to meet cash shortages caused by the failure of some Member States to pay and 
by persistent patterns of late payment by others. While the budget was at 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 32 


zero real growth, paid contributions showed negative growth. Inevitably, when 
stop-go-type administration became necessary, efficiency was lost, delivery 
suffered, margins became narrow and cash crises threatened. The Agency now 
had no reserves to pre-finance operations in situations of temporary cash 
shortage. For 1989, the Board had recommended an increase in the Working 
Capital Fund by US $2 million to a level of US $4 million. As a Working 
Capital Fund of that size could only bridge the gap for slightly more than a 
week, the Agency would be obliged to request a further increase for 1990 up to 
a level which deserved to be called a working capital. 


108. A gradual trimming back of the Agency's programme might not result in a 
calamity, but it did have that potential. The Agency's fundamental missions 
were to create confidence that no diversion of (fissionable) material was 
taking place, to help reduce the risks of nuclear accidents, and to promote 
development in the Third World. Reducing the Agency's ability to accomplish 
those missions at the levels to which Members had laboriously agreed was a 
serious matter. 
109. While the past few years had brought awareness of potentially alarming 
changes in the atmosphere and global climate, a great improvement in the 
world's political atmosphere and climate could be observed. Real disarmament 
measures affecting nuclear weapons had been agreed upon and even more 
significant ones were being negotiated; long-standing disputes and dreadful 
armed conflicts were being ended, and the increasing interdependence of the 
world was being recognized. In that new situation, with its perils and 
possibilities, the world would need its international organizations. 
Governments would find that the instruments they had created for their 
international co-operation were there when they wanted to co-operate. Member 
States had been making increasing use of the Agency: they knew the value of 
the instrument and its further potential, and he trusted that they would want 
to keep it in good shape. 
110. Finally, he thanked the Government of Austria and the city of Vienna 
for the hospitality shown to the Agency and the support given to its 
activities. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 33 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1989 


111. The PRESIDENT reminded Members that the early pledging of 
voluntary contributions considerably facilitated the Secretariat's work in 


planning the Agency's technical assistance programmes. He urged all 


delegations that were in a position to do so to notify the Secretariat during 


the current session of the voluntary contributions their Governments would be 


making to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1989. At the end 


of the session, under agenda item 23, he would report on the voluntary 


contributions pledged so far, and he was confident that, in response to his 


appeal, a considerable percentage of the 1989 target figure of US $42 million 


recommended by the Board of Governors would by then already have been pledged. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1987 (GC(XXXII)/835) 


112. Mr. SALGADO (United States of America) read out the following 
message from the President of the United States, Mr. Ronald Reagan: 


"On behalf of the United States, I would like to take this opportunity, 
the last of my administration, to reflect on a number of important 
themes which provide the foundation for United States participation in 
the vital work of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 


"The IAEA is an institution of singular importance to world peace and 
to the economic and technological advancement of many nations around 
the globe. Members and non-Members alike have benefited from the 
effective implementation of its programmes. IAEA safeguards, far from 


being essentially restrictive in nature, have been a key factor in 
building the confidence necessary for peaceful nuclear co-operation 
among nations. The safeguards programme has thus helped to make 


peaceful atomic energy available to all countries as envisioned in the 


Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, while at the same time promoting 
international peace. 


"Given the diversity of its membership, the degree of international 
co-operation achieved by the IAEA is outstanding. Working together, 
IAEA members have found more efficient ways to apply safeguards and 


more effective means of using the peaceful atom for social and economic 


development. Recently, in the aftermath of the tragic accident at 


Chernobyl, renewed emphasis has been placed on nuclear safety and on 
finding new ways for States to strengthen co-operation in this 


all-important endeavour. On behalf of the United States, I want to 


applaud this progress. In order to fulfil its mission in world 


affairs, the IAEA must always preserve its integrity as a technical and 


scientific organization. This requires a clear 



GC(XXXII)/0R.303 
page 34 


perception by all Members of the Agency's technical and scientific 


mandate as set forth in the IAEA Statute. Such an understanding is 


essential to the continued building of the international consensus on 


which the non-proliferation regime and the IAEA rest. 


"In the years to come, the IAEA will assume even greater importance as 


nuclear techology becomes more sophisticated and as more and more 


countries realize the benefits of the peaceful atom. The strong and 
continuing commitment of all Members to the Agency's goals will be 


needed in order to meet those challenges. As I most recently pledged 


during the May 1988 Summit Meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev, 
the United States has, and will continue, to provide its strong support 
for the IAEA and to the principles for which it stands. 


"In closing, may I extend to you my best wishes for a successful 
session of the General Conference, one that strengthens and deepens the 
commitment of all Members to the vital mission of the IAEA in world 
affairs." 


113. He (Mr. Salgado) joined President Reagan in saluting the Agency for the 
important work it did. The year 1988 marked the twentieth anniversary of the 
signing of the Non-Proliferation Treaty - the hallmark of the Agency's efforts 
to prevent the spread of nuclear arms. Adherence to the Treaty was now almost 
universal. The Agency's accomplishments in recent years included the 
expansion and enhancement of its technical assistance activities, nuclear 
safety programme and safeguards system, and the new arms negotiations called 
for by NPT. 
114. With regard to the safeguards system, he wished to underscore his 
country's firm commitment to that invaluable component of world stability -a 
commitment that had been demonstrated from the very beginning. In 1962, the 
United States had volunteered a reactor at the Brookhaven National Laboratory 
for the Agency's first safeguards inspection based on fully-developed 
procedures which had subsequently become routine for research reactors around 
the world. It had contributed valuable resources, both financial and 
scientific, to Agency safeguards over the years. It was fully committed to 
maintaining the effectiveness of the safeguards programme, under which it had 
continued to develop state-of-the-art equipment for measuring special nuclear 
material and to devise containment and surveillance devices. 
115. The United States was also fully committed to the physical protection 
of nuclear material handled throughout the world, and had ratified the 
relevant Convention. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 35 


116. The United States recognized that, together with other nuclear-weapon 
States, it bore a special responsibility, under Article VI of NPT, to work 
towards disarmament. In June 1988, President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev had 
exchanged instruments of ratification for the INF Treaty - the first treaty 
ever to reduce, rather than merely to limit, the nuclear arsenals of their 
respective countries. The INF Treaty had been the culmination of many years 
of work, involving several summit meetings and protracted negotiations in 
Geneva. The first step had been the President's proposal for a "double-zero 
option", and despite fears that complete elimination of INF missiles could 
never be achieved, the events of the past seven years had borne out the wisdom 
of that proposal. 
117. Great strides had also been made in reducing strategic nuclear arms 
through the so-called "START" negotiations. The first breakthrough had come 
in Geneva in 1985, when President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev had agreed on the 
concept of a 50% reduction in strategic nuclear arms. At the Reykjavik Summit 
in 1986, the two leaders had agreed on specific numerical limits for warheads 
and delivery vehicles. 
118. President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev had met again in Washington in 
December 1987 to sign the INF Treaty. They had agreed to work intensively 
towards completing the "START" Treaty, and had also agreed to comprehensive 
verification provisions for inclusion therein. 
119. In addition, the two leaders had given their agreement to the holding 
of joint experiments in both countries to improve verification under 
two nuclear test limitation treaties that were awaiting ratification. Those 
experiments represented an unprecedented step forward towards the laying of a 
new foundation for nuclear testing limitations embodied in bilateral 
treaties. The United States looked forward to further work with the 
Soviet Union, in a spirit of co-operation, in regard to those critical matters. 
120. In addition to its safeguards programme, and the work being done to 
build on the success of NPT, the Agency's technical activities had done much 
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy among developing countries. 
Between 1981 and 1987, annual payments to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund had grown from just over $8 million to more 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 36 


than $29 million, an increase of more than 350%. He was proud to say that the 
United States, as the largest contributor to the Fund, had provided nearly 30% 
of the previous year's total. 


121. The Agency's activities served the interests of all its Members by 
helping to resolve countless global problems, ranging from pest control in 
agriculture to environmental monitoring. Its research programmes also helped 
to expand the frontiers of basic science, reinforcing efforts to promote 
better health, to increase the world's food supplies, and to develop new 
energy sources for the future. 
122. The Agency had long been active in promoting international co-operation 
in nuclear safety around the world through its safety and radiation protection 
programmes. The United States was proud to have contributed to the 
strengthening of the Agency's safety regime: indeed, its efforts had led to 
the improvement of safety guidance for commercial nuclear power reactors. 
While the United States wholeheartedly supported the intensified safety 
programme begun the previous year, it continued to believe that the 
fundamental responsibility for safety and regulatory functions rested with 
Member States. 
123. He was delighted to announce that the United States Senate had approved 
ratification of the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency 
Assistance on 7 September, and that he had just deposited the instruments of 
ratification of those Conventions with the Director General. The 
United States would support the Agency in carrying out its specific 
responsibilities under those two carefully-negotiated Conventions, and would 
be pleased to contribute the services of its experts to that end. 
124. Although some progress had been made, nuclear power could not achieve 
anywhere near its true potential until government and industry successfully 
tackled the problem of lack of public confidence in nuclear safety. Members 
must continue to be vigilant in ensuring that safety continued to be the first 
priority for nuclear power users around the world. 
125. Since 1980, about 14 new reactors had begun operation in the United 
States. The largest of them was the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station in 
Arizona, capable of producing 3810 megawatts of electrical power, enough to 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 37 


meet the needs of 4 million Americans - a symbol of what could be achieved 
with vision and persistence. On the other hand, plants such as Shoreham and 
Seabrook had not been allowed to operate, due in part to public concern about 
safety, despite the fact that a majority had been shown to be in support of 
nuclear power whenever proposals to abandon it had been put forward. 


126. There was growing appreciation in the United States of the role nuclear 
power could play in strengthening energy security by diversifying the energy 
resource base. Because nuclear power was a proven, environmentally clean 
energy resource, it offered a promising means of allaying mounting 
international concern about the consequences of the "greenhouse effect". 
127. The President had recently signed legislation raising the level of 
compensation in the event of a nuclear accident to more than $7 billion, 
ten times the previous level. That legislation marked a major step forward in 
restoring confidence in the credibility of nuclear power as a predictable and 
safe investment. However, there was still need for a more effective and 
efficient licensing process in the United States, in order to ensure continued 
protection of public health and safety through the early and decisive 
resolution of power plant safety issues. That could be achieved by improving 
mechanisms for public participation, and by reducing construction time and 
costs, without sacrificing safety. His administration was pressing for speedy 
action on proposals now before Congress to reform the licensing process, and 
the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, for its part, was making such 
improvements in the process as lay within its power. 
128. Safe, permanent disposal of high-level active waste was crucial to the 
progress of nuclear power, and the passage of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act and 
its amendments marked a milestone in that connection. The Department of 
Energy was now evaluating the suitability of a site in Nevada as a first 
geological repository; it was hoped to receive construction authorization 
by 1988, and to begin initial operations by 2003. The other two elements of 
the United States integrated waste management system were a monitored 
retrievable storage facility (MRS) for packaging and short-term storage, and 
transportation operations to move the waste to the facility concerned. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 38 


129. Congress had authorized the siting, construction and operation of 
one such MRS facility, subject to certain conditions. It was hoped to select 
a suitable site in 1994, and to begin construction in 1998. 
130. Steps had been taken to ensure that the United States would be a 
reliable and economic supplier of enriched uranium. There was support in 
Congress for restructuring the enrichment services sector as an independent 
Government corporation, which it was hoped would keep that sector competitive 
in the world market. 
131. Progress had also been made in fostering the future growth of reactor 
technology. The United States nuclear industry continued to seek improvements 
in the quality of electricity generated, as well as to initiate programmes to 
extend the life of existing reactors. It was also working with the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission to pave the way for the introduction of a new generation 
of safe, standardized reactors. Safety remained the overriding concern, and 
the efforts of the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations to strengthen and 
expand programmes of safety enforcement and training were noteworthy in that 
regard. New initiatives - such as the proposal to form a Worldwide 
Association of Nuclear Operators - would do much to ensure that the best 
safety experience available could be utilized. 
132. Nuclear power was a critically important large-scale technology, 
capable of meeting a sizeable portion of the energy needs not only of the 
United States but of the world as a whole. It already supplied the United 
States with 20% of its electricity, and its contribution to the country's 
energy security was beyond question. 
133. With the increasing energy demands resulting from the expansion of the 
world economy, diversification of energy supplies would become critically 
important. There was no doubt that nuclear power would come to play a more 
prominent role in meeting energy needs, and it might also prove useful in the 
effort to solve complex environmental problems, such as that posed by the 
warming of the earth's atmosphere. 
134. The importance of nuclear power could be clearly seen in the fact that 
420 reactors were now in operation in 26 countries, together supplying 
one sixth of the world's electricity. Many Agency Members generated a major 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 39 


portion of their electricity from nuclear power: France obtained more 
than 70%, other European nations 40% or more, while Japan expected to double 
its capacity over the next four decades. 


135. Much of the success achieved by nuclear power worldwide could be 
attributed to the Agency's tireless efforts. The United States was encouraged 
to see the significant progress made in resolving many of the problems that 
had hampered nuclear energy's growth and acceptability in the past. 
136. President Reagan had stressed the IAEA's unique role in fostering 
international co-operation through the programme activities carried out under 
its mandate. The success of those activities depended on a spirit of 
understanding and mutual confidence. That spirit had guided the Agency in the 
past, and would continue to guide it in the future - a future ripe with 
opportunities for productive, peaceful uses of the atom. Only by working 
together as a community of nations, laying politics aside and remaining 
faithful to the IAEA's original Statute, could Member States hope to ensure 
that the Agency would continue as a world champion of peace and progress. 
137. Mr. SRINIVASAN (India) said the General Conference offered an 
opportunity for reflection on the trends being pursued by the Agency, and on 
its relevance to the evolving needs of Member States. The main expectation of 
a large number of those States was that the Agency should fulfil its statutory 
obligations to help them harness nuclear energy for economic development. 
138. The major challenge to the spirit and dedication of the nuclear 
community in recent times had been the problems posed by safety and the 
environment. Although all Members knew that nuclear safety was safer and 
environmentally more benign than many other sources of energy currently in 
use, they should never cease their efforts to provide the maximum assurance 
regarding public safety and protection of the environment. He congratulated 
the Director General and the Agency on the work done in that connection in the 
post-Chernobyl period. The link-up with the WMO's Global Telecommunication 
System was a significant step in strengthening the Early Notification 
Convention. The Emergency Assistance Convention was also designed to 
facilitate international co-operation in the event of a nuclear accident. 
Those developments were confirmation of the advanced state of preparedness of 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 40 


the nuclear community to tackle an emergency situation. The completion of a 
concise, integrated statement of basic safety principles for nuclear power 
plants by INSAG, and the review of the NUSS Codes, reflected the Agency's 
responsiveness to the sophisticated safety requirements of a nuclear world. 


139. His delegation had been greatly impressed by the comprehensive and 
thought-provoking opening statement made by the Director General. In that 
statement, the Director General had urged that the Agency be entrusted with an 
international regulatory role in the interests of promoting nuclear safety. 
While that was a laudable objective, it should be borne in mind that sovereign 
governments regarded the regulatory function - whether affecting the operation 
of nuclear facilities, or their physical protection in situ or in transit - as 
an area of exclusive national responsibility. 
140. He welcomed the many initiatives already taken by the Agency with 
regard to the management and disposal of low- and intermediate-level 
radioactive waste, as well as of high-level waste. That was an important 
problem that had to be competently tackled in order to gain public confidence 
in the present and future safety of nuclear energy production, as well as to 
allay unfounded fears of a possible blight on the lives of countless 
generations yet unborn. In that connection, he had been pained to learn of a 
deplorable practice that had given the OAU grounds for deep concern, namely 
the dumping of all kinds of toxic wastes on unsuspecting countries, by 
institutions that could be expected to know the consequences of such 
malpractices. It was not yet clear whether that dumping had included nuclear 
wastes, but he welcomed the initiative proposed by the Director General in the 
matter. 
141. He had been glad to learn from the Safeguards Implementation Report 
for 1987 that there had been no diversion of nuclear material from peaceful 
activities safeguarded by the Agency to non-peaceful activities. Both the 
Secretariat and Member States concerned deserved credit for ensuring the 
efficacy of the system within existing budgetary constraints. At the same 
time, it was vital to restore the enthusiasm and dedication with which the 
Agency's technical co-operation programme had been initially conceived. If 
the regulatory function was allowed to dominate the Agency's programme and 
budget, it would only hamper efforts to turn nuclear technology into a 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 41 


universally acceptable tool for development. He wished to take the 
opportunity to pledge India's assessed share of voluntary contributions to the 
Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1989. 


142. India continued to regard the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) as 
a valuable instrument for promoting regional co-operation among developing 
countries. It supported human resource development activities in RCA 
member States by conducting training courses, workshops and seminars. 
During 1988, India had held regional training courses on isotope production in 
research reactors and on neutron activation analysis for mineral resource 
prospecting and material characterization, and more activities were planned 
for 1989. Activities under the RCA should also be expanded to include areas 
such as mineral prospecting, power planning, reactor safety, health, and waste 
management. The RCA seminar held in Jakarta in June 1988 had been useful in 
assessing progress achieved, and in identifying how activities should be 
oriented in the future. In view of the need for manpower training in RCA 
member States, India recommended that the Agency might consider creating an 
institution within the region for providing training facilities in different 
areas of nuclear science and technology. Such an institution could be built 
around an existing nuclear centre in a region that was receiving Agency 
assistance. 
143. The year 1988 marked the completion of four decades of existence of the 
Indian Atomic Energy Commission. During that period, India had accumulated a 
considerable wealth of manpower and expertise in all areas of the nuclear fuel 
cycle. Its nuclear power programme continued to make steady progress, and 
there had been a 13% increase in nuclear power generation over previous 
years. An important development had been the decision taken by the Indian 
Government to start work on nuclear power units with an aggregate capacity of 
about 6000 MW(e). 
144. Safety considerations continued to be given high priority at all levels 
of nuclear plant operation. Emergency preparedness plans had been evolved to 
deal with emergency situations that might arise from an accident at any of the 
nuclear installations in the country. A number of seminars had been held to 
educate the public, and to clear up misunderstandings or apprehensions about 
nuclear energy. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 42 


145. Where research and development were concerned, the main emphasis in 
reactor engineering during the year had been on the design of 500 MW(e) PHWRs, 
and on further refinements of the 235 MW(e) PHWR, in addition to the setting 
up of various experimental facilities at the 100 MW(th) Dhruva reactor. The 
design of a 500 MW(e) prototype fast breeder reactor was progressing, and 
India's long-term plan was to build fast breeder reactors to make optimum use 
of nuclear fuel. He agreed with the Director General*s comment that fast 
breeder reactors were an important energy option that the world might yet come 
to need in future years. 
146. The Director General had rightly drawn attention to certain omissions 
in the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, notably 
the fact that nuclear energy production did not contribute to global warming 
or to the "greenhouse effect". The report recommended that, since the NPT had 
not proved sufficient to halt the spread of nuclear weapons, an effective 
international regime should be set up to deal with the problem, and that both 
nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclearweapon States should undertake to accept 
safeguards in accordance with the Agency's Statute. 
147. However, 1988 had witnessed the conclusion of the first-ever 
disarmament agreement, in the form of the INF Treaty between the United States 
and the Soviet Union. India welcomed that agreement as an important step in 
the right direction. While the treaty might appear modest, it nevertheless 
represented a major breaking-down of psychological and political barriers that 
had proved formidable in the past. He sincerely hoped that that process would 
be carried forward, and would lead to the eventual elimination of nuclear 
weapons. 
148. India was deeply committed to the cause of disarmament, and had 
submitted to the United Nations General Assembly's Special Session Devoted to 
Disarmament an action plan calling on the international community to negotiate 
a commitment to general and complete disarmament. 
149. In conclusion, he reiterated his country's support for activities of 
the Agency designed to realize the aims and ideals enshrined in its Statute. 
India had immense faith in the contribution that nuclear energy could make 
towards economic development. The significance of the Agency's activities 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 43 


would continue to depend on the extent to which it could assist those 
Member States which were assigning a vital role to nuclear energy used for 
peaceful purposes. He was sure the Agency would strive to fulfil the hopes 
placed in it in that regard. 


150. Mr. PROTSENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said the 
Agency was highly valued in his country as a truly unique international 
organization which was seeking both to promote international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and to secure non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and the safe development of nuclear power. He commended the dynamism 
of the Agency's activities, and its ability to respond promptly and 
effectively to new challenges. 
151. The current session of the General Conference was being held at a time 
when international relations had reached a turning point. During the past 
year, there had been a noticeable easing of the nuclear threat. The signing 
of the INF Treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States, together 
with negotiations for an agreement on a 50% cut in strategic nuclear weapons, 
were both significant steps towards nuclear disarmament and towards 
eliminating the threat of the destruction of civilization by nuclear weapons. 
152. Progress had also been made towards halting nuclear-weapon testing. 
The Soviet Union's commitment to an early solution to that problem was 
demonstrated by its declaration of a unilateral moratorium on all nuclearweapon 
testing - a step which had not, unfortunately, been reciprocated. 
However, his country was currently conducting bilateral negotiations with the 
United States on the limitation and eventual cessation of nuclear-weapon 
testing, and considerable progress had been made in the first stage of those 
negotiations. The two parties concerned had carried out a successful joint 
experiment on verification, and he hoped that eventually more radical measures 
could be adopted which would limit the extent and number of nuclear tests with 
a view to eventually eliminating them completely. 
153. One of the essential conditions if disarmament was to be achieved was a 
strengthening of NPT. He urged that those countries which had not yet acceded 
to that Treaty should do so as soon as possible, as requested by the 1985 
NPT Review Conference. In particular, both the Republic of South Africa and 

GC(XXXII)/0R.303 
page 44 


Israel should accede to the Treaty without delay, and should agree to place 
all their nuclear activities under Agency safeguards. 


154. The Soviet Union greatly appreciated the Agency's contribution to the 
creation of an atmosphere of trust and mutual co-operation between Member 
States, notably through its regulatory functions. The Agency safeguards 
system was an effective bar to the diversion of nuclear materials from 
peaceful uses to the manufacture of weapons, and he was pleased to note from 
the annual report that, as in previous years, the Secretariat had not detected 
any violations in that regard in the course of 1987. That was proof of the 
success of the safeguards system, as applied both within the framework of NPT 
and outside it. 
155. As could be seen from the annual report and from the opening statement 
by the Director General, the regulatory activities of the Agency had been 
expanded during the period under review, and the safeguards system had been 
systematically improved. His country was making its own contribution to the 
development of Agency safeguards; in the course of 1989-1990, 4 million roubles 
would be made available to help finance the next stage of research and 
development under the safeguards programme. In addition, a voluntary 
contribution of 300 000 roubles had been made to the programme of staff 
training in the field of safeguards being carried out in the Soviet Union, 
with the participation of Agency experts. 
156. In order to maximize the effectiveness of the existing safeguards 
system, it was important to resolve difficulties that had arisen over the 
designation and accreditation of inspectors. The Soviet Union had always 
shown a flexible approach in that connection, and was prepared to receive 
Agency inspectors without prior agreement, on condition that such inspectors 
were nationals of States with which it had diplomatic relations. His country 
supported the Director General's proposal that the Agency should be entitled 
to appoint inspectors without the prior consent of States, and called on other 
Members to give their support to that proposal. 
157. His delegation could support the Agency's Programme and Budget for 1989 
and 1990 (document GC(XXXII)/837), which provided the necessary funding for 
all those scientific and technical programmes which were of benefit to its 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 45 


Member States. In particular, the Soviet Union attached importance to such 
programmes as nuclear power, the nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear safety and 
radiation protection, safeguards, and the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS). It also supported the Agency's activities in the field of 
controlled thermonuclear fusion, including the ITER project. 


158. His country also attached importance to the promotion of technical 
co-operation with developing countries, and hence supported an expansion in 
the Agency's role in the transfer of technology to such countries to help them 
develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The steady growth of the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund was proof that the system of 
voluntary contributions to that Fund had been a success, and his delegation 
considered that that system should be maintained. He was glad to be able to 
announce an increase in his country's own contribution to the Fund of a sum 
equivalent to $4 237 800 in 1989. It was intended that such contributions 
should be used to help supply developing countries which were Members of the 
Agency and which were also parties to NPT with equipment and materials for 
research purposes, as well as to finance training programmes being carried out 
in the Soviet Union. His delegation wished to express its satisfaction at the 
work being carried out by the Agency's Division of Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation, and to assure the Director General that in matters relating to 
its own voluntary contributions, he could rely on the Soviet Union's 
understanding. 
159. The rapid advance of social and technological progress in the 
Soviet Union called for a corresponding expansion in energy supply, and in 
that area nuclear power was playing an ever-increasing role. There were 
currently some 50 power reactors in operation in the Soviet Union, with a 
total capacity of 35 million kilowatts; in 1987, those reactors had generated 
187 billion kilowatt-hours of electricty out of the total of 1665 billion 
kilowatt-hours, achieving an average capacity factor of 70%. 
160. The serious accident at Chernobyl, although it had raised a number of 
issues concerning the safe operation of nuclear power stations, had not 
altered the fundamental position of the Soviet Union in regard to the use of 
nuclear power. Much had now been done to ensure reliable stopping of the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 46 


nuclear chain reaction, to diagnose the state of the reactor, and to improve 
the design and coolant systems of such reactors. Under normal operating 
conditions nuclear power plants had little or no effect on the environment, 
and they were thus one of the most acceptable sources of power. 


161. Improvements in the training of personnel were also of the utmost 
importance if safe operation was to be guaranteed. At Chernobyl itself, all 
operating personnel had been subjected to retraining, and work with simulators 
was being increased in order further to improve their qualifications. Such 
personnel were now also being given psychological tests. In addition, 
training of personnel in the operation of WWER power units was being upgraded 
in the Training Centre at the Novovoronezh power plant, and advanced training 
in the operation of RBMK reactors was being given in the Training Centre at 
the Smolensk power plant. In all, 2000 nuclear power workers would be 
undergoing special training in the course of the year. 
162. As a result of those measures, RBMK reactors were now just as safe to 
operate as other types of reactor used in the nuclear power industries of 
other countries. Further development in Soviet nuclear power would see an 
increase in the use of WWER1000 -MW power units. 
163. Research and development institutions in the Soviet Union were now in 
the process of developing new power units, with enhanced safety, for power and 
heat generation. That development encompassed the whole cycle from siting and 
design to construction and operation. The goal was to ensure the safe and 
uninterrupted development of nuclear power as one of the most reliable and 
economically sound sources of energy. 
164. His delegation was concerned at the difficult financial situation of 
the Agency caused by delays in the payment of contributions by a number of 
Member States. Lack of resources would have a negative impact on activities 
which were of importance to all countries, notably the Agency's regulatory 
functions. He urged that all Member States should comply strictly with their 
statutory obligations, and should make good their arrears of contributions in 
the near future. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 47 


165. His delegation joined with others in approving the Agency's Annual 
Report for 1987. He was sure that in the future the Agency would continue to 
be a reliable instrument for promoting the development of international 
co-operation, both in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in ensuring the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
166. Mr. ITO (Japan) said that his country, which was poor in energy 
resources, had designated nuclear power as a key energy source, and was 
actively promoting research into nuclear energy as well as its development and 
utilization. 
167. Japan had at present 36 nuclear power reactors, which supplied 
approximately 30% of the total electricity generated in the country. In 
June 1988 Japan's Atomic Energy Commission had launched a new long-term 
programme for the development and utilization of nuclear energy, designed to 
improve levels of safety, reliability and economy, and to establish the 
nuclear fuel cycle by promoting uranium enrichment, spent fuel reprocessing, 
and development of the fast-breeder reactor and radioactive waste management. 
It also intended to promote research and development in more creative and 
innovative areas at the leading edge of nuclear technology. The new agreement 
between Japan and the United States in the field of nuclear energy, which had 
entered into force in July 1988, would be a notable contribution to that 
effort. 
168. Japan would shortly be acceding to the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material. It hoped that the existing system of 
international co-operation for physical protection would be further enhanced 
through the accession of more countries to that Convention. 
169. Research and development into nuclear fusion was important not only 
because it offered mankind the possibility of a lasting energy source, but 
also because it involved many areas of advanced technology. His country 
intended to participate actively in the joint conceptual design activities 
under the ITER project initiated by the Agency. 
170. As a country well advanced in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
Japan was ready to accept its share of responsibilities in regard to 
international co-operation. Together with other advanced countries, it was 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 48 


prepared actively to promote a number of international activities, taking into 
account the need to ensure non-proliferation, as well as the need to meet the 


individual requirements of each country. It would aim to expand bilateral or 
neighbourly co-operation, while also enhancing multilateral co-operation 
through such international bodies as the IAEA and the OECD/NEA. In 
particular, it was prepared actively to promote co-operation with developing 
countries in the field of nuclear energy. 


171. The Agency had played a central role in international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and great progress had been made during 
the past year. In the area of nuclear safety, for example, INSAG had issued a 
set of new basic safety principles for nuclear power plants; extensive work 
had been carried out on the amendment of the nuclear safety standards; and 
work was advancing steadily on the implementation of the two Conventions on 
Early Notification and on Emergency Assistance. Those achievements were 
highly appreciated by his country. 
172. For its part, Japan had co-operated actively with the Agency in the 
safety field. In February, an International Conference on the Man-Machine 
Interface in the Nuclear Industry had been held in Tokyo, and in October Japan 
would be receiving an OSART mission from the Agency. Japan intended to make 
an active contribution to the Agency's activities in the field of nuclear 
safety. 
173. The guaranteeing of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was no less 
important than the guaranteeing of nuclear safety. The year 1988 marked the 
twentieth anniversary of the signing of NPT. It was a matter of pride that 
over the past 20 years the number of parties to NPT had gradually increased, 
and he hoped that further accessions would expand and strengthen the 
universality of the NPT regime. 
174. The Agency's safeguards system had played an important role in ensuring 
effective nuclear non-proliferation. That system had hitherto functioned 
effectively, in that no diversion for purposes of nuclear proliferation had 
been discovered. On the other hand, a more efficient implementation of 
safeguards, involving the introduction of new technical methods, was needed in 
order to respond to the increase and diversification of nuclear facilities 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 49 


under safeguards. He hoped that discussions to that end would make good 
progress in such forums as SAGSI. He congratulated the Agency on the 
Safeguards Seminar held the previous day, and said Japan intended to 
co-operate positively in that effort by such concrete contributions as the 
Japan Support Programme for Agency Safeguards (JASPAS). 


175. The Agency's technical co-operation activities had been crucial in 
disseminating nuclear technology in developing countries. In addition to its 
contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, Japan was 
prepared to make a further contribution in terms of manpower resources for 
technical activities. As for the proposed expansion of the Fund, he hoped 
that careful consideration would be given to the importance of technical 
co-operation on the one hand, and to the financial capability of each 
Member State on the other. 
176. The RCA was one of the most successful examples of regional 
co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. His country intended to 
co-operate as fully as possible in meeting the needs of the region. 
177. There were now more than 400 nuclear power reactors in operation 
throughout the world, indicating that there had been a steady increase in 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It could be said that that increase, 
combined with efforts to conserve energy, had not only ensured a stable energy 
supply in the countries concerned but had also, when accompanied by restricted 
oil consumption, helped stabilize demand for oil and thus for energy in 
general throughout the world. 
178. In order to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy it was vital to 
obtain the understanding and co-operation of the public. Now that the safety 
and benefits of nuclear power had attracted attention throughout the world, it 
was important for the Agency to respond by bringing the peaceful uses of that 
power to public notice. At the same time, co-operation at the international 
level should be strengthened by, for example, the exchange of information 
between countries. He hoped that by such means, public understanding of the 
need for nuclear power would be increased, and Japan would be ready to 
co-operate to the full to that end. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.303 
page 50 


179. The efficiency and soundness of the Agency's administration was well 
known, and he paid tribute to the efforts of the Director General and his 
staff in that regard; it was imperative that Member States should support 
those efforts. He hoped that a satisfactory solution for improving the 
Agency's financial liquidity could be found with the understanding and 
co-operation of Member States. 
180. In conclusion, he was pleased to note that the Agency had so far 
successfully fulfilled its role of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy while also contributing to nuclear non-proliferation. Japan would 
spare no efforts in contributing positively to the Agency's work. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
23 November 1988 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 19 September 1988, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 


General debate and annual report 
for 1987 (continued) 1 - 157 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Pakistan 1 -11 
Argentina 12 -25 
Federal Republic of Germany 26 -42 
United Kingdom of Great Britain 


and Northern Ireland 43 -62 
France 63 -82 
Hungary 83 -95 
Chile 96 -108 
Czechoslovakia 109 -119 
German Democratic Republic 120 -129 
Bulgaria 130 -143 
Nigeria 144 -15 7 


[*] GC(XXXII)/834 and Add.1. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXII)/INF/262/Rev.2. 


88-04722 (4025e/487e) 



GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1987 (GC(XXXlI)/835) (continued) 


1. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that the thirty-second session of the 
General Conference was meeting at a time when the international climate was 
relatively favourable. Progress had been made towards the solution of 
regional conflicts (the Geneva accord on Afganistan and the ceasefire between 
Iran and Iraq) and towards the first concrete measures to reduce nuclear 
weapons (the INF Treaty). Pakistan had always strongly advocated the 
abolition of all weapons of mass destruction and hoped that Treaty would pave 
the way for other practical measures such as a complete nuclear-test-ban 
treaty and the subsequent reduction and elimination of nuclear weapons. 
2. In that connection, the sponsors of NPT, which enjoyed special 
privileges under the Treaty, should honour their obligations and pursue 
negotiations in good faith towards nuclear disarmament. Otherwise, they would 
lose the credibility necessary to persuade other States to forego nuclear 
weapons. 
3. Pakistan was committed to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and was 
opposed to the manufacture or acquisition of nuclear weapons. The proposal 
made in 1975 regarding the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
South Asia had received overwhelming support from the United Nations General 
Assembly. Pakistan had also made an offer whereby it and its neighbours would 
simultaneously sign NPT or accept full-scope safeguards or any other 
non-discriminatory measures aimed at preventing the entry of nuclear weapons 
into the region. There had been no positive response to those proposals, and 
the introduction of nuclear submarines into the area represented the start of 
a nuclear escalation. South Asia, which made up a fifth of the world's 
population, was too poor and underdeveloped to expend its limited economic 
resources on nuclear weapons. 
4. With regard to nuclear safety, Pakistan had decided to sign the 
Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency and the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident. 
Every effort should be made to keep the nuclear power option open, since it 
constituted the most economical and environmentally safe solution to the 
energy problems of the world, and especially of Third World countries. 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.304 
page 3 


General Conference resolution GC(XXXl)/RES/474 urged supplier States to share 
safety-related information with recipient States. His country hoped that 
supplier States would co-operate and that the Agency would take steps to speed 
up the implementation of that resolution. 


5. His delegation congratulated the Secretariat on having organized an 
information meeting on safeguards for the media the previous Sunday. Pakistan 
appreciated the positive and constructive role played by the Agency's 
safeguards system, to which it would continue to give its fullest support. 
There should, however, be a balance between the Agency's safeguards and 
technical co-operation activities, and it was regrettable that that was no 
longer the case: since 1970, growth in the technical co-operation programme 
had been less than one third of that of the safeguards programme. While the 
higher overall level of voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund (TACF) was welcome, Pakistan was unhappy to see that a 
growing number of Member States had not fulfilled their pledges; technical 
assistance should be financed from resources that were as assured and 
predictable as those for safeguards. 
6. With respect to the Agency's programme and budget, Pakistan strongly 
opposed zero growth for promotional activities and regretted the fact that 
allocations for such important areas as nuclear power and agricultural, 
medical and industrial applications of nuclear energy had decreased. That did 
not correspond to the needs of developing countries, whose nuclear power 
programmes were expanding rapidly. 
7. Over the past few years, Pakistan and a large number of other 
Member States had requested that the imbalance in the representation of 
Member States on the Board be corrected by increasing the number of seats 
allocated to Africa and to the Middle East and South Asia. As the General 
Conference had accepted the principle of a modest increase in the 
representation of those two regions on the Board, that gross underrepresentation 
should be rectified as soon as possible. 
8. The Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) had been meeting for the 
past eight years without making progress. That raised questions about the 
real intentions of major supplier States, whose monopoly was being eroded, 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 4 


with the passage of time, by advances in technology and the emergence of new 
supplier States, which had hitherto been recipients. Pakistan associated 


itself with those Member States which wanted the Board to discontinue CAS if 
the latter was unable to report any progress to the next session of the 
General Conference. 


9. Pakistan had continued to make progress in its peaceful nuclear energy 
programme in 1987. It had successfully carried out activities in various 
areas: the manufacture of power reactor fuel bundles, research and 
development work on the production of reactor-grade zirconium, and the 
strengthening of the national infrastructure for the design and construction 
of nuclear power plants. In the area of mutation breeding, several crop 
varieties had been developed, one of which had permitted Pakistan to become 
the world's third largest cotton-exporting country. Pakistan's nuclear 
medicine centres treated more than 150 000 patients a year, and that sector 
was prepared to share its experience with other countries. His country wished 
to thank the Agency and those countries that had helped with the 
implementation of its programme. 
10. Developing countries continued to be under-represented on the Agency's 
staff. While his delegation appreciated the efforts made by the Director 
General to improve the situation, there was a long way to go before 
resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 was implemented. That resolution, adopted by the 
General Conference in 1981, requested the Director General to take "immediate 
steps to increase substantially the number of staff members drawn from 
developing areas at all levels, and particularly at the senior and 
policy-making levels, and to make maximum efforts to rectify the existing 
imbalance over the course of the next four years". Pakistan hoped that the 
Director General would make a more vigorous effort to implement that 
resolution. 
11. Finally, his country supported the work of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics (ICTP), which was headed by the Nobel laureate, 
Professor Abdus Salam. The Agency should continue to support the Centre and 
to co-operate with the Italian Government, as well as with other international 
organizations, to enable the Centre to expand its activities in the most 
effective way possible. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 . 
page 5 


12. Ms. PEREZ FERREIRA (Argentina), presenting her country's nuclear 
programme to the General Conference, said that, even after the Chernobyl 
accident, her Government had never faltered in its belief that nuclear power 
was the source of energy of the future, and of the twenty-first century. 
Argentina had plans to introduce an additional 700 MW of nuclear generating 
capacity during the next decade. Furthermore, in 1987 nuclear power in 
Argentina had maintained its share of electricity production relative to other 
sources of energy, supplying 13.44% of all electricity, even though it had 
been necessary to carry out major maintenance work at one of the country's two 
operational power plants. 
13. Her country's nuclear power programme would, however, be slowed down by 
the country's economic situation. Among other things, her Government foresaw 
a delay in connecting the Atucha II nuclear power plant to the national grid. 
14. Nevertheless, Argentina would continue to produce basic materials for 
its power reactors and planned to consolidate its mastery of the nuclear fuel 
cycle - for example, a pilot plant for heavy water production, of exclusively 
national design, technology and construction, would be inaugurated by the end 
of the year. Since the previous session of the General Conference, Argentina 
had been actively engaged in international co-operation in the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy, on both a multilateral and bilateral level. 
15. On the multilateral level, in spite of its economic difficulties 
Argentina ranked fifth among countries providing experts for the Agency and as 
a host country for Agency fellowships, scientific visits and training 
courses. In co-operation with the Agency, her country had continued to hold 
numerous courses, some within the framework of the Regional Co-operative 
Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin 
America (ARCAL). Argentina reaffirmed its full support for ARCAL, the success 
of which was evident from the number and total amount of contributions from 
countries outside Latin America. Finally, the eleventh meeting of the 
multi-national programme on reduced enrichment for test and research reactors 
had taken place in Argentina, the only developing country participating in 
that programme. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 6 


16. Bilateral co-operation was continuing under 19 agreements entered into 
with, among others, Algeria, the Federal Republic of Germany, Brazil, Canada, 
Cuba, Chile, France, India, Iran, Peru, Uruguay and, most recently, Turkey. 
She wished in that connection to announce the opening, before the end of 1988, 
of the Peruvian nuclear research centre, which Argentina had helped design and 
construct and which was an example of horizontal co-operation between 
developing countries. 
17. Her country was also co-operating with Brazil in a joint project to 
develop fast breeder technology, the aim being to construct, towards the end 
of the first decade of the next century, a demonstration reactor in one of the 
two countries. Brazil and Argentina requested that those responsible for the 
joint project be allowed to participate as observers in the programme of the 
Agency's International Working Group on Fast Reactors. 
18. Those few examples demonstrated how necessary it was to make the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy available to all countries. Her 
Government rejected the argument that nuclear development should be restricted 
so as to prevent horizontal proliferation, since that argument was used simply 
to conceal aspirations to commercial supremacy. 
19. Argentina supported the Agency's safeguards system, but insisted that 
it be applied in a manner which fully respected the provisions of the 
Statute. Her country was opposed to any attempt to impose that system on a 
State against its sovereign will, for whatever reason. 
20. Turning to the work done by the Agency since the previous session of 
the General Conference, she expressed her satisfaction with the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities during that period. 
21. It was also gratifying to note that, as in previous years, the Agency 
was able to state that no Member State had diverted any safeguarded material 
for the production of nuclear weapons, if the regrettable exception of 
voluntary offer agreements with nuclear-weapon States were excluded. 
22. Her delegation stressed the necessity, which the Governor from 
Argentina had referred to in the Board of Governors the previous June, of 
re-evaluating the inspection effort needed to ensure the continuing 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.304 
page 7 


reliability of the safeguards system: that would involve reconsidering all 
the parameters adopted - some a long time previously - and, in particular, the 
approaches and goals adopted for the application of safeguards to different 
types of installation and material. In view of the budgetary restrictions 
imposed by the world economic situation, that was the only way of improving 
the quality of inspection activities and thus of maintaining the reliability 
of the safeguards system. 


23. With regard to the Agency's activities in the area of radiological 
protection and nuclear safety, Argentina expressed its satisfaction with the 
work done and reaffirmed its support for those efforts. At the same time, it 
rejected any attempt to impose binding international standards in that area; 
the adherence of a State to an international standard must remain a sovereign 
decision. 
24. Promotional programmes must not be sacrificed on the altar of the zero 
growth policy. In the safeguards area, savings could be made at installations 
which were not important from the point of view of proliferation, particularly 
civil installations in nuclear-weapon States. 
25. Her Government wished to commend the Director General and the 
Secretariat for the successes achieved in the past year and to reiterate its 
willingness to support the Agency in its efforts and to participate actively 
in all its work. 
26. Mr. ZILLER (Federal Republic of Germany) said that, although 
nuclear power had recently reached a critical stage in its development, there 
were reasonable prospects for a new start. 
27. A number of contradictions had emerged with regard to nuclear power: 
the Chernobyl accident had prompted a debate on the risks of nuclear power, 
yet there was an increasing body of knowledge concerning the dangers inherent 
in the combustion of oil and coal; the Agency continued to suffer financial 
problems despite the fact that the majority of Member States recognized that 
its work was indispensable; a feeling of relief had greeted the reduction in 
the nuclear-weapons capacity of the Superpowers, but there was renewed concern 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 8 


regarding the proliferation risks presented by the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. His country was concerned about non-peaceful nuclear options and 
hoped that additional States would accede to NPT or the Tlatelolco Treaty. 


28. In the light of those contradictions, it was fair to say that, although 
it involved many uncertainties, the current situation also held much promise. 
The only option open to the Agency and its Member States was to continue to 
exploit the enormous potential of nuclear energy. Continuing its present 
policy in that area, his country would do everything in its power to help the 
Agency attain that objective. 
29. Nuclear power had continued to expand, and now accounted for more than 
16% of the world's electricity production. In the Federal Republic of 
Germany, 38% of the public energy supply in the first six months of 1988 had 
been generated by nuclear plants. 
30. His Government considered nuclear energy to be indispensable, both for 
ecological and economic reasons. Scientists had stated that carbon dioxide 
produced by the combustion of fossil fuels was contributing to global warming 
and that, since it could not be assessed, the impact of the greenhouse effect 
on human life was cause for anxiety. Furthermore, nuclear power seemed to be 
a necessity in a world with a growing population but limited fossil energy 
resources. 
31. His Government actively supported the development of renewable energy 
sources, provided they were technically viable, economically reasonable and 
socially acceptable. Nevertheless, by the year 2000 such sources would at 
best account only for a small percentage of electricity production, mainly 
because they were necessarily decentralized and uncertain in character. They 
could therefore be no substitute for nuclear energy, which remained one of the 
main pillars of sustainable development in the world. 
32. Although his country could not do without nuclear power and although it 
maintained high safety standards, it had been the scene of a debate on nuclear 
energy prompted by an alleged violation of NPT. It had been suspected that 
fissile materials had been illegally exported from the Federal Republic of 
Germany to other States, and that had cast doubt on the effectiveness of 
Agency and EURATOM safeguards. 

GC(XXXI1)/0R.304 
page 9 


33. Those suspicions, which had been completely unfounded, had quickly been 
dispelled thanks to the speedy and effective action taken by the Agency and 
EURATOM, which his country wished to thank once again. The complexity of the 
safeguards system and the difficulty of measuring its effectiveness exactly 
were such that emotions or deliberate misinformation sometimes obstructed a 
rational approach to that subject. His country hoped that the Bundestag 
commission of enquiry would help to make the debate more objective. 
34. He noted with satisfaction that in 198 7, as in previous years, the 
Agency had not detected any diversion or misuse of nuclear material under 
safeguards. His Government fully supported that conclusion because it had 
confidence in the Agency's competence and political judgement. 
35. The debate in his country had shown that it was necessary to improve 
the safeguards system further in order to optimize the use of dwindling human 
and financial resources and, if possible, to obtain even more reliable 
results. In that connection, the Federal Republic would continue, under its 
safeguards support programme, to provide cost-free experts, to develop 
safeguards approaches and to demonstrate their feasibility under real 
operating conditions. 
36. In order to maintain the credibility of safeguards, it was essential 
for apparent contradictions, which could only be understood by a small number 
of experts, to be avoided in reports on the application of safeguards. Above 
all, it was necessary to define realistic safeguards goals which could be 
attained, even for complex plants, in the course of normal operation and with 
a reasonable volume of inspection work. 
37. The conclusion of a safeguards agreement between the Agency and the 
People's Republic of China was to be welcomed. All nuclear-weapon States had 
now submitted some of their installations to Agency safeguards through 
voluntary offer agreements. That was an important confidence-building 
measure, and his delegation called on all nuclear-weapon States to place an 
even greater number of high technology installations under safeguards. It 
also urged all non-nuclear-weapon States to submit all their nuclear 
activities to Agency safeguards, as the Federal Republic of Germany had done. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 10 


38. Nuclear safety remained an important area of the Agency's activity. 
The speedy and smooth functioning of international co-operation in the field 
of nuclear energy had been demonstrated following the radiological accident in 
Brazil the previous year. His Government had helped alleviate the 
consequences of the accident by sending experts and equipment. It was against 
that background that his Government appealed to all Member States to sign the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. 
39. His delegation hoped that an equally close network could be set up in 
the area of nuclear liability. It was a great achievement that a conference 
for signing a Joint Protocol linking the Paris and Vienna Conventions could 
now be held. His delegation would sign the Joint Protocol and called on all 
parties to the two liability conventions to do the same. It would be very 
desirable for more States to accede to one or other of the two conventions and 
for attempts to continue to be made to determine realistic amounts for 
liability limits; in fact, nuclear liability provisions should be commensurate 
with the actual amounts required to compensate for damage. 
40. Concluding his comments on safety, he expressed his appreciation of the 
revised NUSS Codes and the hope that all Member States concerned would use 
those codes as a basis for their national legislation. The third operational 
safety review team (OSART) mission had been successfully carried out in the 
past year in the Federal Republic of Germany. The great demand for those 
missions was proof of the confidence Member States had in the Agency's 
expertise. 
41. His country attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
assistance activities. It commended the Secretariat on its work under that 
programme, which it would like to see implemented in an even more efficient 
manner. His country fully supported the Agency's technical assistance 
programmes, and had for a number of years been among those States which had 
made the largest extrabudgetary contributions. The previous year, it had 
again supported the technical co-operation programme by providing experts as 
well as funds for fellowships, equipment, training programmes and scientific 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 11 


meetings, partly within the framework of footnote-a/ projects. Subject to 
parliamentary approval, his Government pledged to contribute its share to TACF 
for 1989 and to make available additional extrabudgetary funds. 


42. Returning to the financial crisis, he recalled that there was a 
contradiction between Member States' statements concerning the indispensable 
nature of the Agency's work and their attitude to the payment of their 
contributions. The laudable efforts made by the Secretariat to mitigate the 
consequences of that problem would not eliminate its causes. The situation 
was becoming ever more critical and, while a scarcity of resources might have 
a certain stimulating effect, a shortage of funds might result in a paralysis 
which would prevent the Agency from carrying out its most important tasks - to 
the detriment of all, including those States which were the slowest in paying 
their contributions. His delegation therefore appealed to the goodwill and 
sense of responsibility of all the Agency's Member States in that matter. 
43. Mr. MORPHET (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) 
said that the Agency's Annual Report for 1987 recorded in considerable detail 
the valuable services which the Agency provided, without which confidence in 
the orderly development of civil nuclear power would be severely weakened. 
The importance of the Agency's task in that sensitive area could scarcely be 
exaggerated. The need for a truly comprehensive international system 
continued to be vital; the Agency had a dynamic task in that respect, which it 
had carried out creditably during the year under consideration. 
44. The report drew attention to the long commitment of his country, 
amongst others, to the development of civil nuclear power, which was 
demonstrated by the energy options it had selected over the past 30 years. 
Notwithstanding his country's wealth in fossil fuels, his Government was 
determined to diversify the sources of electricity generation and to continue 
the modernization of its nuclear generating capacity. The construction of the 
plant at Sizewell was ahead of schedule, the planning inquiry for a second PWR 
at Hinkley was to open the following month and a third PWR at Wylfa was being 
planned. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 12 


45. Moreover, plans for the privatization of the United Kingdom's 
electricity supply industry had taken shape. The total production capacity 
was to be divided between two competing companies. Under the legislation 
which was being prepared for that purpose a specified proportion of the 
electricity produced had to be generated from non-fossil fuel so as to ensure 
the future of nuclear power and renewable sources of energy. The precise 
proportions were still under consideration; however, the figure for the 
year 2000 would not be below the present level of existing or committed 
nuclear and renewable generating capacity. 
46. Continued development of nuclear power carried with it the need for 
supporting research and development work on the safe and economic exploitation 
of reactor systems, together with their associated fuel cycles, including 
waste management. Particular attention was being paid in the United Kingdom 
programme to: the man-machine interface; accident management strategies; 
monitoring and controlling the exposure of workers and the public to radiation 
from nuclear plants; radioactive waste management, nuclear materials 
management, including decontamination and decommissioning; and safeguards. 
The research activities undertaken in his country were of special interest not 
only in terms of safety and economic benefits but also because they were 
important for public acceptance of nuclear power. 
47. The United Kingdom recognized the particular importance of the last 
point; there should be a combination of openness and an active campaign of 
public information. The Sizewell inquiry report proposed that guidelines, 
based on public opinion, should be formulated and published on the tolerable 
levels of individual and social risk from nuclear power stations. The Health 
and Safety Executive had recently published a document on tolerability of risk 
from such stations. It showed how the matter was regulated in the 
United Kingdom and explained to the public the nature of the risk from 
radiation and how that risk was calculated when deciding to license nuclear 
installations. It also outlined the important factors which were taken into 
consideration in evaluating industrial risks. The public had been invited to 
comment and those comments would be published. The foregoing illustrated the 
fact that in his country experts alone were not the final judge and that 
society as a whole took decisions in matters which concerned it, including the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 13 


tolerability of risk. Given the world's mutual interdependence in nuclear 
matters, the subject deserved to be discussed at the international as well as 


the national level. 


48. It was unfortunate that much of the debate on nuclear power was based 
on ignorance or misunderstanding. It was therefore important that society 
should be as well informed as possible, particularly about radioactivity. If 
the public were more aware of the relatively high levels of natural radiation 
to which everyone was exposed, they would realize that a very small 
contribution was made to that radiation by the nuclear industry. 
49. The effects on human health of low- level radiation were a source of 
growing public concern, which his country did not underestimate. In the 
United Kingdom there had been particular emphasis on apparent clusters of 
leukaemias around nuclear installations. Various studies carried out over the 
preceding five years had looked at areas around nuclear plants rather than at 
the wider distribution of the disease. Those studies had been inconclusive 
thus far, although it was clear that the levels of radiation associated with 
those plants where excesses of the disease had been found could not, in the 
present state of knowledge, have caused the abnormally high incidence. 
50. Laboratories in the United Kingdom were continuing research on the 
causes of leukaemia and the effects of low-level radiation. Meanwhile, the 
nuclear industry was being encouraged to familiarize people with its 
activities and with the general concept of nuclear power. The Atomic Energy 
Authority was particularly active in getting information across (educational 
programmes including publications, videos and visits). 
51. Amongst the major factors affecting public acceptance in all countries 
was the question of ultimate disposal of nuclear waste. In the United 
Kingdom, in particular, there was concern about the progress of new waste 
disposal facilities. A decisive step forward had been taken in November 1987 
with the opening of public discussion on the proposed solutions. The three 
technological solutions considered (deep burial under land, deep burial 
beneath the seabed with access from a coastal land base and deep burial 
beneath the seabed with access from an offshore structure) had been explained, 
together with the geological and hydrological data. Many comments had been 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 14 


received on the appropriateness of the technologies suggested and on the 
importance of the various factors which had to be considered in selecting 
sites. All those comments were being evaluated, and recommendations were 
shortly to be submitted to the Government. 


52. Another question of increasing concern was the decommissioning of 
nuclear plants. In that matter, too, the public needed to be shown that 
responsible policies were being pursued. In the United Kingdom, 
decommissioning of nuclear stations would be carried out in three stages: 
first, complete removal of fuel, which could take up to five years; second, 
removal of ancillary equipment, which could take up to another ten years; as 
for the last phase, the timescale was not precise, but it was envisaged that 
50-100 years would be needed to allow radioactivity to decay to the point 
where final demolition could be carried out. Incidentally, it was perhaps not 
too fanciful to suppose that there might be some pressure to preserve the 
occasional structure for posterity! 
53. Safety assessment of ageing plants had attracted much attention in 
recent years. In his country, reviews of long-term safety were carried out by 
operators after about 20 years of operation. The competent authority examined 
the results of those reviews and indicated to the operator what improvements 
and other safety validation work were required if operation was to continue 
for some further years. The details of the review were published, together 
with the regulatory body's recommendations and the timescale of the measures 
to be implemented, if the plant was to continue in operation. The operator 
then had to take an economic decision whether to make those improvements and 
continue operation, or to close the station. An operator had recently decided 
in favour of making the investment required for operation to continue at the 
Bradwell plant, which had been operating since 1962. In another case, the 
operator had decided against doing so. Subject to careful continuing 
assessment, there was no reason for decommissioning older power stations which 
were operating safely and effectively. In that conection, he pointed out that 
the Agency had been invited to send an operational safety review team (OSART) 
to a plant whch had begun operation in 196 7. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 15 


54. His Government was determined that in its plans to privatize the 
electricity supply industry the safety of nuclear power stations should remain 
paramount. A sound regulatory regime was the best guarantor of safety, and 
regulatory and safety standards would be enforced just as vigorously in the 
future as they were at present. 
55. The United Kingdom had emphasized the benefits to be secured through 
greater international contact between regulatory authorities at the special 
session of the General Conference in 1986, and had advocated a three-stage 
approach. The first stage was the updating of the Agency's database on 
regulatory practices in Member States; in that connection, his country had 
been glad to assist in the formulation of a questionnaire and in analysing the 
resulting information. The second stage was the establishment of a continuing 
programme to exchange views on best practices, and in that regard he welcomed 
the conference to be held in Munich in November of the current year. The 
third stage would be peer review of regulatory procedures with possible 
co-ordination by the Agency. 
56. His country attached considerable importance to the safety activities 
of the Agency. During the preceding year the United Kingdom's Chief Inspector 
of Nuclear Installations had acted as Chairman of the NUSS Advisory Group 
charged with revising the NUSS Codes to bring them into line with the latest 
thinking. His country had also made a major contribution to the work of the 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) and in particular to the 
development of basic safety principles. It would continue to offer assistance 
in that valuable work. 
57. He welcomed the progress made by the Agency in widening the coverage of 
the third-party liability conventions; his Government would be signing the 
Joint Protocol on 21 September. 
58. The application of an effective system of safeguards was a corner-stone 
of public acceptance of the nuclear industry and of nuclear co-operation. 
Nuclear technology continued to move forward. It was important that 
safeguards techniques should keep pace with those developments. New 
technologies - in enrichment and reprocessing, for example - required new 

GC(XXXII)/0R.304 
page 16 


safeguards approaches. The United Kingdom wished to ensure the development of 
effective safeguarding arrangements for large-scale commercial reprocessing 
plants, and a large part of its safeguards research and development support 
programme was therefore devoted to assisting the Agency to develop appropriate 
techniques in that area. It would participate fully in an exercise to 
identify the range of safeguards methods which could be applied to such 
reprocessing plants. The hexapartite safeguards project, which had resulted 
in internationally acceptable safeguards approaches for enrichment plants, 
provided an encouraging example of what could be done. He hoped that the 
discussions on reprocessing plants would have equally satisfactory results. 


59. The United Kingdom would continue to play an active part in other areas 
of safeguards. Its safeguards support programme included the testing of seals 
and the development of measurement methods, where work was concentrating on 
the use of in-line measurement systems rather than the conventional sampling 
approach. The provision of cost-free experts, reference material and training 
courses also featured in the programme. A course on reprocessing plants and 
the techniques available to safeguard them would be offered the following 
year. His country would continue to offer its support and to assist the 
Agency in keeping abreast of new developments. 
60. The public must be assured that nuclear material was not being diverted 
from peaceful to military uses. The resources needed to back up that 
assurance were not unlimited. The record of the Deputy Director General for 
Safeguards and his staff was one of achievement, and they were to be commended 
on the positive and innovative approach they had shown in developing the 
implementation of safeguards and in continuing their search for efficiency 
gains. There had been some encouraging increases in inspection goal 
attainment, while the development of more sophisticated equipment and methods 
and the flexible approach of safeguards inspection teams should lead to 
further improvements. 
61. Having consistently supported the Agency's technical assistance 
activities by pledging and paying in full its contribution to TACF, the 
United Kingdom had again pledged its contribution to that Fund for 1989. 
It had likewise continued to make an extrabudgetary contribution to 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 17 


footnote-a/ projects and had funded a number of fellowships in its 
institutions. In the current year it had also underlined its support for the 
work of the Department of Technical Co-operation by funding two project 
management courses. He commended the constructive approach of all 
Member States in reaching agreement on indicative planning figures for the 
years 1990-92. 


62. While the need for Member States to work closely with the Agency would 
be greater than ever in the years ahead, resources were limited. The Director 
General and his staff were fully aware of the importance of improving 
efficiency and cost-effectiveness, and his delegation was looking forward to 
the results of the studies currently under way. The United Kingdom wished to 
assure the Director General and his staff of its full support in their 
demanding work, and to congratulate them on their achievement during the 
preceding year. 
63. Mr. CAPRON (France) recalled that the previous session of the 
General Conference had marked the 30th anniversary of the Agency. It was 
largely the preparations for the future that his present statement would deal 
with. Everything was making societies discard short-term policies and that 
was particularly true in the energy field. Everything was inducing them to 
take account of the realities of tomorrow in making their choices for today. 
And it was first and foremost the demographic outlook that was encouraging 
that approach. 
64. The world's population, which had doubled to 5000 million in only 
20 years, would have doubled again by the middle of the following century 
unless there was a serious epidemic or a generalized conflict. Mankind was 
thus going through a period of unprecedented population growth. 
65. The population of the industrialized parts of the world, which at 
present consumed three quarters of the world's primary energy, would remain 
stable. It was the least developed regions which would be affected by that 
growth. Such energy savings as were still possible in the industrialized 
countries would certainly not compensate for the growth of demand in 
developing countries. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 18 


66. The energy resources were abundant but not inexhaustible. The next 
energy crisis might well be a consequence of failing to make plans 
sufficiently well in advance. It was important, therefore, to emphasize the 
need for energy policies based on a long-term view. That was true of oil and 
coal, but also of nuclear energy. Mankind simply could not afford to deny 
itself the use of all available sources of energy. 
67. What was true for all countries of the world applied all the more to 
those where population growth was the highest. All leaders had to make their 
choice and to assume their responsibilities in the energy sphere. For lack of 
adequate manpower, financial resources and technological capacity, their 
options might be limited only to immediately available means of production. 
It was thus imperative to broaden their options by making nuclear power 
accessible to them under conditions which were acceptable to all. It was one 
of the tasks of the Agency to contribute to that process. 


68. There was another reason for basing energy policies on a long-term 
view. The present generation had a responsibility to ensure that its 
descendants had access to abundant, reliable and cheap energy; it also had 
the duty to bequeath a wholesome environment to future generations. 
69. To his mind, the cause of nuclear power should be pleaded on the basis 
of long-term arguments: protection of the environment should provide one of 
the main justifications and might in the future constitute the main argument 
for nuclear power. Even today, atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, 
sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide were one of the major concerns not only of 
specialists but of the population at large. Given the risks involved, could 
further substantial increases in those concentrations be contemplated? 
70. It was not enough to produce electricity, and energy in general, in 
sufficient quantities at reasonable cost. It was essential in addition to 
ensure that the growth of energy production did not imperil the natural 
environment and the health of the world's people. And yet, it was a fact 
that, where both national policy and international guidelines were concerned, 
tolerance levels were today far less demanding - from the standpoint of the 
environment and human health - for conventional power plants than for nuclear 

GC(XXXI1)/0R.304 
page 19 


power plants. That was demonstrated by the simple fact that the various 
national standards for sulphur dioxide were at present 100 times higher than 
the average natural concentration of that substance, whereas for radioactivity 
they were barely above the natural level. 


71. That imbalance endangered efforts to reduce atmospheric pollution. 
Since Chernobyl everybody knew that the consequences of nuclear accidents had 
no frontiers. But what the public was less aware of was that conventional 
power plants in normal operation, especially when they were not equipped with 
desulphurizing devices, also had atmospheric effects which went beyond 
national frontiers - and lasted a long time, too. In that area as in others 
the Agency had an essential role to play - to establish, and where necessary 
re-establish, the truth. In that connection, his delegation had noted with 
the greatest interest the arguments advanced in July, in a speech at Sopron, 
by the Director General on the subject of "Electricity and the Environment". 
Those arguments were clear, precise and very much to the point. 
72. Quite apart from its own convictions, his delegation noted that an 
increasing number of persons from different fields, who had in common only the 
desire to prepare for the future, believed that in the absence of any new 
scientific breakthrough - of which there was no indication at present nuclear 
power offered one of the few ways now available of meeting the growing 
demand for energy without creating any major ecological imbalance. 
73. In order to meet the double challenge of population growth and ecology, 
States would have to have the necessary will, although national efforts alone 
would not be enough. It was not only useful but desirable to make a common 
effort, and in the nuclear field, as in many others, national sovereignty and 
international solidarity were by no means incompatible. 
74. That was true in matters of safety. The place which nuclear power 
occupied in French energy policy was well known. France had always held the 
view that without a very high level of safety that commitment would be 
inconceivable. A demanding and rigorous safety policy was an obligation 
vis-a-vis both its own citizens and the international community. Even though 
France was convinced that, to be fully effective, regulatory functions in that 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.304 
page 20 


area must remain the responsibility of national authorities, it was 
nevertheless equally sure of the importance of international co-operation in 
that field. 


75. The comparisons of experience and the exchanges of views made possible 
thereby could help to improve the level of safety for all. Because of its 
universality and the diversity of its expertise, the Agency played a decisive 
role in that regard. France would therefore continue to give its full support 
to the work of INSAG, which had performed an important task by defining 
general safety principles; to the NUSS Codes, revision of which had just been 
completed, and which constituted a body of reference material reflecting the 
consensus of international experts; and to the OSART programme, through which 
the Agency provided assistance - upon invitation - to those who wished to 
discharge their responsibilities in a more effective way. 
76. The same close attention must be given to the management of radioactive 
waste, which was at the heart of public concern about the nuclear industry. A 
few simple ideas were worth recalling in that connection: a country 
developing a nuclear programme must resolve all the problems resulting from 
its decision to do so. That was why, in the matter of waste management, 
France had always refused to shift its responsibility on to others, or to let 
the burden fall on future generations. Accordingly, its policy was to store 
all its radioactive waste on French soil, under well-tried safety conditions 
and under stringent surveillance. It refused to store any of its radioactive 
waste in any other country. That issue could not be treated as an ordinary 
commercial transaction since it had too many moral implications on the 
international plane for there to be any hint of ambiguity. For that reason, 
the President of the French Republic had recently explained the position of 
his country to the President of the Organization of African Unity, mentioning 
in particular that it was up to individual States to find solutions to their 
waste storage problems which would not only protect the natural environment 
and the health of the general public, but which would also respect the 
sovereignty and dignity of States. 

GC(XXX11)/0R.304 
page 21 


77. Finally, control over the peaceful utilization of the atom was 
essential. In that area, the Agency played a role in which it could not be 
replaced. Effective safeguards were an essential condition for international 
nuclear relations. They were also one of the bulwarks of public confidence. 
France was therefore pleased to note that in 1987 the Agency had again not 
detected any anomaly which would indicate a diversion of nuclear material 
subject to safeguards. With a view to improving the efficiency of safeguards, 
especially within the context of stringent budgetary constraints, France had 
recently had occasion to make a number of specific proposals, which had 
aroused some interest; no effort would be spared to ensure that they came to 
fruition. Thus, the Agency could be assured of France's continued support in 
maintaining the credibility of its safeguards. 
78. One of the conditions for that credibility was undoubtedly that 
safeguards should not be allowed to be transformed into a means of applying 
pressure or imposing sanctions on any State. Safeguards were neither a 
punishment nor a reward, but a voluntary relinquishing of a part of national 
sovereignty in the collective interest represented by development of the 
peaceful uses of the atom. To attempt to use them for any other end would 
distort the purpose for which they had been designed, undermine the strength 
of the Agency's structure and run counter to the common objective, namely the 
elimination of the risk of nuclear-weapons proliferation. That difficult 
problem could not be solved by threats, nor by applying the law of the jungle, 
but by seeking to reconcile two imperatives: on the one hand, that of 
enabling countries that needed it to have access to the technology essential 
for their nuclear power programmes and for meeting their energy requirements; 
and on the other hand, that of guaranteeing the peaceful utilization of that 
technology through formal and internationally verifiable commitments which 
were compatible with the sovereignty of States. 
79. It was not enough that the use of nuclear energy should appear to the 
national authorities as something technically possible, desirable or 
necessary. It was also essential that nuclear energy should be recognized as 
such by public opinion. Each country was different in that respect; each 
government made its decisions and responded to the expectations of its people 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 22 


in its own particular way. As far as nuclear information was concerned, it 
should be possible to provide public opinion, which differed from country to 
country, with the means of understanding all aspects of nuclear energy, 
especially those which lent themselves to erroneous interpretation or 
tendentious exploitation. The information should therefore be presented in a 
form that was clear, understandable and accessible to the public and to the 
media. 


80. With all those considerations in mind, France was pursuing its nuclear 
power programme. One of the outstanding characteristics of French energy 
policy was undoubtedly its continuity. It was well known that in the nuclear 
field the span of time between a decision and its final execution was at least 
a decade. Today, when the rate of growth of the French nuclear power capacity 
was diminishing substantially, as had been foreseen, the need to prepare for 
the future remained. For that reason, it was important to make good use of 
the investments approved and to focus efforts on the following: 
Design of reactors for the year 2000, including the development of 
fast reactors within the framework of European co-operation; 


Gradual introduction of mixed oxide fuel in reactors; 


Development of new uranium enrichment techniques. France hoped 
that its research on laser enrichment would result in substantial 
economic gains; 


Commissioning of new spent fuel reprocessing facilities at 
La Hague, the success of which was crucial to French nuclear 
policy; 


Storage of radioactive waste: operational capacity for low- and 
medium-level waste was already available. Where high-level waste 
was concerned, the theoretical and experimental work required for 
the construction of an underground laboratory was going ahead 
satisfactorily. The objective was to have an underground waste 
disposal centre in operation at the beginning of the twenty-first 
century. 


81. For France, preparing for the future necessarily involved Europe as 
well. Its thoughts and its actions must henceforth be oriented towards the 
prospect of a single market in 1992. Nuclear energy was not only an asset for 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.304 
page 23 


France but also an opportunity for Europe -
--for its independence in matters of 
energy, for its economic competitiveness, for its technological level and for 
the protection of its environment. 


82. The will of States, although necessary, was not sufficient to meet the 
international challenges which awaited the world community or to find lasting 
solutions to the complex problems which it would encounter tomorrow. That was 
so especially in the field of energy, where growth in demand, resource 
distribution and ecological requirements could lead to dangerous blind 
alleys. The Agency was fully aware of that. France would therefore continue 
to support the Agency with confidence in the success of its activities. 
83. Mr. TETENYI (Hungary) observed that the present session of the 
General Conference was taking place against a background of promising 
developments in the international situation. The signing of the INF Treaty by 
the Soviet Union and the United States was an historical and, in the field of 
nuclear disarmament, unprecedented event. Of prime importance within the 
context of that Treaty was the strengthening of security both within Europe 
and throughout the world. Also, the Treaty constituted a real breakthrough of 
great psychological significance with regard to nuclear disarmament: its 
strict implementation should lead to further achievements in that field and 
might demonstrate that the peoples of the world could live in security even 
after the elimination of weapons of mass destruction. It would be highly 
desirable if future agreements on nuclear disarmament were to provide for 
nuclear material released as a result of such agreements to be transferred to 
the civilian sector and used for peaceful purposes in accordance with NPT and 
the Agency's safeguards regulations. His delegation was convinced that the 
Agency's experience in the field of safeguards -and particularly its 
inspection activities -helped in a significant way to raise public 
confidence, and that in certain respects its work had become a fertile example 
not only for nuclear disarmament agreements, but also for other types of 
disarmament agreement. 
84. Twenty years had passed since the signing of NPT, the provisions of 
which were still regarded as crucially important instruments in the limitation 
and eventual elimination of nuclear weapons. The Treaty had on the first day 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 24 


been signed by no fewer than 61 States, including Hungary. In that 
connection, he recalled that a Hungarian scientist, Bruno F. Straub, who was 
currently President of the Presidential Council of Hungary, had made a 


substantial contribution to the elaboration of the Agency's safeguards 
system. Also, he wished to congratulate the Agency and China on having 
concluded an agreement which placed a number of Chinese civil nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. That would undoubtedly contribute to the 
universality of the Agency's safeguards system. 


85. The experience of the previous 20 years or so had confirmed the 
importance of NPT and had shown how it could be further improved and made more 
effective through the Agency's co-operation and safeguards activities. The 
conference that was due to take place in 1990 to review the Treaty would be 
crucial from the standpoint of strengthening its universality, since the 
reality of the nuclear age was that every country must shoulder part of the 
responsibility for promoting peace and security, reducing international 
tension, limiting arms and achieving disarmament. In that connection, Hungary 
welcomed Spain's adherence to the Treaty and the recent decision by Saudi 
Arabia to do likewise. 
86. His delegation noted with satisfaction that, according to the Annual 
Report for 1987 and the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1987, the Agency 
had not detected any misuse of nuclear materials and facilities under 
safeguards. That was a very encouraging conclusion for all and demonstrated 
just how unsubstantiated were the accusations recently made by certain press 
organs concerning the alleged ineffectiveness of the Agency's safeguards. In 
order to prevent misinterpretations and to enhance public awareness of the 
Agency's safeguards activities, a permanent and effective dialogue should be 
maintained with the media. 
87. In accordance with its Statute and its responsibilities under NPT, the 
Agency was required to do everything in its power to strengthen and improve 
safeguards. However, its increasing activity in that area need not 
necessarily result in increasing expenditures. In that connection, his 
delegation welcomed the new safeguards criteria for 1988, which enabled the 
Secretariat, in certain cases, to decide upon the frequency of inspections. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 25 


Expenditures could be considerably reduced by making better use of inspectors, 
in which connection he recalled that his Government had responded favourably 
to the Director General's appeal and had waived its right to be consulted 
prior to the designation of inspectors to Hungary. He noted with satisfaction 
that a number of countries had recently taken similar decisions, and hoped 
that others would follow that example. 


88. The year 1987 had been marked not only by the 30th anniversary of the 
founding of the Agency, but also by the efforts made by the Agency and the 
world nuclear community in general to restore public confidence in nuclear 
power, which had been seriously shaken in 1986. The results of those efforts 
were clear to all in that no nuclear power plant construction project had been 
cancelled. It was gratifying to see that the world's installed nuclear 
capacity had continued to increase. The last of Hungary's 440 MW(e) 
pressurized-water reactors, situated in Paks, had been connected to the grid 
at the end of 1987. The next reactors, now at the planning stage, would also 
be pressurized-water reactors, with a capacity of 1000 MW(e). In 1987 nuclear 
power had accounted for over 39% of the electricity generated within the 
country. 
89. His delegation attached great importance to the Agency's nuclear safety 
activities and strongly supported the expanded programme in that area. Those 
activities should be continued, particularly in those areas in which they 
helped directly to enhance public acceptance of nuclear power, since a certain 
degree of mistrust undoubtedly persisted. The annual report gave a clear 
picture of the work done by the Agency to increase nuclear safety. Hungary 
had always considered studying and learning from the safety-related activities 
and experience of the Agency and its Members to be of vital importance and was 
firmly resolved to continue and strengthen its practices and policy, in that 
respect in the future. All aspects of nuclear safety must be taken seriously 
not only in the case of nuclear power plants, but also in all areas of the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. For the past 35 years, therefore, 
Hungary had maintained detailed records of the radioisotopes used within the 
country, so as to keep constant track of their whereabouts. That was 
particularly important in a country which handled almost 40 000 transactions 
involving isotopes every year. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 26 


90. Hungary acknowledged the international importance of nuclear safety and 
had therefore ratified the Conventions on Early Notification and Emergency 
Assistance the previous year. It had also concluded a bilateral agreement 
with Austria on mutual notification in the case of an accident. His 
delegation was gratified to note the effective support given by the Agency 
in 1987 to Member States' efforts in the field of nuclear safety. The Agency 
should continue to do so in the future, since that would facilitate public 
acceptance of nuclear energy. 
91. Another aspect of safety was the physical protection of nuclear 
materials. Hungary was party to the relevant convention, believing that, 
given the increasing quantities of nuclear materials in Member States, close 
attention should be paid to the protection of such materials and preventive 
measures against terrorist attacks should be adopted. International 
obligations should be established in that regard. 
92. With regard to the matter of liability for nuclear damage, steps should 
be taken by the Agency, together with interested Member States, to work out a 
comprehensive convention covering both civil and State liability. 
93. Multilateral technical co-operation activities were a corner-stone of 
the Agency's programme. The Director General's report on those activities 
for 1987 showed that the Agency had successfully taken further steps to 
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of technical assistance. The 
evaluation of various aspects of the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities had helped to improve the quality of programme implementation. 
94. Hungary was making increasing contributions to TACF and had decided to 
pledge a voluntary contribution of 4.8 million forints to the Fund for 1989. 
His Government continued to be satisfied with the effective use made by the 
Agency of Hungary's local currency contributions. 
95. In conclusion, his delegation expressed its satisfaction with the 
Agency's activities, approved the Annual Report for 1987 and supported the 
suggestion that that document be disseminated in a form which would make it 
accessible to a wider public. 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.304 
page 27 


96. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) called upon all Member States to show 
goodwill and to work together towards a consensus on the various matters to be 
considered during the General Conference, and to be guided solely by the 
desire to achieve tangible results that would serve the Agency's objectives 
and increase the contribution made by nuclear energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world. 
97. That was the spirit in which Chile itself had undertaken a number of 
activities during the previous year, not only at the national level but also 
on a regional basis through its active participation in the ARCAL programme. 
98. At the national level, various isotope and radiation techniques had 
continued to be used in medicine, agriculture, mining and hydrology, thereby 
making an effective contribution to the production and research sectors. With 
regard to nuclear safety and radiation protection, Chile had continued to draw 
up, review and refine its present regulations. It had also assumed the 
responsibility of organizing a course on radiation protection and quality 
control in odontology, with the valuable assistance of experts from Brazil. 
With regard to nuclear materials, Chile had made considerable progress over 
the previous year in the treatment and storage of liquid and solid radioactive 
wastes arising from studies or research work within the country. 
99. Chile had also made progress with the development of processes for the 
fabrication of the structural parts of fuels for materials testing reactors as 
well as with all the dimensional inspections and destructive and 
non-destructive tests. For 1989, it had set itself the task of converting one 
of its research reactors from high- to medium-enriched fuel, the corresponding 
studies and calculations for which had already been successfully completed. 
100. At the regional level, Chile had made a significant contribution to 
training and co-ordination activities under the ARCAL programme and other 
programmes sponsored by regional bodies such as the Inter-American Nuclear 
Energy Commission (IANEC) and the Latin American Institute for Agriculture. 
Specifically it had organized a course on food irradiation techniques, a 
course on the utilization of bulk reagents for radioimmunoassay and a workshop 
on the use of irradiation for quarantine purposes. 

GC(XXXp)/OR.304 
page 28 


101. As it had announced at the thirty-first session of the General 
Conference, Chile had agreed, to serve as the pilot centre for the nuclear 
information project established under the ARCAL programme. The past year had 
seen the establishment of that centre, which it was hoped to have fully 
operational by 1990. Also within the framework of ARCAL, Chile was 
responsible for drawing up, as part of a co-ordinated research activity, a 
questionnaire on the application of the Convention on Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident and of the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency. Convinced as it was of the importance of 
the ARCAL programme for the development and progress of nuclear activities in 
Latin America, Chile reiterated its full support for all ARCAL projects and 
its willingness to participate in them and to put at their disposal all its 
human and material resources. It was always happy to receive fellows from the 
region in its establishments. He wished to thank the Agency once again for 
the interest it had shown in that programme, which was of such importance to 
the countries of the Latin America region, and to express his gratitude to the 
donor countries for their valuable economic support, which had been a major 
factor in the achievement of the goals of the ARCAL programme. There was, 
however, still a long way to go, and the programme would require greater 
financial resources. Chile therefore urged Member States to seek with the 
Agency a formula which would make it possible to implement as many as possible 
of the activities planned. 
102. Turning to specific agenda items, and first to the question of measures 
to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological 
protection, he stressed the importance of the Joint Protocol linking the 
Vienna and Paris Conventions, which would strengthen the current international 
regime concerning liability for nuclear damage and would encourage a greater 
number of countries to accede to the two conventions. Chile had recently 
signed the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, and it 
would also sign the Joint Protocol in the firm conviction that the system 
governing such a delicate subject should be a universal one involving all 
States. His country would also continue to co-operate with States interested 
in establishing an international regime for State liability in the case of a 
nuclear accident. The time had come to tackle that issue, consideration of 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 29 


which should be entrusted to an expert group. That group should co-operate 
closely with the International Law Commission, which had been studying the 
question of the international liability of States for more than ten years and 
whose work provided a frame of reference for the formulation of very precise 
concepts such as those relating to nuclear damage. 


103. With regard to the Agency's contribution to sustainable development, 
his delegation was pleased to note that the institutions and organizations of 
the United Nations system intended to take into account in their policies and 
programmes the need to achieve harmony between national development and 
environmental protection. 
104. As to the Agency's programme and budget for 1989 and 1990, the 
difficulties encountered during the current year had stemmed from the opposing 
interests of countries with different levels of development. The preferential 
treatment accorded to safeguards at the expense of the Agency's promotional 
activities - which were of vital importance to the developing countries - was 
a matter of concern at the meetings of the Administrative and Budgetary 
Committee in May, and subsequently at those of the Board of Governors in June, 
Chile had co-sponsored, in co-operation with the Group of 77, a number of 
proposals which it considered necessary in order to reverse that trend and to 
achieve a balance in the distribution of resources among the Agency's various 
programmes. He therefore hoped that in the years to come the Agency's major 
statutory objectives would all be accorded equal significance. 
105. As in previous years, Chile stressed the need to find a formula which 
would ensure reliable and predictable financing for technical co-operation 
activities. That was already the case for safeguards activities, which were 
financed entirely from the Regular Budget. Recipient countries would then be 
able to submit multi-year technical assistance projects with the possibility 
of their being approved. 
106. With regard to the item entitled "Staffing of the Agency's 
Secretariat", his delegation noted with satisfaction the efforts made by the 
Secretariat to implement General Conference resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, the 
aim of which was to increase the representation of nationals of developing 
countries within the Secretariat. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.304 
page 30 


107. He wished to congratulate the Director General and the Secretariat on 
their work over the previous year. However, it was a matter of concern that 
there had been no rapprochement among the different opinions held within the 
Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS), despite the fact that a compromise 
was urgently needed so as to ensure the uninterrupted utilization of nuclear 
technology in countries which required it. 
108. In conclusion, Chile reiterated its support for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, even though it possessed other natural resources such as 
hydroelectric resources, coal and other fuels for electricity production which 
for the time being obviated the need for it to utilize nuclear energy for that 
purpose. It was worth recalling in that context that there were numerous 
criteria other than power production for assessing a country's level of 
nuclear development. 
109. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia) expressed the conviction that the 
current session of the General Conference would make a significant 
contribution toward strengthening international co-operation in the 
utilization of nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes, and toward 
giving form and vigour to the idea of a non-violent, denuclearized world. 
That belief was, of course, based on the positive changes that the world had 
recently experienced on the political level. A decisive element in that 
improvement was the new quality of the relations and the dialogue which now 
existed between the Soviet Union and the United States. Czechoslovakia was 
very keen for the peace policy to succeed, since it saw in it assurances for 
its own present and.future. It was with that objective in view that 
Mr. Jakes, General Secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party, had proposed 
on 24 February 1988 the creation of a zone of confidence, co-operation and 
good neighbourliness between the countries of the Warsaw Pact and NATO. 
110. It was no exaggeration to say that the idea of broad international 
dialogue and all-round co-operation had for several years been a reality 
within the Agency, where it represented the fruit of a common effort which had 
been pursued despite certain differences of opinion. The results obtained by 
the Agency during the previous year, as shown in the annual report and as 
indicated by the Director General in his opening statement, bore witness to 
that. Of particular note was the continuing implementation of the Soviet 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 31 


proposal for the establishment of an international regime for the safe 
development of nuclear power, and of other measures aimed at strengthening 


international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiation protection. His 
delegation was satisfied with the efforts being made to revise the NUSS Codes, 
in which Czechoslovak experts were participating actively. It welcomed the 
elaboration by 1NSAG of basic safety principles which constituted useful and 
practical recommendations for Member States that were formulating or upgrading 
their technical policies in the nuclear safety area. It actively supported 
the idea of a comprehensive solution to the problem of international liability 
for nuclear damage. The conclusion and signing of the Joint Protocol linking 
the Vienna and Paris Conventions would create a situation that was conducive 
to an early start to negotiations on the drafting of a new, wide-ranging 


international legal instrument covering questions of State liability. 


111. With regard to the OSART programme, Czechoslovakia had commenced 
preparations to receive a mission at the Dukovany nuclear power plant in 
September of the following year. 
112. The Secretariat was to be commended for having set up the permanent 
communications network necessary for the implementation of the Conventions on 
Early Notification and Emergency Assistance. It was Czechoslovakia's strong 
hope that the foundations of co-operation which had been established through 
those conventions - which were already of historic significance - would be 
expanded and would be supplemented by bilateral and multilateral agreements. 
Czechoslovakia was providing information on its nuclear power plants to its 
Austrian neighbour in a very open manner under an existing agreement between 
the two countries governing issues of mutual interest in relation to nuclear 
facilities; it was participating with equal openness in current talks on 
expanding such co-operation, thereby contributing to the establishment of 
good-neighbourly relations. 
113. It was to be hoped that co-operation of that type would help put an end 
to unsubstantiated criticism and attacks on nuclear power of the kind that had 
been levelled, for example, by certain Austrian groups against Czechoslovak 
nuclear power plants. The operation of his country's nuclear power plants had 
always been marked by a high level of stability and reliability. In 1987 the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 32 


output of the eight units with WWER-440 reactors in service at Jaslovske 
Bohunice and Dukovany had been 22 215 GW.h, or 26.3% of the country's total 
electricity production. The excellent performance of those units was 
confirmed by their load factor, which varied between 71% and 86%, and also by 
the total number of unplanned outages, which amounted to 3.1 per unit 
per year. The construction of a further four WWER-440 units and four 
WWER-1000 units was proceeding according to plan. 


114. His delegation was gratified to note that the Agency had not detected, 
in the course of its safeguards inspection activities, any violation by 
Member States of their safeguards obligations. The application of safeguards 
to nuclear materials was a high-priority task, and the Agency's safeguards 
system was an important part of efforts to prevent a nuclear war and generally 
to strengthen peace, confidence and co-operation throughout the world. 
Czechoslovakia was therefore concerned at recent trends which indicated that 
serious problems might arise in the near future. The nuclear industry had 
made great advances since the first inspection, but the safeguards system had 
not kept pace with those major qualitative changes. In short, although there 
had been progress, particularly on the technical level, the basic concepts and 
approaches had remained the same. Now, with the dawn of new political 
thinking on the international scene, conceptual changes should be made within 
the safeguards system, so as to enable it in the near future to respond despite 
serious financial constraints - to the new political challenges 
regarding verification and inspection in connection with disarmament and the 
expanding use of nuclear energy. Two levels of inspection would be 
introduced. The first would involve inspections intended to identify possible 
anomalies, to be carried out unannounced and on a large scale. Should an 
anomaly be discovered, the second level would be brought into effect in the 
form of a verification inspection involving the thorough investigation of the 
area concerned, including the material balance. 
115. Such an approach would make it possible to reduce the volume of the 
inspection work without diminishing the effectiveness of the safeguards system 
and to shift inspection effort from the less sensitive facilities to those 
requiring greater attention. 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.304 
page 33 


116. His delegation's interest in that area of the Agency's activities was 
motivated by the need for safeguards to remain a reliable instrument for 
strengthening the non-proliferation regime and enhancing the authority of NPT, 
the 20th anniversary of which fell during the current year. Czechoslovakia 
welcomed the conclusion of a safeguards agreement between the Agency and 
China, following a voluntary offer from that country to submit a number of its 
nuclear facilities to safeguards. It also welcomed Spain's accession to NPT, 
and would be extremely happy if other States, particularly those in areas of 
tension around the world, would follow that country's example. It was 
regrettable that, despite the efforts made by the Secretariat and the Director 
General, South Africa and Israel were still persisting in their negative and 
unconstructive attitude to the question of submitting their nuclear programmes 
to Agency safeguards, which the General Conference and the General Assembly of 
the United Nations had been requesting them to do for several years. 
117. His delegation supported the draft programme and budget for 1989 
and 1990 as submitted. The experience of the previous year had shown that the 
Agency's activities were adversely affected by the lack of discipline 
displayed by certain Member States in failing to meet their financial 
obligations. His delegation therefore associated itself with those which had 
called upon the Member States concerned to pay their contributions to the 
Regular Budget in full and in a timely manner. 
118. His delegation supported the proposed target figure of US $42 million 
for contributions to TACf for 1989. His Government had decided to contribute 
to the Fund for 1989 an amount which fully corresponded to Czechoslovakia's 
base rate of assessment in respect of the Regular Budget. It was also 
offering to host two training courses in 1989, one on the operational safety 
of WWER nuclear power plants and the other on the development, production and 
use of radiopharmaceuticals, 
119. The past year had demonstrated that the Agency deserved all the praise 
it had received on the occasion of its 30th anniversary. His delegation 
wished to commend the Secretariat, the Director General, and the Chairman of 
the Board, Mr. Loosch, for enterprising spirit and constructive approach they 
had displayed in tackling the many complex problems facing the Agency. 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.304 
page 34 


120. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) expressed his 
Government's appreciation of the work done by the Agency, which had helped 
strengthen international nuclear co-operation and had discharged its statutory 
responsibilities to the benefit of its Member States. 
121. Technical co-operation was an area of the Agency's activity in which 
there had been much expansion in recent years. The agreement reached by the 
Board of Governors on indicative planning figures for the forthcoming 
three-year period was a prerequisite for continued expansion, but it was 
equally necessary to reverse the negative trend observed in recent years in 
the actual payment of voluntary contributions. That trend, together with 
other financial problems, had made it impossible to maintain the record 
implementation rate achieved two years previously. 
122. His country paid its voluntary contributions to TACF on time, supplied 
equipment and material and provided training for scientists from developing 
countries. In 1987 his country had hosted two training courses and increased 
the number of fellowships and experts it provided. 
123. During the past two years, most Member States which used nuclear energy 
to produce electricity had re-examined the nuclear option and many of them had 
reaffirmed their commitment to nuclear power. That was the case for his 
country, which, in accordance with its economic policy, would continue its 
nuclear power programme in order to meet its increasing energy needs. In 
implementing that programme, the highest priority would be given to nuclear 
safety and to the protection of man and the environment. His country was 
aware of the advantages of co-operation and of sharing experience, and 
therefore appreciated and fully supported the central role played by the 
Agency as an instrument for the promotion and implementation of international 
co-operation in nuclear safety and radiation protection. Regional 
co-operation was particularly important for members of the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA), where standardized types of pressurized-water 
reactors were in use. The recently established Council of Nuclear Authorities 
of the CMEA countries, of which the German Democratic Republic was a member, 
was focusing its activities on nuclear safety issues. Lastly, since the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 35 


beginning of 1987 his country had concluded six new bilateral agreements 
concerning nuclear safety and the protection of man and the environment. 


124. Absolutely safe conditions for the use of nuclear energy required 
effective nuclear safeguards and the physical protection of nuclear materials 
and installations. Agency safeguards provided the assurance that States were 
complying with their non-proliferation commitments and made a major 
contribution towards the creation of a climate of mutual confidence among 
States. It was gratifying to note that in 1987, as in previous years, the 
Agency had again been able to state that nuclear material under Agency 
safeguards had remained in peaceful nuclear activities or had otherwise been 
adequately accounted for. In order to enhance further the objectivity and 
reliability of that statement, the Agency and Member States should continue 
their efforts to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards 
system. 
125. He was pleased to note that China had signed a safeguards agreement 
with the Agency. In view of the importance of safeguards for the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, his country would continue to support 
the Agency's safeguards system. In 1987 it had hosted two training courses, 
one for newly recruited inspectors and the other for trainees from developing 
countries. Activities of that kind were now carried out within the framework 
of his country's safeguards support programme, which, in the light of the 
forthcoming HPT Review Conference, was to be expanded by one third over and 
above the agreed level in its first year. 
126. The question of the physical protection of nuclear materials was 
closely linked to safeguards. The Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material had entered into force, but much remained to be done, 
particularly with regard to the physical protection of nuclear installations. 
127. The conclusion in Moscow 25 years previously of the Treaty Banning 
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water had 
been the first step towards a safer world. The signing of NPT 20 years 
previously had been another important event. Finally, the INF Treaty had 
inspired feelings of satisfaction and confidence the world over, and, together 
with the planned 50% reduction in strategic weapon arsenals, had marked the 

GC(XXXli)/OR.304 
page 36 


start of nuclear disarmament. Further steps towards nuclear disarmament were 
necessary and possible'. At their last meeting, the Warsaw Pact countries had 
reiterated their proposal for a total and universal ban on nuclear-weappns 
tests and had advocated the elimination of tactical nuclear weapons in Europe, 


including the nuclear components of dualrcapable systems. An international 
meeting on nuclear-weapon-free zones held in Berlin in June had shown that 
efforts aimed at establishing additional nuclear-weapon-free zones were 


gaining in importance. The very fact that representatives of governments, 
parliaments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations had met 
was evidence of the existence of new thinking on how to prevent nuclear war. 
The Agency's active participation in that internationally important meeting 
was highly appreciated. 


128. The conclusion of the INF Treaty was a successful step towards nuclear 
disarmament and could be the beginning of the transfer of significant amounts 
of direct-use nuclear material from military to peaceful applications. That 
might lead to an increase in the Agency's verification activities. 
Furthermore, it was conceivable that the experience gained by the Agency in 
applying safeguards would have an impact - direct or indirect - on other areas 
of verification. 
129. As a result of the increasing industrialization of developing countries 
and the growth of the world's population, energy consumption would inevitably 
increase, thus making it necessary to broaden and expand existing energy 
resources. If environmental pollution caused by fossil fuels was to be 
substantially reduced, nuclear power must have a major place in that process. 
The Agency had an important role to play in that connection, and should extend 
its communication links to all organizations and institutions concerned with 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
130. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) said that the year which had elapsed since 
the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of the Agency had been marked by 
important political events. Firstly, an agreement had been concluded on the 
elimination of a whole category of intermediate- and shorter-range nuclear 
weapons and realistic conditions had been established for a 50% reduction in 
strategic nuclear weapons. The successes achieved in restraining the arms 

GC(XXX11)/OR.304 
page 37 


race and reducing weapons arsenals gave grounds to hope that the twenty-first 
century would see a nuclear-weapon-free world. Those successes confirmed the 


importance of the new attitudes and the active and dynamic policy of the 
socialist countries and were a victory for realism in international politics. 
Bulgaria was ready to contribute to that noble cause. It should be recalled 


in that connection that his country was pursuing a policy of creating a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Balkan Peninsula. 


131. The NPT, which Bulgaria had signed twenty years previously, had played 
and continued to play a fundamental role in preventing the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. One hundred and thirty-five countries were parties to that 
Treaty, and the necessary conditions were now in place for the Treaty to 
become genuinely universal. Also, the reduction of the threat of the 
destruction of humanity by the atom and the progress made towards settling 
various regional conflicts had created a more favourable climate for the 
future expansion of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
132. His delegation had carefully studied the Annual Report for 1987 and was 
satisfied with the programmes carried out and the results achieved. The 
important work done by the Agency to strengthen nuclear safety and radiation 
protection included the revision of the five NUSS Codes, the new version of 
which had been adopted by the Board in June. Bulgaria was in the process of 
scrutinizing the Codes and hoped to announce soon that it could accept them as 
minimum binding safety standards. 
133. The Agency's operational safety review team (OSART), analysis of 
safety-significant events team (ASSET) and radiation protection advisory team 
(RAPAT) programmes were very important, since they too contributed to greater 
nuclear and radiological safety. Bulgaria participated in the Agency's 
Incident Reporting System (IRS), which it considered to be a vital mechanism 
for training operating personnel and a model for international co-operation in 
the exchange of information on the operational safety of nuclear power plants. 
134. His delegation was gratified to note the successes achieved in the area 
of technical co-operation. Bulgaria met its obligations to TACF regularly and 
in full, and its voluntary contribution included the provision of equipment as 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 38 


well as of training for nationals of developing countries. Bulgaria was 
prepared to accept a greater number of Agency fellows in its scientific and 
economic organizations. Being also a recipient of technical assistance, his 
country wished to thank the Agency and particularly the Middle East and Europe 
Section, the Training Courses Section and the B'ellowships and Training Section 
for their excellent work and very valuable assistance. In 1987, Bulgaria had 
received a radioactive waste management mission, whose conclusions and 
recommendations would serve as a basis for future technical co-operation 
projects. 


135. Notwithstanding those positive results, his delegation was troubled by 
the fact that the co-operation programme was not universally supported, a 
situation which had worsened in 1987. The Secretariat should undertake a 
study to determine whether there was a link between the growth of the 
technical co-operation programme and the decrease in the number of 
Member States which contributed both to that programme and to the Regular 
Budget, and should submit its conclusions to the Board. The main means of 
further improving technical co-operation results were to enhance the quality 
of the services provided and to pay closer attention to national priorities. 
136. The Agency's safeguards activities were of vital importance. He 
welcomed the efforts made to increase further the effectiveness of that 
activity and expressed his delegation's support for the Agency's safeguards 
programme. He wished to point out that safeguards goals were being fully 
attained in Bulgaria. 
13 7. While he could approve the Agency's accounts, he was concerned at the 
non-payment or late payment by certain Member States of their assessed 
contributions. Any measure to improve the financial situation, no matter how 
good, could never be better than Member States fulfilling their statutory 
obligation to support their organization through their contributions. 
Bulgaria paid its contributions to the Regular Budget and to TACF in full and 
on time and called on all Member States to do the same. 
138. Bulgaria could approve the Agency's programme and budget for 1989 and 
the scale of assessment proposed for 1989; also, it would pay to the TACF a 
voluntary contribution in local currency equivalent to US $67 200. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 39 


139. With regard to the staffing of the Secretariat any solution to the 
problem should be based on the Statute and should take into account the 
interests of all Member States. As far as the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of 
the Statute and the revision of Article VI as a whole were concerned, his 
country's views were well known. With respect to South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities, Bulgaria had noted with interest the results of the meeting 
between the depositaries of NPT and the South African delegation, but found it 
disappointing that, despite that meeting, South Africa had still not complied 
with the requirements of General Conference resolution GC(XXX)/RES/468 and 
with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly. His 
country's position on that issue would depend on South Africa's attitude. 
Finally, in accordance with its Statute, the Agency should contribute to 
efforts to resolve the question of armed attacks on peaceful nuclear 
installations and to prevent nuclear terrorism. 
140. Bulgaria's peaceful nuclear programme had continued to expand at a 
steady and rapid pace in 1987, during which year the Kozloduj nuclear power 
plant had produced almost 30% of the electricity used in the country. The 
fifth unit of that plant, which comprised a WWER reactor with a capacity of 
1000 MW(e), had come into operation, and a sixth unit, also equipped with a 
WWER-1000 reactor, was under construction. A second plant equipped with the 
same type of reactor was under construction at a new site. 
141. Bulgaria actively participated in the Agency's nuclear safety and 
probabilistic safety assessment programmes, and had taken a number of measures 
to improve both the safety of existing reactors and the qualifications of 
operating personnel. Those activities would be continued and, within the 
overall context of nuclear power development, priority would always be given 
to safety. In that connection, his Government had decided to receive an OSART 
mission at a Bulgarian nuclear power plant in 1990. 
142. Bulgaria attached great importance not only to the development of 
nuclear power, but also to the applications of nuclear techniques in industry, 
agriculture, medicine and science. It was receiving Agency assistance in 
connection with the construction of an irradiation facility for sterilizing 
medical supplies, a charged-particle accelerator for polymer research, and a 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 40 


neutron generator. In 1987, Bulgaria had organized an international seminar 
on the application of induced mutations in agriculture and had taken part in 
the Agency's food irradiation programme. 


143. In conclusion, he wished to reaffirm his Government's appreciation of 
and support for the Agency's efforts to strengthen international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He congratulated the Director General 
and his staff on the success of their endeavours and wished them further 
success in the future. 
144. Mr. CHIKELU (Nigeria) said that an examination of the programmes 
and activities carried out by the Agency in 1987 showed that it had been a 
good year for the Agency. The annual report indicated that encouraging 
progress had been made in areas such as nuclear power - 22 nuclear power 
plants had come into operation in the world and 9 others were under 
construction. In the area of nuclear safety and radiation protection, the 
Agency continued to play an active role in strengthening public confidence in 
nuclear power. In the nuclear applications area, it was interesting to note 
that some 200 technical projects and 14 regional and interregional projects 
had been implemented in the food and agriculture sector in 62 developing 
countries. His delegation also noted that resources for technical 
co-operation activities in 1987 had increased by 5.5% over the previous year. 
145. Despite the Agency's commendable efforts, many developing countries particularly 
in Africa - were not yet benefiting sufficiently from its 
promotional activities. The Agency should make a deliberate effort to help 
those countries to ensure that they could take full advantage of the immense 
potential the Agency had to offer in the nuclear power and nuclear 
applications areas. In that connection, his delegation urged the Agency to 
send assistance and pre-project support missions to those countries. The 
Agency should also, as a matter of priority, tackle the problems faced by many 
developing countries in their efforts to acquire nuclear technology. Various 
constraints such as a lack of financial resources, inadequate infrastructure, 
a shortage of high-level specialists, restrictions on access to nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology and the low level of support for research 
and development had hampered the attempts made by developing countries to 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 41 


establish nuclear power programmes. The Agency should therefore expedite its 
efforts to implement the recommendations of the senior expert group on the 
promotion and financing of nuclear power in developing countries. 


146. In order to increase the impact of Agency assistance to and 
co-operation with African countries, present bilateral arrangements should be 
supplemented by a regional co-operation agreement for the African region, 
along the lines of the existing regional arrangements for Asia and the 
Pacific (RCA) and Latin America (ARCAL). The African region could then, 
within the framework of that agreement and with the Agency's effective help, 
really promote regional co-operation in nuclear applications. His delegation 
wished to thank the Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation for 
having invited African Member States to a preliminary meeting on that subject 
during the current session of the General Conference, and expressed the hope 
that the Secretariat would ensure that the proposed regional agreement 
remained regional in both concept and implementation and that all 
participating African countries benefited from it. 
147. Where nuclear safety and radiation protection were concerned, the 
Agency should help developing countries to build up the necessary 
infrastructure and capability to enable them to fulfil effectively their 
obligations under the Conventions on Early Notification and Emergency 
Assistance. Most of those countries needed assistance in enacting relevant 
radiation protection legislation, acquiring the necessary radiation monitoring 
equipment and establishing effective contact points. RAPAT missions should 
take due account of those needs, so that the Agency might subsequently tackle 
them in a serious manner. 
148. Nigeria was one of the first States to have ratified NPT and had signed 
a safeguards agreement with the Agency at the beginning of the current year. 
That was an unequivocal demonstration of its interest in international 
co-operation in peaceful nuclear technology. Nigeria wanted to set up a 
nuclear energy technology centre and needed assistance from the Agency in the 
form of infrastructural support and the provision of equipment, expert 

GC(XXX11)/OR.304 
page 42 


services, training and fellowships. It also required the Agency's help for 
new or existing national projects in its universities, research institutes and 
hospitals. 


149. One technical co-operation project which had been an outstanding 
success was that concerning the eradication of the tsetse fly using the 
sterile insect technique. During the first phase of the project, which had 
been completed in 1987, the tsetse fly had been totally eradicated from an 
2 


area of 1500 km . However, the proposal to eradicate the tsetse from an 
2 


additional area of 12 000 km in the next phase of the project at an 
estimated cost of some US $12 million had run into financial problems. There 
was a danger that the infrastructure already in place would deteriorate and 


that the area cleared of tsetse flies would be re-invaded. The enormous 
effort invested in that project in terms of both research and other resources 
must not be allowed to go to waste. His country therefore hoped that donors 
would come to the aid of that very important project, to which his Government 
was strongly committed and to which it had already devoted a great deal of 


resources. 


150. Another matter of concern to his Government was the dumping of toxic 
wastes in developing countries by companies from industrialized countries. 
Nigeria which had been the victim of such dumping, had made its position on 
that subject known at the Board's meeting in June. Each shipment of waste to 
a Third World country was in a way a "time bomb". The international community 
should now take the necessary action to prevent the Third World from becoming 
a dumping ground for wastes, including nuclear waste. 
151. It was against that background that African and other countries were 
presenting a draft resolution on that worrying problem. The African Group 
hoped that the General Conference would give a positive response to the 
proposals contained therein, which were aimed at strengthening the Agency's 
role in a potentially dangerous and delicate area where abuses could shake 
public confidence in nuclear energy. It was to be hoped that the draft 
resolution would be adopted by consensus. 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.304 
page 43 


152. Turning to the question of South Africa's nuclear capabilities, he 
recalled that resolution GC(XXXI)/RES/485 requested the Director General to 
continue to take all possible measures to ensure the full implementation of 
resolution GC(XXX)/RES/468, which - inter alia - called on South Africa to 
submit forthwith all its nuclear facilities and installations to Agency 
safeguards. The resolution also stated that the continuation of South 
Africa's policies in disregard and in violation of the purposes and principles 
of the United Nations, upon which, in accordance with Article 1II.B of the 
Statute, the Agency activities were based, constituted a persistent violation 
of the provisions of the Statute within the meaning of Article XIX.B. 
153. The Director General had announced to the Board at its meetings in 
February and June that no progress had been made in his negotiations with 
South Africa on the implementation of the resolution. The Note by the 
Director General on that question contained in document GC(XXXlI)/844 also 
indicated that no progress had been achieved. South Africa's racist regime 
had once again clearly demonstrated the contempt with which it treated the 
Agency's resolutions. 
154. South Africa's policies constituted a violation not only of the Charter 
of the United Nations, but also of the Agency's Statute. They included 
subjecting the black population to the inhuman system of apartheid and denying 
it any basic rights. South Africa was the only country where the system of 
government was based on institutionalized racism. It was for that reason, 
that the United Nations General Assembly, in resolution 41/35B, had called on 
all United Nations organizations to exclude South Africa and, in 
resolution 42/23C, had urged the Security Council to take immediate action 
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and to apply comprehensive and 
mandatory actions against South Africa. 
155. In June 1987, the Board had recommended that the General Conference 
suspend South Africa from the exercise of the privileges and rights of 
membership in the Agency. It had taken that decision after carefully 
considering both South Africa's consistent refusal to comply with various 
Agency resolutions and that racist regime's policy of apartheid, which ran 
counter to the purposes and principles of the United Nations. His delegation 

GC(XXXII)/OR.304 
page 44 


was adamant that the General Conference should adopt the Board's resolution 
and deprive South Africa of its membership rights, thus following the example 
of many other international organizations. 


156. South Africa had recently made some diversionary moves in an attempt to 
convince the rest of the world that it intended to accede to NPT. Nigeria 
would not be fooled by that ruse and wished it to be clearly understood by all 
countries that none of South Africa's recent initiatives was genuine. 
157. The NPT was open to any country which wanted to accede to it: there 
was no need to deliberate or to hold consultations on that matter. The 
procedure that the racist regime was currently engaging in - namely announcing 
its so-called intention of signing NPT - was therefore completely 
unnecessary. Consultations or negotiations with the three Depositary States 
or Permanent Missions were simply a diversionary manoeuvre. The issues South 
Africa was discussing were extraneous to the Agency's work and outside the 
terms of the various resolutions adopted by the General Conference. 
Accordingly, the Agency should suspend the racist regime of South Africa, 
whose policies were a gross violation of the objectives and principles of the 
Agency's Statute. That action would strengthen the stature and credibility of 
the Agency. 
The meeting; rose at 6.10 p.m. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
12 October 1988 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Tuesday, 20 September 1988, at 10.20 a.m. 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 


[*] GC(XXXlI)/834, 

President: Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 
later: Mr. AAMODT (Norway) 


CONTENTS 


Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 


(resumed) 


General debate and annual report 
for 198 7 (resumed) 


Statements by the delegates of: 
Canada 
China 
Australia 
Egypt 
Islamic Republic of Iran 


First meeting of the Committee 


of the Whole 


General debate and annual report 


for 1987 (resumed) 


Statements by the delegates of: 
Iraq 
Republic of Korea 
Zimbabwe 


Paragraphs 


1 -9 
10 -108 


10 24 
25 33 
34 56 
57 72 
73 81 


82 - 84 


85 -108 


85 -93 
94 -102 
103 -107 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXII)/INF/262/Rev.2. 


88-4727 (3981e/0458e) 



GC(XXX11)/0R.305 
page 2 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT said that the Latin America group had come to a 
decision regarding its nominees to serve on the General Committee and he 
proposed that the delegate of Guatemala be elected as Vice-President and the 
delegate of Colombia be elected as an additional member. 
2. It was so decided. 
3. Thirteen members of the General Committee had now been appointed. 
However, one group had not yet been able to agree on its nominees, so that the 
General Committee could not yet be fully constituted. 
A. If the General Committee was late in holding its first meeting to 
discuss the Conference's agenda, that would delay the work of the Committee of 
the Whole, and in those circumstances he proposed that the Conference suspend 
Rules 34 and 40 of the Rules of Procedure ad interim in order that the General 
Committee might meet soon. 
5. Mr. MAHMASSANI (Lebanon) asked the President for an interpretation 
of the phrase "subject to the provisions of the Statute of the Agency ... " in 
Rule 102 of the Conference's Rules of Procedure in relation to the proposal 
which he had just made. 
6. The PRESIDENT replied that, while the Agency's Statute was 
undoubtedly paramount, it did not deal with the question of the composition of 
the General Committee, so that he did not believe there to be any conflict 
between his proposal and the Statute. 
7. He took it that the Conference was ready to accept his proposal that 
Rules 34 and 40 be suspended so as to enable the General Committee to meet 
soon. 
8. Mr. MAHMOUD (Iraq) said he understood that the Middle East and 
South Asia group was close to agreement on its nominees and suggested that the 
Conference defer further consideration of the matter until its next plenary 
meeting. 
9. The Conference agreed to defer further consideration of the matter. 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.305 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 198 7 (GC(XXXII)/835) (resumed) 


10. Mr. SHENSTONE (Canada) said the past two years had been trying 
times for all international organizations, and the IAEA had not been spared. 
Although Member States acknowledged the Agency's position at the centre of 
international nuclear co-operation, their expressions of support had often not 
been translated into tangible deeds. The Canadian Government urged them to 
fulfil their obligations towards the Agency in full and on time. 
11. The twentieth anniversary of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in 1988 was a reminder of its crucial importance in 
preventing nuclear proliferation, facilitating nuclear co-operation for 
peaceful purposes and encouraging nuclear weapons reductions. Canada had an 
abiding commitment to NPT and attached great importance to all States becoming 
full parties to it. 
12. The Agency's safeguards were of paramount importance and highly 
effective. Canada had been pleased to note that no anomalies indicating the 
diversion of safeguarded nuclear material had been detected during 1987. The 
pressures of "limited growth" should not be allowed to permit the 
deterioration of safeguards. Canada had been working with the Secretariat to 
find ways of utilizing available IAEA resources to maintain the effectiveness 
of safeguards. It welcomed the fact that, in December 1987, the IAEA field 
office in Toronto had been upgraded to a Regional Office. 
13. The Agency and Canada had invested considerable effort in preparing a 
safeguards approach for the new multi-unit nuclear generating station at 
Darlington. The Agency's special project, which had facilitated exchanges 
with Canadian officials and with the facility operator, could serve as a model 
for implementing safeguards at other facilities. 
14. For 11 years, the Canadian Safeguards Support Programme had been 
helping the Agency achieve its goals and objectives, particularly for 
CANDU-type on-load fuelled reactors. Considerable progress had been made on a 
system based on a combination of containment, continuous surveillance and 
non-destructive assay which could be of broader application in providing 
assurance against diversion. Canada had been pleased to witness signs of 
increased co-operation among the safeguards support programmes of other 
countries. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 4 


15. Although it had been over two years since the events at Chernobyl, 
public concern over nuclear safety persisted. That factor and other recent 
developments had forced a more prominent role on the Agency. Attention was 
being focused on environmental degradation owing to fossile fuels, and concern 
over climatic changes caused by men was growing. The World Conference 
on the Changing Atmosphere, held at Toronto in June 1988, had recommended 
reassessing the nuclear power option, which could have a role to play in 
lowering carbon dioxide emissions. A standing committee of the Canadian House 
of Commons had concluded that nuclear power represented an environmentally 
appealing technology. The Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources had 
released a study of energy alternatives for Canada which had concluded that 
the nuclear option should be sustained as a component of Canada's energy mix. 
Although a recent survey had revealed over 50% acceptance of nuclear power in 
Canada, it was still necessary to build better public knowledge and a broader 
acceptance of nuclear energy. 


16. His delegation acknowledged the valuable role played by the Nordic 
delegations in relation to sustainable development. Canada shared their deep 
concern about the environment and considered that international organizations 
should include an emphasis on the environmental factor in their programming 
and budgeting. The Agency was to be commended for its long-standing, 
effective activities relating to the environment, in particular nuclear 
safety, radiation protection and waste management, and for its renewed 
emphasis on the environment in the light of the report of the Brundtland 
Commission. In Canada's view, a review of the Agency's programmes from the 
environmental perspective would contribute both to public acceptance of 
nuclear energy and to the Agency's work in its promotion. 
17. The Agency's intensive efforts in the field of nuclear safety had 
culminated in the adoption of the revised NUSS Codes of Practice, which 
provided valuable guidance to States that were developing or revising their 
national safety requirements, and could serve as a useful reference in the 
safety assessment of nuclear power plants. The NUSS Codes and the safety 
guides might need to be augmented by requirements specific to particular 
reactor designs. Continued progress in the Agency's nuclear safety activities 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 5 


could best be achieved through an integrated programme that eliminated the 
increasingly artificial division between its regular and supplementary 
components. 


18. Canada had long collaborated with the Agency on the formulation of 
standards and criteria for the management of radioactive wastes: it was a 
leader in research on the disposal of radioactive wastes in deep geological 
formations. An environmental review of nuclear fuel waste management issues 
in Canada was to be carried out, and a siting task force would be formed to 
establish a low-level radioactive waste management facility in the province of 
Ontario. 
19. In 1987, 18 nuclear power plants had supplied over 15% of the 
electricity generated in Canada. Pressure tubes in two nuclear reactors had 
been successfully replaced: complete retubing of reactor cores greatly 
extended the reactor's life and enhanced its economic advantages. 
20. Canada remained the world's leading producer and exporter of uranium 
and took great interest in the Agency's activities involving uranium geology 
and exploration and exploitation technology. It supported the Agency's 
biennial effort to assess the world uranium supply in co-operation with the 
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, and believed the high quality of the NEA/IAEA Red Book should be 
maintained. 
21. Canada was in the forefront of international research into the 
applications of nuclear energy in the non-power sector, and strongly supported 
the Agency's activities involving research and isotopes. It had collaborated 
with the IAEA in a number of projects, including the monitoring of fall-out 
radioactivity in the environment and food and pollution studies.During the past 
year an accelerator for radiation applications had been successfully installed and 
tested in Canada, while development of the MAPLE family of light-water 
research reactors had continued throughout 1987. A fusion test facility had been rendered 
operational, and agreement had been reached on Canada's involvement in 
EURATOM's contribution to the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 
Project. 



GC(XXXI1)/OR.305 
page 6 


22. Canada continued to be a world leader in radiochemical and nuclear 
medicine products. In September 1987, the Government had reiterated its 
commitment to the safe application of food irradiation technology and to 
providing consumers with the option of irradiated foods. Canada had launched 
a food irradiation demonstration facility and technology transfer programme in 
Thailand and had opened an irradiation centre in Quebec which was being used 
solely for training in irradiation techniques. The Agency was already making 
use of the facility in its activities. 
23. Canada attached the highest importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities. The high rate for programme implementation in 1987 
despite resource constraints had been most commendable. His Government 
endorsed the steps being taken to achieve a more comprehensive policy review 
and was pleased by the extent to which project evaluation had become an 
integral part of the Agency's technical co-operation activities. Greater 
emphasis should be placed on key target groups, especially women, and efforts 
should be made to increase the impact on key economic sectors, such as 
agriculture and health, which would bring tangible benefits to those most in 
need. 
24. The Canadian delegation was pleased with the effective implementation 
of Agency programmes and endorsed the Annual Report for 198 7. 
25. Mr. ZHOU (China) said that, in pursuance of the objectives set 
forth in its Statute, the Agency had worked in a wide range of fields in the 
past year and had done a great deal to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The Chinese delegation supported the Agency's emphasis on the 
development of manpower resources in technical co-operation and noted the 
improvement in personnel training activities for the developing countries. In 
the nuclear power field, headway had been made in planning and implementation, 
research on performance and in technical development. On the nuclear fuel 
cycle, useful work had been carried out in such areas as the exploration and 
mining of uranium, nuclear fuel fabrication and management of spent fuels, the 
decommissioning of nuclear facilities and nuclear waste disposal. In nuclear 
safety and radiation protection, satisfactory results had been achieved in 
OSART activities, the review of NUSS Codes of Practice, the amendment of 

GC(XXX11)/0R.305 
page 7 


regulations for the safe transpsort of radioactive materials, and linking and 
testing the global communication network for early notification. The Agency 
had also been active in research and isotopes, mainly in the light of the 
practical needs of Member States. It had also performed significant work in 
nuclear safeguards and administration. 


26. The three regional co-operation programmes sponsored by the Agency for 
Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Africa 
respectively, were much favoured by the developing countries, and China, as a 
member of the Asia and Pacific region, was a supporter of and donor to the 
Regional Co-operation Agreement for that area. 
27. The Chinese delegation agreed to the Agency's programme and budget 
for 1989 and 1990; to the annual increment of $3.5 million in the Indicative 
Planning Figures for targets for voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for the period 1990-92; and to the increase 
in the level of the Working Capital Fund to $4 million. It was aware of the 
Agency's financial difficulties in the past two years and their impact on 
activities, and believed that the Secretariat's efforts and Member States' 
co-operation were major factors in the success of the Agency's activities. It 
hoped that the Secretariat would play its part by further tapping its latent 
potential and continuing to improve its efficiency. 
28. China supported the Secretariat's evaluation of technical assistance 
activities and review of the technical co-operation policies, which were 
designed to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of technical assistance 
and co-operation. His country looked forward to new contributions by the 
Agency to the promotion of the peaceful use of nuclear energy throughout the 
world. 
29. The Chinese Government had always followed the Agency's work with 
interest. Although only a recent Member, China had participated in many of 
the Agency's activities and had always paid its assessment and its voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund on time. It 
had taken an active part in INSAG and the work of other senior experts and 
advisory groups. Following the Chernobyl accident China had helped in 
drafting, and had signed and ratified, the two Conventions on nuclear safety. 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.305 
page 8 


It had also participated in, and contributed financially to, the expanded 
nuclear safety programme. China supported the Agency's revised NUSS Codes of 
Practice, to which Chinese nuclear safety experts had proposed a number of 
revisions. 


30. During the past year, China had been host, in co-operation with the 
Agency, to six training courses and seven international conferences. The 
tenth meeting of the working group of representatives of RCA member States 
held in April in Beijing, had been the first such meeting held in China since 
it joined the RCA programme. China was planning, after the current session of 
the General Conference, in co-operation with the Agency, to sponsor a number 
of international training courses and meetings, on subjects such as the 
rice-fish ecological system, radiation sterilization for tissue grafts, and 
INIS input and output. His country valued the Agency's activities in the 
fields of INIS and nuclear data and would continue to support those and other 
activities. 
31. With regard to the development of a nuclear energy programme in China, 
as everyone knew, people had become more apprehensive about nuclear safety 
since the Chernobyl accident, and some had even advocated the discontinuance 
of nuclear power programmes. However, after calm and serious reflection and 
analysis, people still recognized that nuclear energy had more advantages, 
both economically and environmentally, than other major energy sources 
currently in use. In the three decades or so between the 1950s and 1986, the 
time of the accident, nuclear power stations had maintained a fairly good 
operating record, and generally speaking, the environmental effects of 
developing nuclear energy were no worse than those of conventional power 
stations. 
32. China believed that the lessons learned from Chernobyl would lead to 
greater attention to, and hence improvement in, nuclear safety measures. 
Until new and better energy sources for massive production of power at 
reasonable cost were discovered, the development of nuclear energy would 
continue. China had accordingly pursued its policy of developing nuclear 
energy, with priority to safety and quality. The construction of its two 
nuclear power stations in Qinshan (Zhejiang) and Daya Bay (Guangdong), was 

GC(XXX11)/0R.305 
page 9 


proceeding smoothly and on schedule. Pre-phase preparations had also begun on 
the second phase of the Qinshan nuclear power station - a project for the 
construction of two 600 MW PWRs, with part of the technology and equipment 
coming from abroad. Discussions were in progress on the possibility of 
co-operation with interested countries. 


33. At the twenty-ninth session of the General Conference, the Chinese 
delegation had stated that China intended to hold consultations with the 
Agency with a view to placing some of its civil nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards. He now wished to inform delegates that satisfactory 
results had been achieved after two rounds of formal talks and the safeguards 
agreement between China and the Agency had been signed by both sides that 
morning. Consultations on the subsidiary arrangements for implementation of 
the agreement would continue after the present session of the General 
Conference. The signing of the agreement demonstrated China's goodwill and 
commitment to the peaceful use of nuclear energy and the promotion of 
international co-operation in that field, and its support for the two basic 
objectives laid down in the Agency's Statute. The list of facilities to be 
submitted by China to the Agency for safeguards would include nuclear 
facilities made in China as well as imported nuclear power stations. China 
would ensure that its nuclear imports were used for peaceful purposes, and not 
for military purposes or for nuclear explosions, and would continue to request 
recipient countries to submit nuclear materials and equipment from China to 
the Agency for safeguards. In pursuing its policy of modernization through 
peace and development, China would make further progress in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy and international co-operation in that field. 
34. Mr. WILSON (Australia) commended the Agency on its central role in 
international peace and security and its considerable achievements which were 
reflected in the Annual Report for 1987. 
35. The IAEA's safeguards system was indispensable to nuclear trade and 
co-operation and enabled nuclear power to contribute to the world's overall 
energy needs. Australia, as a party to NPT and a major supplier of uranium, 
attached paramount importance to that system, on which the entire 
international non-proliferation regime was based. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 10 


36. Australia therefore welcomed Spain's accession to NPT, which had 
brought the number of NPT parties to 137 - surely evidence of the Treaty's 
success and of the degree of international support it had attracted. His 
country also welcomed the announcement by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia that it 
intended to accede to the Treaty. The South African Government's recent 
statements concerning the possibility of possible accession to NPT had been 
regarded by Australia as a hopeful sign for the non-proliferation regime, and 
it was to be hoped that all other countries which had not yet joined NPT would 
do so as soon as possible. 
37. It was in the interests of all Member States to co-operate with the 
Agency in ensuring efficient and effective application of IAEA safeguards in 
many areas, including inspector designation, the updating of facility 
attachments and the negotiation of safeguards agreements. His delegation 
urged all NPT parties that had not negotiated INFCIRC/153 agreements with the 
Agency - in particular the three parties which had operating nuclear 
facilities - to do so promptly. 
38. The Agency's safeguards system needed to be kept under continuous 
review. The safeguards evaluation process which culminated each year in the 
Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR) was one of the Agency's strengths. 
That professional approach had come under attack from some quarters during the 
year on the basis of unauthorized disclosure of the SIR. As public confidence 
in safeguards - as well as in nuclear safety and waste management - was 
essential to nuclear trade and co-operation, the Agency should respond fully 
and convincingly to public questions and criticisms. To that end, the 
resources allocated to the Department of Safeguards and the Division of Public 
Information for public relations purposes might need to be reviewed when the 
next budget was drawn up. 
39. His delegation strongly supported the Director General's efforts to 
develop safeguards approaches to deal with the increases made necessary by the 
growing number of facilities under safeguards, the increase in quantities of 
material to be safeguarded, and the challenges posed by new technologies, at a 
time when the Agency and Member Governments alike faced acute budgetary 
pressure. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 11 


40. The Agency's technical co-operation programme had gone from strength to 
strength, assisted by the continued steady increase in resources. Australia 
agreed to the future real growth in the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund, to be brought about by increases of US $3.5 million for each of the 
years 1991, 1992 and 1993. Disbursements had been rising more than 
commensurately with the increases in resources: the Agency's report on 
technical co-operation activities in 1987 (document GOV/2344) showed that the 
implementation rate had reached an all-time record, as a result of greater 
efficiencies in the Department of Technical Co-operation. 
41. Australia's support of the Agency's technical co-operation programme 
was reinforced by extrabudgetary contributions, especially to the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) - a most successful 
agreement, enjoying the positive support of a wide range of countries in its 
region. Australia provided assistance in the form of equipment, training for 
IAEA fellows, expert services and lecturers, and training courses in Australia. 
42. Nuclear training continued to be a high priority for his country. The 
Australian School of Nuclear Technology had recently been reconstituted into 
the Training and Education Centre of the Australian Nuclear Science and 
Technology Organization (ANSTO). Provision of training for overseas students 
at the highest standards would be one of the Centre's major objectives. 
43. His country fully endorsed the IAEA's safety activities, which provided 
an important framework for conducting peaceful nuclear energy programmes. In 
April 1988, Australia had hosted, in Sydney, the successful IAEA International 
Conference on "Radiation Protection in Nuclear Energy". In conjunction with 
that Conference, Australia had also hosted a month-long training course on 
radiation protection for representatives from all members of RCA. The 
7th Congress of the International Radiation Protection Association had also 
been held at the same time. 
44. Australia strongly supported the three conventions related to nuclear 
safety - the Conventions on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, on 
Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, and on Assistance in the Case of a 
Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency - and welcomed the international 
support given to the three conventions, all of which Australia had ratified 

GC(XKX1I)/0R.305 
page 12 


the previous year. His delegation hoped that States which had not yet done so 
would become parties to those conventions as soon as possible. 


45. Australia had participated in the series of successful test 
transmissions using the Global Telecommunication System (GTS) of the World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO) for transmitting information in connection 
with the early notification convention, and ANSTO had established a 24-hour 
direct computer link with the Burea of Meteorology in Melbourne, which was the 
Australian entry point for the GTS network. That link ensured that Australia 
could be quickly notified and kept informed by the IAEA or other Member States 
of matters relating to the two conventions. 
46. 
Australia's uranium exports for 1987 had been 3795 tonnes of U 0 , 
3 8 
which currently represented about 14% of the world's uranium needs. 
Production from the Olympic Dam Mine, one of the largest in the world, had 
started in July 1988. 


47. ANSTO, formerly the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, was now 
operating with a more commercial orientation. It enabled nuclear science and 
technology to be used in industry, medicine and agriculture, and also 
maintained a significant regional and international standing in its areas of 
expertise. Its research and development programmes centred on the 
applications of radioisotopes and radiation in nuclear physics, biomedicine 
and health, environmental science and advanced materials. Work was continuing 
on SYNROC, the Australian-developed radioactive waste form. The 
non-radioactive pilot plant constructed at Sydney to demonstrate commercialscale 
production of SYNROC had begun work. Results confirmed SYNROC's 
potential as an alternative to the borosilicate glass process, and ANSTO had 
entered into arrangements with counterpart organizations in the United 
Kingdom, Japan, and Italy for research and development work on it. 
48. Australia had been engaged in research and development in nuclear 
science and technology for well over thirty years; the highest standards of 
safety had always been observed, and thus Australia had an excellent safety 
record, with no incident resulting in any adverse public health consequences 
taking place during that time. That level of commitment to safety would be 
maintained by ANSTO. 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.305 
page 13 


49. Australia had continued to seek protection of the marine environment 
through its opposition to the sea dumping of radioactive wastes, and in 
October 1987 had chaired a working group of the London Dumping Convention 
International Panel of Experts on Radioactive Wastes which had been 
established to examine the wider political, legal, economic and social aspects 
of radioactive waste dumping at sea. There would soon be a further meeting. 
Australia had also played a leading role in the negotiation of the texts of 
the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Rarotonga) and the 
1986 Convention for the Protection of the Natural Resources and Environment of 
the South Pacific Region (SPREP Convention). The SPREP Convention had the 
most rigorous provisions of all international treaties governing the dumping 
at sea of radioactive waste. 


50. Reports that radioactive waste had been dumped in African countries 
were cause for grave concern, even though the Agency had so far not been able 
to confirm that they were accurate. However, the proper management of nuclear 
waste was a matter of government policy for Australia, and it would be 
supporting acceptable measures to deal with the issues which those reports 
raised. 
51. The nuclear industry had faced major challenges in 1988 from 
allegations of improper conduct. Some of those allegations had received 
considerable publicity. Those developments showed how important it was that 
public and private entities, whether engaged in the nuclear power industry or 
in nuclear energy research or its applications, should conduct their 
activities with the utmost propriety, having full regard for safeguards, 
safety and other regulatory requirements. 
52. Australia acknowledged the genuine concerns of many, throughout the 
world, over issues involving nuclear energy and its applications. One current 
issue was food irradiation. In Australia, a parliamentary enquiry into the 
matter was underway and until its report had been considered, his Government 
would not be in a position to take a stance on food irradiation. 
53. The parliamentary inquiry had also covered the Conference on 
Acceptance, Control of and Trade in Irradiated Food, to be held in Geneva 
in December. It would be desirable for the Conference to approach its work on 

GC(XXXII)/0R.305 
page 14 


the basis of strict objectivity and not to rely on assumptions which were 
unsupported by scientifically established facts. Naturally, Member States 
participating in the Conference had the right to dissent from any of the 
Conference's conclusions. 


54. The IAEA was facing many challenges in different areas. Support for 
the Agency's safeguards programme was of paramount importance. The Director 
General was to be congratulated on the achievement of a negative real growth 
budget, no easy feat in view of the many demands placed on the Agency. 
Australia strongly approved of the re-ordering of priorities reflected in the 
1989 budget proposals before the General Conference. Australia also supported 
the proposed increase in the Working Capital Fund, to US $4 million. However, 
increasing the level of that Fund addressed only the symptoms of the Agency's 
cash flow problems, not the cause. The Agency's financial difficulties, due 
to the late payment or non-payment of assessed contributions by many 
Member States, remained a serious issue. His delegation urged those Members 
which paid late or were in arrears to give the Agency the necessary financial 
support. 


55. Australia had always upheld the principle of universality of membership 
of organizations in the United Nations system, and therefore believed that 
South Africa should not be prevented from exercising the rights and privileges 
of membership of the IAEA. There was a widespread inclination to isolate 
South Africa from the international community, because of its abhorrent system 
of apartheid. Australia's opposition to apartheid was well known - it was a 
system totally rejected by the entire international community - but it would 
not be in the interests of the Agency or the international non-proliferation 
regime to suspend South Africa from the Agency. 
56. The IAEA had achieved a level of success and respect rare among 
international organizations and enjoyed strong support from the international 
community. It was important for that to continue. His delegation would 
continue to work with other members to ensure that it did. 
57. Ms. TALLAVJY (Egypt) said that the Agency had a major role to play 
in seeking to overcome the problems of development through the application of 
advanced nuclear technology. In order to make the technological option 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.305 
page 15 


available to all nations, four requirements had to be met: developing 
countries should be provided with nuclear technology and the economic and 
social conditions in those countries should not be used as a pretext to deny 
them that technology; the nuclear option should be a peaceful one; the 
nuclear option should not endanger human safety and the environment; and 


lastly, each State should bear all liabilities arising from its nuclear 
option, including waste disposal, and developing countries should not be used 
as reservoirs for dumping nuclear and toxic wastes that could cause severe 
damage to their peoples. Her delegation urged all States, particularly the 


developed ones, to support the draft resolution on the dumping of nuclear 
wastes in developing countries, submitted by Egypt on behalf of the African 
Group. 


58. The Agency's General Conference coincided with the 20th anniversary of 
the entry into force of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which was closely 
linked with the Agency's functions and role in ensuring that nuclear energy 
was not used for non-peaceful purposes. The Treaty's requirements concerning 
the application of safeguards under the Agency's supervision constituted one 
of the major roles assigned to the Agency. Her delegation welcomed the 
reference made in the Director General's statement to the Agency's readiness 
to participate actively in the preparation of the Fourth NPT Review Conference 
which was to be held in 1989. It would be appropriate for that Conference to 
be held in Vienna, since many of the technical aspects of the Treaty, which 
were not less important than its political aspects, fell within the competence 
of the Agency. Egypt was one of the first countries which had acceded to that 
Treaty and had been motivated by its belief in nuclear non-proliferation, 
which was vital for the preservation of world peace and security. 
59. Egypt supported all efforts aimed at declaring both Africa and the 
Middle East nuclear-free zones. South Africa had not yet complied with the 
Agency's resolutions by submitting all its nuclear installations to safeguards 
and had not even acceded to NPT. South Africa should therefore sign and 
ratify the Treaty immediately and submit all its nuclear installations to 
Agency safeguards forthwith, instead of resorting to further delaying tactics. 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.305 
page 16 


60. Israel shared South Africa's attitude regarding accession to NPT and 
submission of all its nuclear installations to the Agency's safeguards. 
Israel's reply to the Director General's letter, which had called upon Israel 
to submit all its nuclear installations to safeguards, was nothing but an 
attempt to evade its obligations by propagating the idea of establishing a 
nuclear-free zone in the Middle East through direct negotiations. Moreover, 
the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, though important, 
was no substitute for Israel's accession to NPT and submission of all its 
installations to Agency safeguards. The Agency should initiate a technical 
study on the application of the safeguards system in the Middle East should a 
nuclear-free zone in fact be established. It was hoped that all States would 
support the draft resolution submitted by Egypt on that subject. The 
dangerous situation in the Middle East made it imperative for all States to 
exert pressure on Israel to induce it to accept the resolutions adopted by the 
United Nations and the General Conference for the sake of peace and stability 
in the region. 
61. The strengthening of the civil liability system for nuclear accidents 
was vital for the promotion of nuclear energy and its peaceful uses. The 
conference to conclude a Joint Protocol relating to the application of the 
Vienna and Paris Conventions on civil liability, which her country would sign, 
marked an important step on the way to further international efforts in that 
connection. Expansion of the use of nuclear energy would require more 
legislation to govern the relations between States and the Agency should 
therefore continue the course which it had begun, with a view to establishing 
a comprehensive legal system covering all aspects of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 
62. With regard to the Agency's safeguards system, her country believed 
that the system played a key role in the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
and the strengthening of world security in general and it should therefore be 
supported with a view to increasing its effectiveness. In order to reinforce 
that system, the Agency should participate in, and make use of, the current 
experiment in the field of safeguards resulting from the Treaty between the 
United States and the Soviet Union on the elimination of their intermediaterange 
and shorter-range missiles. 

GC(XXX11)/OR.305 
page 17 


63. Technical assistance was particularly important for developing 
countries. The Agency and developed countries had a responsibility to help 
developing countries in their efforts to catch up with technical progress and 
to make use of the resources provided by the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. Her country attached great hopes to the arrangements for regional 
co-operation on the African continent. Her country also appreciated the 
efforts made, within the Agency to help developing countries to develop and 
finance their nuclear power programmes by carrying out studies on the problems 
and obstacles facing them in that field. 
64. Efforts to implement the recommendations made by the Senior Expert 
Group which dealt with that question should be continued. Those 
recommendations covered four main fields: nuclear power project planning; 
public acceptance of nuclear power; project preparation and implementation; 
and project financing. Egypt commended the co-operation among the Agency, the 
World Bank and the United Nations Environment Programme aimed at planning and 
implementing nuclear power programmes in developing countries. It was hoped 
that full use would be made of those possibilities by combining the experience 
of the World Bank in financial analysis and planning with the experience 
of the Agency in nuclear and electric power planning in developing countries 
and the experience of UNDP in environmental protection. 


65. The Egyptian nuclear programme had started by establishing the main 
basis for research and development on three major axes: programmes for 
research and development and for supporting nuclear power projects, including 
instrumentation and research work on reactors and the nuclear fuel cycle; 
programmes for the applications of radioisotopes and radiological sources in 
support of development projects in the industrial, medical, agricultural and 
environmental fields, including diagnosis, treatment, development of economic 
characteristics of industrial products, food conservation, pest control and 
medical product sterilization; and nuclear safety and radiation protection 

GC(XXXII)/0R.305 
page 18 


programmes aimed at establishing criteria and standards for nuclear 
operational safety and for the protection of the population and the 
environment against the dangers of exposure to radiation and radiological 
pollution. 


66. Egypt planned to establish various facilities, including: a central 
plant for processing radioactive waste; industrial irradiation units using 
gamma-rays and accelerated electrons; a pilot unit for manufacturing nuclear 
fuel rods; a second pilot research reactor; a national system for automatic 
environmental monitoring in Egypt; a multi-purpose cyclotron; and support 
for plants producing radioactive energy and sources as well as for units 
manufacturing nuclear and electronic instruments. 
67. The Egyptian nuclear programme encouraged regional scientific and 
technical co-operation in the nuclear and radiological fields. Thus, several 
training programmes had been organized for specialized personnel from the Arab 
and African regions. Efforts in uranium exploration processes had been 
intensified and approximately one third of Egypt's total area had been 
surveyed for that purpose, revealing important discoveries which were now 
being developed and prepared for the production stages. 
68. Despite the direct impact of the Chernobyl accident on public opinion 
in Egypt concerning the use of nuclear energy for generating electricity, 
Egypt still regarded nuclear energy as one of the main options for meeting its 
electricity demand. In the light of the studies on the accident and its 
consequences, carried out at international level with the effective 
participation of the Agency, Egypt aimed, in its nuclear programme, to 
guarantee the highest degree of efficiency in implementation and maximum 
operational safety through man-power development in all the spheres relevant 
to the different stages of nuclear power projects. Her country appreciated 
the efforts which had been made to complete revision of the NUSS Codes and 
keep them up-to-date and in line with the development of nuclear technology. 
Egypt had adopted those NUSS Codes as a basis for the nuclear safety standards 
applicable to its nuclear power plants and other nuclear installations. It 
also appreciated the co-operation in its nuclear programme received from the 
Agency and other specialized international organizations as well as from 
friendly States. 
Although Egypt supported the Agency's draft budget for 1989, it did not approve 
of the application of the zero-growth rate to development activities 
in view of their importance for developing countries. With regard to 
the Indicative Planning Figures, the Egyptian Government had decided to make 
a contribution amounting to $23 800 to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 19 


69. Finally, there were some areas in which her delegation felt that the 
Agency's work could be enhanced. Firstly, it would be useful to summarize the 
results of scientific activities and ideas put forward during Agency-sponsored 
symposia and seminars and to prepare a report thereon for submission to the 
main Agency bodies. A committee could be established for that purpose on the 
same pattern as the Technical Assistance Committee, or the Administrative and 
Budgetary Committee. 
70. Secondly, the amount of resources allocated to each of the Agency's 
activities should be radically reconsidered since the existing situation was 
not consistent with the tasks of the Agency as defined in its Statute. The 
principle of setting a maximum limit for contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund conflicted with the idea of voluntary 
contributions. There were many funds in the United Nations system to which no 
such limitation was applied. That system could be changed or voluntary 
contributions could be made open and new sources of finance for developmentoriented 
activities found. 
71. Thirdly, it was important to support the Agency's information role in 
order to give the public a correct understanding of nuclear technology. The 
Agency could, for example, produce visual means such as video tapes to show 
the importance of the peaceful uses of nuclear power. 
72. In conclusion, the nuclear option raised the question whether 
scientific invention and progress would provide solutions to the devastating 
problems confronted by humanity in the light of its limited resources. Her 
delegation believed that the role that the Agency played in the future could 
contribute an answer, or part of the answer, to that question. 
73. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) noted that if moral 
considerations were not taken into account, the applications of science and 
technology would eventually lead to the annihilation of the human race. His 
country firmly believed in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and 
hoped that the Agency would also increase its efforts in that respect by 
providing more assistance to developing countries, while preventing 
non-peaceful applications. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 20 


74. During the past few years, there had been a continuous shift of 
emphasis in the Agency's role from promoter of global nuclear technology 
development to that of international regulator of nuclear technology 
applications in developing countries. The steady decline in the Agency's 
budget for the nuclear power and fuel cycle, technical assistance and 
promotional activities together with the continuous rise of the Agency's 
budget for safeguards clearly demonstrated that trend. That point had also 
been made by the Task Force of the Group of 7 7 in its report to the Board of 
Governors on the Agency's programme and budget for 1989 and 1990. 
75. His delegation was not suggesting that safeguards and the monitoring of 
fissionable materials were unnecessary, but merely wished to point out that 
the peaceful applications of atomic energy were by no means uniform throughout 
the world. The Agency's assistance should be given primarily to developing 
countries and the burden of safeguards activities should logically be borne by 
industrialized nations. However, such priorities were often interchanged and 
the benefits of nuclear energy were enjoyed largely by industrialized nations 
and in fact only 20% of the world's population enjoyed the benefits of 95% of 
total nuclear-power-generated electricity in the world. 
76. During the present decade, nuclear technology and its applications had 
been virtually stagnant in almost all developing countries. A developing 
country, intending to embark on a nuclear power programme, had to overcome 
numerous political obstacles. Bilateral and sometimes multilateral agreements 
were necessary as well as licensing agreements, various protocols, numerous 
guarantees, assurances and so on which effectively amounted to a loss of 
sovereignty for the country concerned. 
77. In his statement to the third special session of the General Assembly 
devoted to disarmament on 13 June 1988, the Director General had refuted the 
contention that there was an inevitable link between civilian nuclear power 
and nuclear weapons. One of the Agency's main tasks should be to dispel such 
unfounded fears. Even countries such as his own which were party to NPT and 
which had accepted full-scope Agency safeguards were the object of 
discrimination. The Director General should therefore make special efforts to 
establish the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards programme and to 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.305 
page 21 


convince politicians, in certain political power blocks, that no country which 
was fully covered by the Agency's safeguards programme had been able to use 
its nuclear power plants to manufacture nuclear weapons. 


78. With regard to the composition of the Board of Governors, equal 
opportunities should exist for the membership and representation of all 
regions of the world on an equitable basis. A review of the existing 
membership of the Board of Governors showed that in fact 52.5% of the 
membership was consistently allocated to the American continent and Western 
Europe. Countries in South East Asia and the Pacific and in the Middle East 
and South Asia represented only 5% and 7.5% of Board membership respectively, 
which was by no means commensurate with either the size of the respective 
regions or with their respective populations. Even the proposed 10% increase 
in the total number of Board members would not significantly alter the present 
situation and the majority would still be held by the Western Bloc. 
Therefore, while his delegation supported the 10% increase in Board 
membership, it felt that as a final solution Article VI of the Statute should 
be modified. In the meantime, the proposed 10% increase should be adopted and 
allocated in a fair manner to the Asian and Middle East countries. The right 
of membership of the Board of Governors for those countries in the Middle East 
which desired a seat on the Board, should be given on a rotational basis, and 
the informal working group examining alternatives to Article VI should be 
given stronger support to achieve its objectives. 
79. With regard to military attacks on nuclear installations, a resolution 
should be adopted to prohibit future military attacks on all nuclear 
installations devoted to peaceful applications, at any stage of construction 
or at any stage of utilization. The Agency's indifference to his country's 
repeated warnings on the need for specific steps towards the prohibition of 
military attacks on nuclear installations would pose much more severe 
consequences to the international community than those caused by chemical 
weapons. It should be recalled that the primary objective of the Agency was 
to safeguard not only the utilization of fissionable materials, but also the 
right of all Member States to benefit from nuclear technology. Such a 
resolution should also envisage clear mechanisms for penalizing the aggressor 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 22 


country since mere condemnations did not constitute a sufficient deterrent. 
His country had suffered severely from that deficiency in the Agency's working 
apparatus and therefore proposed that the situation should be corrected for 
the benefit of other countries which might one day be affected by it. His 
country was, however, very grateful to the Director General for his special 
efforts in mobilizing a fact-finding mission to Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant 
following the latest military attack. 


80. Although the Agency's safeguards programme was effective with regard to 
the installations to which it applied, it remained impotent when set against 
real nuclear proliferation. The Agency had no mechanisms to check vertical 
proliferation, while the dangers of horizontal proliferation were 
disproportionately exaggerated. At present, strategic nuclear weapons had a 
combined yield of some 20 000 megatons and formed a constant potential threat 
to mankind. It was deplorable that such real threats did not receive the 
attention which they deserved, whereas the improbable scenario of a 
Third-World country using a nuclear power plant to manufacture a nuclear 
device constantly received exaggerated publicity. Until a comprehensive 
programme for total nuclear disarmament was brought into force, the 
effectiveness of any safeguards programme, the NPT and the encouragement of 
new signatories to NPT remained questionable issues. 
81. With regard to activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran, its Nuclear 
Research Centre had been very active in the production of various 
radioisotopes, in particular Tc and I, for medical and industrial 
applications. Considerable progress had also been made in other areas such as 
solid-state physics and electronics; the Plasma Physics Department had been 
active in the study of plasmas and their applications, particularly in the 
area of nuclear fusion; the Gamma Irradiation Centre, established in 1986 
with the aim of providing services for the sterilization of disposable medical 
products, had expanded its activities to the sterilization of foodstuffs and 
polymers; and efforts in the application of nuclear science and technology to 
agriculture had been increased to help alleviate some of the country's needs 
in that area. Finally, in the field of radiation protection, in addition to 
formulating regulations and standards and evaluating the safety of nuclear 
installations and issuing licences, the most important activity had been the 

GC(XXX11)/OR.305 
page 23 


protection of the public and the environment against the biological hazards of 
radiation. His country had also been continuing its activities associated 
with the biological protection of the environment as a consequence of the 
Chernobyl accident and the monitoring of imported foodstuffs which might have 
been contaminated. 


FIRST MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


82. The PRESIDENT said that the delay in fully constituting the 
General Committee meant that the Committee of the Whole had not started its 
work that morning. In order to ensure the smooth progress of the Conference's 
business, he suggested that the Conference suspend Rule 42 of its Rules of 
Procedure ad interim, so as to allow the Committee of the Whole to start its 
work before the General Committee met, and that the Conference request the 
Committee of the Whole to embark on a consideration of the matters proposed 
for initial discussion by it in the provisional agenda (document GC(XXXII)/834). 
83. It was so agreed. 
84. The PRESIDENT announced that the Committee of the Whole would 
meet at 3 p.m. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1987 (GC(XXXII)/835) (resumed) 


85. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) noted that studies to select a site for Iraq's 
first power station had continued in co-operation with the Agency. The Iraqi 
Atomic Energy Commission (IAEC) had been able to install new laboratories for 
use by research workers and specialists in agriculture and biology and to 
develop the analytical chemistry, radiation protection and environmental 
monitoring laboratories. In addition, laboratory facilities for basic 
research in physics and reactor studies had been upgraded. Furthermore, the 
IAEC had devoted special attention to the production of isotopes and 
pharmaceutical kits and had provided additional facilities for that purpose. 
New laboratories and training facilities in several fields of atomic energy 
had also been set up. 

GC(XXXI1)/0R.305 
page 24 


86. Before the entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), there had been high hopes that it would prevent the 
spread of nuclear weapons to non-nuclear-weapon States and that it would 
promote and develop the peaceful applications of atomic energy in the States 
party. The Treaty was further expected to curb the arms race, to reduce the 
level of nuclear armament and to achieve disarmament in accordance with the 
obligations undertaken by all parties, in particular, the nuclear-weapon 
States. 
87. It was satisfying to note that the number of States party to the Treaty 
had increased to 136 and that the non-nuclear-weapon States had complied with 
their obligations. However, the arras race was continuing and had escalated to 
new higher levels both quantitatively and qualitatively. At the same time, 
the nuclear-weapon capabilities of a number of regimes which had acceded to 
the Treaty had grown considerably. Moreover, it was becoming certain that 
Israel, in co-operation with South Africa, had acquired nuclear weapons. 
88. Iraq, whose nuclear facilities devoted to peaceful purposes and placed 
under Agency safeguards in accordance with NPT had been attacked by Israel, 
regretted the failure of some parties to comply with their obligations under 
the Treaty. Those States had failed to condemn the Israeli aggression 
vigorously and decisively and had also failed to take strong preventive 
actions to deter the repetition of a similar aggression. The same States were 
still co-operating with Israel in a manner that would further enhance its 
nuclear capabilities. In doing so, they had seriously damaged their own 
credibility and that of NPT. 
89. With regard to South Africa, the General Conference should not be 
deceived by that country's attempts to play for time. The suspension of the 
privileges and rights of membership of South Africa was already overdue and 
his delegation believed that the Conference should take the necessary action. 
90. His delegation was also dissatisfied with the Secretariat's response to 
the General Conference resolution GC(XXXI)/RES/4 70 presented in the report 
entitled "Israeli Nuclear Capabilities and Threat" contained in document 
GOV/INF/554. Israel had totally ignored resolution GC(XXXI)RES/470, the 
United Nations Security Council resolution 487 (1981) and the relevent 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 25 


resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly, which called on Israel to 
place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. Political 
protective measures aimed at covering up the Israeli nuclear armament 
activities were posing a frightening threat to non-proliferation in the region 
and were endangering peace and security. 


91. The problem of pollution of the environment by the dumping of poisonous 
industrial wastes within the borders and the territorial waters of some States 
had created wide-spread apprehension. That problem was further complicated by 
the fact that developing countries, which were victims of such practices, 
lacked the technical and scientific know-how and the financial resources to 
deal with the problem. The international community should intensify its 
efforts to stop those dangerous practices. His delegation believed that the 
International Commission on Environment and Development established by the 
United Nations General Assembly resolution 38/161 of 1983 could play an 
important role in that respect. 
92. His delegation fully supported the Agency's safety activities and 
attached special importance to international co-operation. Iraq had ratified 
the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention 
on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency and 
had deposited the instruments of ratification with the Agency. However, its 
basic reservations on those conventions remained unchanged, in particular, the 
exclusion of accidents caused by armed attacks. 
93. In conclusion, his country welcomed the treaty between the Soviet Union 
and the United States of America on the elimination of intermediate-range and 
shorter-range missiles and hoped that further agreements would be concluded. 
Mr. Aamodt (Norway), Vice-President, took the Chair. 


94. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) noted that nuclear power accounted for 
more than 16% of the world's electricity production and that its use would 
undoubtedly continue to expand. However, there were difficulties associated 
with international co-operation, non-proliferation and public acceptance of 
nuclear power and it was therefore important to strengthen the Agency's basic 
role, to redefine its future direction and to steer it away from extraneous 
issues. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 26 


95. International co-operation was indispensable for the implementation of 
nuclear power projects, particularly in the case of developing countries, 
since nuclear projects traditionally involved a developed infrastructure, 
skilled manpower, highly sophisticated technology and considerable financial 
resources. In that respect, his country appreciated the Agency's many 
activities to promote peaceful nuclear co-operation between advanced nations 
and developing countries. However, difficulties associated with access to 
advanced technology, the assurance of nuclear supply and availability of 
skilled manpower still remained. 
96. His country felt that the Agency should focus more attention on the 
quality of technology transferred under its technical assistance and 
co-operation programme and should further expand its nuclear power and safety 
programmes. All international nuclear co-operation should be carried out 
under comprehensive internationally binding commitments to the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices such as the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons or the Tlatelolco Treaty 
and acceptance of the Agency's full-scope safeguards. His country welcomed 
Spain's accession to NPT and the recent decision of Saudi Arabia to follow NPT 
and hoped that those countries still remaining outside those Treaties would 
become party to one of them as soon as possible. If not, they should at least 
show their adherence to non-proliferation through voluntary acceptance of 
Agency safeguards for all their nuclear facilities and activities. That would 
help to dispel universal concern about non-proliferation and help to obtain 
much needed public acceptance for nuclear power. 
97. There was growing concern among the general public about the safety of 
nuclear power. The Agency had made valuable contributions to increasing 
public awareness and to improving nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
The International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) had played a vital 
role in the development of basic safety principles and the revision of nuclear 
safety standards and the Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) missions had 
contributed not only to reassuring the operators, the licensing authorities 
and the public, but also to strengthening the confidence of neighbouring 
States. Public concern about nuclear energy was partly based on 
misunderstanding and ignorance and therefore it was important that the public 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 27 


should be better informed about the benefits of nuclear power. In that 
connection the Agency should take a more active role by systematically 
developing and making available information, designing appropriate methods of 
public education and organizing seminars, workshops and/or expert group 
meetings on public awareness. 


98. His delegation was pleased to note that, in 1987, as in previous years, 
the Agency had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the diversion of 
safeguarded materials or the misuse of facilities for the manufacture of 
nuclear weapons. There had also been welcome increases in inspection goal 
attainment and inspection efforts in spite of budgetary constraints and the 
extension of safeguards coverage. Nevertheless, his delegation felt that an 
in-depth study should be made of all possible organizational and procedural 
measures which could improve the efficiency and the reliability of the 
Agency's safeguards system and ensure optimum utilization of the limited 
resources available. 
99. With regard to the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
activities, his country noted that there had been an increase in the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF), which reconfirmed the effectiveness 
of the principle of voluntary contributions and Indicative Planning Figures. 
It was, however, regrettable that although there had been considerable 
improvements in the pledges and payments of voluntary contributions to the 
TACF in 1987, there were still problems associated with non-payments or late 
payments of voluntary contributions for the TACF which would threaten the 
current technical assistance and co-operation system in the long term. 
100. As a party to NPT, and under the Agency's full-scope safeguards, his 
country had ambitiously conducted its peaceful nuclear power programme under 
the international non-proliferation regime. At present, there were 
nine nuclear power plants in operation or being commissioned with over 
7.7 GW(e) of installed capacity, representing 35% of the country's total 
electricity capacity. Eventually, the nuclear power programme in Korea would 
be expanded to meet the ever-growing energy demands, with two or more units 
being added in the mid-1990s. 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.305 
page 28 


101. Korea believed that the benefits of nuclear power should be made fully 
available to developing countries and it wished to share with other developing 
countries its unique experiences and the.nuclear power technology which it had 
accumulated over the past 20 years. It had therefore been pleased to host and 
provide full financial support for the RCA Regional Workshop on Photon, 
Electron and Neutron Dosimetry in Radiotherapy in 1987 and would also host and 
provide financial support for the Agency's Interregional Training Course on 
Nuclear Power Project Planning and Implementation in November 1988. 
102. In addition to the continued expansion of its technical assistance and 
co-operation to developing countries, it would further strengthen its internal 
non-proliferation system to ensure the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
fulfil its obligations as an Agency Member State in accordance with NPT and 
other international nuclear agreements. In that connection it had developed 
its own computer system for safeguards data processing and a legal framework 
for safeguards. In addition, as an emerging nuclear supplier, it would 
establish, in the near future, basic guidelines for nuclear exports as well as 
physical protection instruments for the safe use of nuclear power. 
103. Mr. KANGAI (Zimbabwe) noted that the Agency had been very 
successful in fulfilling its objectives and his country welcomed the increased 
importance attached to safety-related work by the Agency and the greater 
emphasis which had been placed on the needs of the developing Member States. 
104. The growing atmosphere of trust and increasing contact between the 
United States of America and the Soviet Union in the area of nuclear armaments 
was very welcome. Zimbabwe and other countries in the non-aligned movement 
and in the rest of the world would live more peacefully if the current trend 
of dialogue continued successfully. The vast amounts of money spent on 
nuclear weapon research and development could be much better used to alleviate 
many of the world's problems. 
105. The agenda of the General Conference included once again an item on 
South Africa's nuclear capabilities. In 1987 a statement released by 
Mr. P.W. Botha hinted that South Africa would "soon" like to sign the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty but South Africa had taken no such steps. It should 
therefore be suspended from the Agency and subjected to comprehensive 

GC(XXXII)/OR.305 
page 29 


international sanctions until it showed more respect for international 
opinion, whilst the prospect of peace in southern Africa as a result of the 
United States-mediated peace talks between Angola, Cuba and South Africa was 
very welcome, past experience had shown that caution was necessary since South 
Africa had repeatedly violated the Nkomati Accord which it had signed with the 
People's Republic of Mozambique. 


106. It was alarming to read in certain press reports about the wastes, some 
of which contained radioactive materials, dumped by industrialized countries 
in developing countries. His country did not accept that such activities were 
carried out solely by unscrupulous private business concerns and believed that 
the governments responsible turned a blind eye to those activities in the hope 
that the problem of toxic wastes would be "exported" from their territory. 
107. Finally, with regard to the Agency's technical assistance activities 
his country welcomed the increasing awareness within the Agency of the 
importance of technical assistance to developing Member States and although 
his country was a relative newcomer to the Agency, it was already experiencing 
the benefits of Agency membership. It had fairly comprehensive legislation to 
cover the import, handling and use of radioisotopes and improvements were 
being made with the Agency's assistance. In addition, some Agency waste 
management experts were going to visit Zimbabwe before the end of the year. A 
radiation protection manpower training programme was being conducted with the 
Agency's assistance and his country hoped to be able to hold such courses 
locally for radiation protection workers. Numerous applications for Agency 
assistance had been made in the fields of hydrology, agriculture, medicine and 
the life sciences and some had already been approved. Zimbabwe already had a 
Nuclear Medicine Centre and it was hoped that a national calibration 
laboratory would be set up to calibrate all radiation equipment to ensure 
correct dosages. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
16 November 1988 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Tuesday, 20 September 1988, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 
General debate and annual report 
for 1987 (continued) 1 - 139 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Mauritius 1 14 
Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea 15 20 
Cuba 21 34 
Viet Nam 35 39 
Malaysia 40 53 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic 54 64 


[*] GC(XXXII)/834. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXII)/INF/262/Rev.2. 


88-4749 
(4117e/0456e) 



GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 2 


Item of the 
provisional
agenda* 


1


 Paragraphs 


Finland 65 - 76 
Poland 77 - 87 
Belgium 88 - 102 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 


Republic 103 - 113 
Brazil 114 - 129 
Spain 130 - 139 


Reply by the delegate of Iraq to 


the statement by the delegate of 


the Islamic Republic of Iran 140 - 142 


 Election of officers and 
appointment of the General 
Committee (resumed) 143 - 144 


Statement by the delegate of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran 145 



GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1987 (GC(XXXII)/835) (continued) 


1. Mr. UTCHANAH (Mauritius) observed that several positive steps 
taken recently indicated the political will to create a peaceful environment 
for the world population. At the present time when technology was evolving 
fast, man could not only destroy the Earth, but could also - by acting 
circumspectly - promote sustained economic development on a world-wide scale. 
The Annual Report for 1987 demonstrated quite clearly the increasing role of 
nuclear power in world electricity production. There was no doubt that the 
demand for electricity would be growing in the developing countries as they 
increased their level of industrialization. Mauritius, which had started its 
industrial diversification programme in 1983, had been witnessing a growth 
rate of 10-15% annually in electricity production over the preceding 
three years. That was the kind of growth rate which could be expected in a 
developing economy if the conditions were right. 
2. The recent conclusion of the INF Treaty had been a positive step away 
from the destructive aspect of nuclear energy. However, the appropriate 
pressures should be maintained at all levels for the total elimination of 
nuclear arms. The resources thus freed could be more wisely used for social 
and economic development. 
3. Two years earlier, at the thirtieth regular session of the General 
Conference, he had spoken about the need to consider the world as one. The 
troubles which affected one part of the planet could not leave the other parts 
unconcerned. Mankind was now more than ever aware of the potential dangers 
which the new methods of harnessing nuclear technology might bring to it. He 
had in mind the case of the radiological accident in Goiania: the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy were now being extended to medicine and agriculture, 
but dangers often arose, especially in the less developed countries, as a 
result of shortages of trained personnel. 
4. His delegation upheld the Agency's stand that regulatory requirements 
should be specific, simple and enforceable; in particular, good communication 
was required between all concerned in implementing and enforcing radiological 
protection requirements. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 4 


5. The Agency budget for radiation protection and nuclear safety 
for 1989-90 clearly recognized the need for a concentrated effort in that 
area. Like some delegates who had spoken before him, he stressed that the 
availability of funds for programmes of direct importance to the developing 
countries should keep pace with the priority accorded to them. Any slowing 
down of such programmes would only widen the existing technology gap. 
6. There was hope at present that the nuclear arms race would soon be a 
thing of the past, and so efforts should now be concentrated on preparing for 
the future of mankind. The seminar on radiation protection services for 
developing countries which the Agency had recently conducted had been an 
effective exercise, but it was perhaps not enough. Many developing countries 
faced the dilemma of having up-to-date technology without necessarily having 
the legislative and technical framework needed for regular monitoring and 
control of radiological sources. 
7. Each country should set up such a framework for both radiological and 
radioactive waste control as well as nuclear safety. To that end, it was 
essential to train personnel and to acquire the necessary equipment. That 
must be one of the Agency's aims, recent events having clearly shown that 
accidents could happen to anyone. That would take time, but would be a 
worthwhile exercise. 
8. Referring to the question of making the public aware of the safety 
aspects of nuclear energy, he congratulated the Agency on the meeting with media 
representatives which it had recently organized. A sound public information 
programme was essential to the development of the uses of nuclear energy. 
9. The recent public outcry against the dumping of toxic waste in 
Third World countries was a matter of serious concern for everyone. Although 
the stringent controls which the Agency had established might appear 
satisfactory, there was still a need to exercise vigilance, both at the 
national and the international level, where nuclear waste material was 
concerned. 
10. Resolution No. 1153 adopted by the Organization of African Unity 
in May 1988 had highlighted the concern felt by the countries in the region at 
the potential hazards which the dumping of nuclear and industrial wastes might 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 5 


have for the environment. It was important for every Member State to ensure 
that its radioactive waste was disposed of in accordance with the established 
safety standards. But beyond that, some international guidelines were 
required, and the Agency had a role to play in that respect. 


11. On the issue of food irradiation, he noted with pleasure that an 
International Conference on the Acceptance, Control of, and Trade in 
Irradiated Food was to be held towards the end of the year. The need for some 
form of quality standardization was felt most particularly by developing 
countries which, often through ignorance, took delivery of products considered 
unacceptable by the developed countries. Standards for irradiated food 
applicable to both exports and imports should be prepared. 
12. Lastly, he considered that programmes and activities closely related to 
the nuclear energy sector should be initiated in all regions. His Government 
was therefore interested in the development of regional arrangements for 
Africa in the field of nuclear science and technology on the lines of those 
existing in Europe, Asia and Latin America. 
13. That was indeed a challenge for his region, which had the greatest need 
for training but could take heart from the thought that nuclear science and 
technology would help it to proceed on the path of sustained development. 
However, economic growth must not be pursued at the expense of the 
environment. That was why Africa as a region must have the appropriate 
structures which would ensure safe utilization of nuclear energy. The Agency 
had been of great assistance in establishing safeguards standards, but it was 
up to all independent nations to ensure that those standards were followed. 
14. Expressing his satisfaction at the present period of worldwide detente, 
he emphasized the role of the Agency as an instrument for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy for economic development. He hoped that it would take a 
unified and global approach in its activities. 
15. Mr. KIM (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) wished to commend 
the Director General and the Secretariat on the excellent Annual Report 
for 1987. That had been a year of great significance for the Agency and, in 
general, for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Since the commemoration of 
its 30th anniversary the Agency had continued to play a pivotal role in the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 6 


expansion of the use of nuclear energy, in nuclear safety, environmental 
protection, the prevention of nuclear war and the abolition of nuclear 
weapons. That role had been justly appreciated at the 42nd session of the 
United Nations General Assembly. The Agency enjoyed the active support of 
Member States and of peace-loving peoples all over the world. Its technical 
assistance activities enabled the developing countries to embark on exploiting 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The world output of nuclear power had 
reached 16% of total electricity production, and nuclear energy was now being 
used widely for the promotion of human welfare in the areas of industry, 
agriculture, health and education. Ways of utilizing nuclear energy without 
risk to man and his environment were being explored and applied ever more 
effectively. 


16. The achievements which had been made in the field of nuclear energy 
were unthinkable without the participation of the Agency. His country was 
appreciative of all the activities of the Agency and wished to reaffirm its 
intention to take an increasing part in them in the future. 
17. His country had taken steps towards using nuclear energy for purposes 
of economic development. During the period of the third Seven-Year Plan, 
mainly hydroelectric power plants and thermal plants were to be built, but 
other resources such as nuclear energy would not be ignored. Preparations 
were under way for the construction of a nuclear power plant with a WWER-440 
reactor. In addition, various activities were being carried out to apply 
nuclear energy in many sectors of the national economy, including industry, 
agriculture and health. The number of institutions using radiation and 
radioisotopes had increased to several hundred. Radiographic testing had come 
into general use in heavy engineering factories, shipyards and construction 
complexes, and such measuring devices as radiation densitometers, and level 
and thickness gauges were in use in various production sectors. Mines and 
factories were employing X-ray luminescence and beta scattering analysers. 
Radioisotopes were being used for the treatment of diseases and modern 
labelling methods in biology, agriculture and scientific research. A new 
device which could check germs quickly had recently aroused great interest 
among people working in the health sector and food industry. At the same 
time, in the use of nuclear energy in the various sectors of the national 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 7 


economy, special attention was paid to nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, and the relevant rules and requirements were being strictly 
observed. 


18. The situation in the Korean peninsula had become more tense and 
complicated than ever before. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea had 
put forward many peace-oriented proposals, including one to turn the Korean 
peninsula into a nuclear-free zone of peace. He hoped that all peace-loving 
people would pay due regard and give support to that just cause. 
19. The co-operation between his country and the Agency was increasing with 
each passing year. Research and development work on nuclear energy, research 
in the fields of nuclear physics and the properties of materials, and 
scientific and technological activities relating to the applications of 
nuclear energy in many sectors of the economy had been undertaken in close 
collaboration with the Agency. His country had received technical assistance 
from the Agency, notably in connection with particle accelerators for isotope 
production and analysis and with the modernization of uranium exploration. 
That assistance had proved its worth in many fields. 
20. He wished to express his deep gratitude to the Director General, the 
Secretariat and many Member States for the development of the Agency's 
promotional activities and to assure the Agency of his country's continued 
co-operation. 
21. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) welcomed the opportunity which the 
Conference afforded to Member States to review their achievements in the use 
of nuclear energy for the development of their economies and for other 
peaceful purposes. His country was making progress in implementing its 
peaceful nuclear programme, and the construction of its first nuclear power 
plant was going ahead in accordance with technical standards. Special 
attention was being paid to measures which would guarantee its safe operation, 
both during construction and assembly and with respect to the training of 
future operators. 
22. The Cuban Government was in the process of establishing a regulatory 
infrastructure for the nuclear sector. It had recently approved a decree on 
State supervision of the safety of nuclear installations in line with the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 8 


Agency's efforts in that area. Another important step towards the 
introduction of nuclear power in Cuba had been the start of construction work 
on the future nuclear research centre, which was to serve as the basic 


institution for research, specialist training and production of radioactive 
substances used in industry and public health. 


23. In the safeguards area, Cuba had successfully concluded its 
negotiations with the Agency on subsidiary arrangements in connection with the 
safeguards agreement relating to units 1 and 2 of the Juragua nuclear power 
plant. Those instruments were already in force. 
24. The Director General's visit to Cuba in October 1987 had been of 
special importance in strengthening that country's ties with the Agency and 
with other countries interested in the development of nuclear energy. There 
had been fruitful exchanges of views on the basis of the Cuban nuclear 
programme and on the technical assistance which the Agency provided to 
scientific institutions. The Cuban Government's commitment to the development 
of nuclear energy in accordance with international regulations and standards 
had been reaffirmed. It attached high priority to its nuclear programme, and 
had just inaugurated an applied research centre for nuclear energy 
development, a scientific institution dedicated to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Cuba was also carrying out important activities in Latin 
America - including a course in nuclear medicine and increased participation 
in the ARCAL programme. Moreover, it was taking steps aimed at achieving a 
better understanding over nuclear safety matters with neighbouring countries. 
A Cuban delegation had recently visited a nuclear power plant in the United 
States and had been given the opportunity for a valuable exchange of views. 
25. Referring to the economic situation in countries which lacked 
conventional sources of energy, he pointed out that although nuclear power was 
the only viable option for those countries, no progress was being made towards 
their acquiring it in the reasonably near future. As the annual report 
indicated, the installed capacity in the seven developing countries with 
nuclear power plants in operation was no more than 4% of the world's total 
installed capacity. That imbalance was a matter of great concern. How could 
a country which had no choice, and which was poor as well, make progress? 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 9 


Some argued that those countries would do better to turn to other options such 
as coal - in order to solve their energy problems. However, even if they 
had fossil fuel or hydroelectric potential, the less advanced countries lacked 
the financial resources and infrastructure to realize that potential and 
exploit it. 


26. His delegation considered that the situation in the Third World would 
not improve unless changes were made in the unfair international economic 
system imposed on the developing countries by the market-economy countries, 
which kept the former in technological dependence and debt. Once that problem 
was resolved, the nuclear option would be the most efficient for many 
countries, as it would not only result in saving conventional fuels for other 
uses, but would also exert a positive influence on society as a whole through 
its multi-disciplinary character. Those realities must be understood and the 
essential changes made in the socio-economic structure if the Third World was 
to have energy and industrial development. 
27. He wondered what the international community had done so far in that 
regard, and what had become of the new international economic order which had 
been proclaimed as the only way out for the world's poorest countries. 
Analysis of the relationship between disarmament and development showed that a 
potential source of financing for programmes to help the Third World and for 
the repayment of foreign debts would be the substantial resources now being 
invested in the arms race. In that context, all mankind had welcomed with 
satisfaction the agreement concluded between the two nuclear Superpowers to 
eliminate intermediate-range missiles. He also noted with pleasure that the 
Soviet Union, taking the initiative, had hinted at the possibility of going on 
to destroy 50% of intercontinental missiles. 
28. It was also important to reduce conventional armaments and to abandon 
the politics of force and interference at the regional level, which had 
inevitably been the source of conflict and aggression in various parts of the 
world. The peace to which the world aspired was not merely that which 
excluded all danger of nuclear destruction - it must be universal and be 
established in a climate of international collaboration over problems of 
development. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 10 


29. The President of the Republic of Cuba, referring in a speech to those 
problems - nuclear weapons, underdevelopment, poverty, hunger and lack of 
education and health - had pointed out that malnutrition and well-known and 
curable diseases caused the death of 40 000 children each day - as many as 
would be killed if a nuclear bomb like those dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
were to fall on the children of the Third World once every three days. 
30. Turning to the Agency's budget for 1989, he observed that it followed 
the principle of zero real growth, on which subject his delegation's position 
was the same as before. He hoped that in the future the Agency's budget would 
reflect an appropriate balance between promotional and regulatory activities 
so as to ensure that the developing countries' goals for the use of nuclear 
energy in the various sectors of the economy were achieved. 
31. The indicative planning figures approved for 1990-92, representing a 
growth rate lower than in the preceding cycle, were the result of delicate 
negotiations. Cuba had defended, and continued to support, the present 
mechanism of financing technical assistance. However, it had pointed out on 
several occasions that the success of that mechanism depended on the 
participation of all countries in the financing, and that the amounts pledged 
must keep up with the growing demand of the developing and other Member States 
of the Agency. 
32. The General Conference was called upon to consider how to implement 
resolution GC(XXXI)/RES/470 on Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat. He 
regretted that no progress had been made. In his delegation's view, the 
General Conference should assert its authority in such a way that the 
international community would compel the Israeli Government to comply with the 
resolutions of the United Nations and of the Agency in particular. 
33. As to resolution GC(XXXI)/RES/485 concerning South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities, he noted that contact had been established with that country's 
Government with a view to finding solutions to the problems identified by the 
General Conference. His delegation wished to reaffirm its position in that 
matter: it supported and would continue to support any measure designed to 
eliminate the danger which South Africa's nuclear capabilities represented for 
the countries in the region. Cuba unreservedly upheld the stand of the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 11 


African group in that matter, and wholeheartedly supported any measure that 
would guarantee the security and integrity of the so-called front line 
States. It considered that any formula for a negotiated solution must be 
pursued which would help eliminate the anachronistic and despised system of 
racial segregation in South Africa and promote democratization of South 
African society, as demanded by the international community. Only then would 
the threat have been dispelled. 


34. Every session of the General Conference constituted a challenge to the 
will of participants to find mutually satisfactory solutions for the benefit 
of peoples, to seek to eliminate nuclear weapons and to harness nuclear energy 
for the development and welfare of mankind as a whole. 
35. Mr. NGUYEN DINH TU (Viet Nam) said that the thirty-second session 
of the General Conference was taking place at a crucial time when 
international relations were changing for the better. The relationship 
between countries was shifting away from confrontation towards dialogue, as 
had been shown by recent events. The INF Treaty between the Soviet Union and 
the United States had been a first breakthrough in the direction of genuine 
nuclear disarmament, a process which would certainly facilitate the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy. Although a lot still remained to be done, one could 
look forward optimistically to a nuclear-weapon-free world. In that context 
the Agency, as an international organization with high prestige, played an 
important role in the promotion of international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. Its activities were of particularly high value to 
those countries which had just embarked on those uses of nuclear energy. The 
transfer of experience and technology, and assistance in research and 
development, manpower training, energy planning, etc. were a real help to 
developing countries. He hoped that the developed countries and the Agency 
would make further efforts to understand and to meet the legitimate demands of 
developing countries. 
36. His Government fully recognized that peace and co-operation were 
essential for social and economic progress within Viet Nam, in the region 
where that country was situated, and in the world as a whole. It had 
therefore taken steps in that direction, thereby contributing considerably to 

GC(XXXII)/0R.306 
page 12 


detente and co-operation in the region and in the world. In the nuclear area, 
it had affirmed more than once that it was resolutely embarking on the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in close collaboration with 
the Agency and with all countries, especially those in its region. It 
strongly advocated the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones in South-East 
Asia and in other regions of the world. At the RCA seminar held in Jakarta in 
June 1988 he had said that Viet Nam highly appreciated the co-operation which 
had been established between the countries of the region within the framework 
of the RCA under the Agency's auspices, and that it desired further extension 
and strengthening of that co-operation. 


37. In view of current conditions in Viet Nam, his Government accorded 
preference to the non-power applications of nuclear energy. The research 
reactor, built with the assistance of the Soviet Union and the Agency, had 
been working successfully and safely for more than four years. The institute 
where the reactor was situated had become a centre for nuclear instrumental 
analyses, isotope production, research and training. Several Agency projects 
in medicine, agriculture and industry had been implemented, creating a demand 
for the uses of nuclear technology in material processing, sterilization, 
non-destructive testing and food preservation. 
38. Radiation protection was becoming an important element in Viet Nam's 
programmes. Attention was being paid to environmental and personnel 
monitoring and to regulation and supervision. In that respect, the visit to 
his country of an Agency radiation protection advisory team (RAPAT) during the 
current year had been useful. Viet Nam hoped that with the Agency's 
assistance its basic radiation protection infrastructure would soon be in 
place. 
39. In conclusion, he observed that mankind was now on the right path towards 
a nuclear-weapon-free world, a world of mutual understanding and 
sincere co-operation. He was confident that the Agency would make a valuable 
contribution to that cause. 
40. Mr. GHAZALI (Malaysia) said that the usefulness of supranational 
organizations, and the need for them, were being ever more widely recognized. 
Still, terrorism, threats and nationalism remained prominent aspects of the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 13 


modern world. Although the Agency did not claim to transcend national 


sovereignty, but on the contrary worked through recognition of that 


sovereignty, States were reluctant to invest it with the necessary powers and 
material resources. 


41. The peaceful uses of nuclear energy were essential to the economic and 
social development of nations. Economic and social factors external to 
science (including industrial, commercial, military and political ones) played 
a crucial role in determining foci of interest and lines of research. 
However, few matters having to do with economic life had been so misunderstood 
as the problem of economic security, even though it was of paramount 
importance. 
42. Commitment to a doctrine or to a set of doctrines was nothing new. One 
would have to be naive not to see that society was influenced by political 
ideologies which created a perpetual atmosphere of crisis. All the same, the 
recent turn taken by the Iran-Iraq conflict was a reason for hope. 
43. As the question of nuclear disarmament affected all countries, the 
progress which had been made in that area was welcome. It seemed as if actual 
power in the world was concentrated in the hands of a very limited number of 
Member States which now tacitly recognized that none of their interests was 
more important than world peace. Even if that was a precarious basis for 
world peace, that approach at least had the merit of being pragmatic and 
constituting a distinct advance over the previous situation. Seen from that 
point of view, peace was nothing more than a suspension of will. Unless the 
balance of terror produced its effect, and unless the motivations for 
ceaselessly perfecting nuclear weapons were transformed into a beneficent urge 
to co-operate, the fear of war and of the suicide of humanity would continue 
to dominate political awareness. 
44. As a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT), Malaysia attached great importance to the Agency's safeguards 
system and appreciated the concerns which had been expressed in many 
quarters. It might be necessary to strengthen that system further, but care 
should be taken that efforts made to that end were not counterproductive, the 
penalty for which would be impotence and erosion of confidence. Overall, NPT 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 14 


was supposed to be based on a balance between certain obligations and certain 
privileges, especially after 20 years' existence. 


45. Developing countries benefited directly from the technical assistance 
and co-operation programme. Malaysia, for one, had done so. Clearly, a 
liberal and intelligent transfer of technology to developing countries could 
be an incentive for whole-hearted support of NPT. Indeed, that sort of 
collaboration was necessary to bridge the gap which separated the developed 
from the developing countries. The proper functioning of the Agency was also 
hampered by the cash flow problem it faced. His country was concerned about 
that problem and urged Member States to meet their obligations immediately. 
46. All the progress achieved in the areas of energy, industry, medicine 
and agriculture was only one aspect of the great changes which characterized 
the modern world. It was the age of technology, but since technology could 
not itself make the necessary corrections, man had to intervene to decide 
which political and administrative mechanisms should be used. There must be a 
way of taking conscious and coherent action different from what was demanded 
by modern mass movements or even pressure groups representing particular 
interests. 
47. Governments, scientists and the public had become aware of the extent 
to which modern technology and commercial practices were harming the rural and 
urban environments. Many intellectuals and officials had expressed their 
scepticism about nuclear safety. For example, it had been seen that the safe 
storage of radioactive wastes and industrial wastes containing long-lived 
toxic materials raised serious problems, namely first, the problem of 
responsibility for their management, which would extend well beyond the 
probable lifetime of any State, or even any society; secondly, the problem of 
the quantities involved, which had given rise to a number of controversies; 
thirdly, the problem of storage (Should they be stored inside a country's 
boundaries or in certain unclaimed areas?); and fourthly, the problem of safe 
transport to the storage sites. The storage of wastes should not exclude the 
possibility of their subsequent retrieval for further processing. However, 
the fact that certain quarters (and perhaps certain States, believing that 
technology could solve any problems it created) were engaged in dubious 
activities had added a new dimension to that issue. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 15 


48. It was known that man had always had to face mortal dangers. Yet there 
was a difference between jeopardy to the life of one man - or even to the 
lives of a large group of men - and jeopardy to life itself. It was to be 
feared that knowing or unknowing mismanagement of the environment and wasting 
of the earth's resources would result in irreversible ecological disturbances 
and endanger future generations. 
49. His delegation wished to stress, as it had already done in previous 
sessions of the General Conference, that adherence to international standards 
was essential in the context of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and that 
any attempt to establish norms contrary to those in force would be 
unacceptable. Nothing could so condemn a country or a system of government as 
recourse to methods which flagrantly violated universal norms. 
50. For Malaysia, the decision to embark on a nuclear programme was a 
national option. The institutionalization of scientific knowledge and 
technical information in that field was contrary to its free exchange and 
entailed serious consequences, since a great part of research and development 
activities went on outside the framework of private enterprise. Private 
enterprise had shown relatively little interest in nuclear power, as that 
sector could not be made to fit commercial requirements. Moreover, in nuclear 
trade the ground rules were forever changing. It was as if certain developing 
countries had to fight with every means to prevent their immediate interests 
from being sacrificed to some intangible cause. Although there were 
apparently no insurmountable technical problems, their nuclear programmes 
faced formidable institutional and political obstacles. That situation was 
likely to set countries against each other and, as a consequence, to weaken 
the nuclear regime as a whole. 
51. The expected failure of the United Nations Conference for the 
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy (UNCPICPUNE) in 1987 had been the culminating point of the frustrations 
felt by the international community, which had been left in a state of 
passivity with its attention focused not on the problems or possibilities of 
the future, but on the unpleasantness of the recent past. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 16 


52. The nuclear debate was now no longer a scientific controversy, even 
though scientists were involved, but could be described as a sociological and 
sometimes political confrontation. It was also accepted that opposition to 
nuclear energy was above all a facet of the far more wide-ranging concern felt 
by a substantial section of the population over the trends and conditions of 
modern life. 
53. On political issues, by definition, there could be no unanimity. 
Balances had to be found between the interests of different groups. 
Scientists could neither abdicate their responsibilities to others nor reserve 
for themselves the right to decide. 
54. Mr. VISHNEVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
thirty-second session of the General Conference coincided with detente in 
international relations. The realistic approach of leaders and public opinion 
had made it possible to slow down the arms race, to avert the threat of war 
and to resolve conflicts. As Mr. M.S. Gorbachev had stressed at the 19th All-
Union Conference of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the focus of 
international life must shift from confrontation to co-operation and mutual 
understanding. The year's events were of great importance indeed, as they 
marked the first reductions in nuclear weapons. World denuclearization 
demanded, in addition to the reduction of existing nuclear arsenals, a 
strengthening of the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the 
establishment of nuclear-free zones and the formulation of assurances 
regarding the definitive elimination of nuclear weapons. 
55. There was a tendency to propose political, rather than military, 
solutions to contemporary problems, as shown by the conclusion of the 
INF Treaty between the United States and the Soviet Union, the substantial 
progress made towards an agreement on a 50% reduction in strategic arms, and 
the negotiations on the restriction and banning of nuclear tests. 
56. The NPT and the Agency's safeguards system played a significant role in 
connection with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in maintaining 
international peace and security. His country considered that they were 
particularly important and that the Agency should have a major role in that 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 17 


area. In that connection, his country shared the public's concerns at the 
fact that certain governments with ambitious nuclear policies refused to 
understand that it was in their countries' interest to accede to NPT. 


57. His country was also in favour of establishing measures to prevent 
attacks on nuclear targets, undertaking efforts to prevent nuclear terrorism 
and introducing international regulation of liability for nuclear accidents. 
58. The proposed programme and budget for 1989 and 1990, his delegation was 
gratified to note, was fully in line with the Agency's objectives. His 
country attached particular importance to nuclear power, which seemed to be 
the economically and ecologically best means of meeting an increasing demand 
for electricity, for nuclear power plants were in the long run less costly 
than conventional power plants, and under normal circumstances they were also 
more satisfactory from the environmental point of view. 
59. Nuclear safety was an essential element for the future of nuclear 
power, and his country fully supported the Agency's activities in that area, 
be they the establishment of standards, the organization of conferences and 
meetings or the adoption of conventions. At the same time, the Agency should 
be expediting the formulation of guiding principles on measures to be taken in 
the event of an accident, for the experience of many countries showed that the 
problems of nuclear power plant safety could be mastered if suitable efforts 
were made. 
60. His country, which had been particularly sensitized to that issue by 
the experience of Chernobyl, was in the process of establishing a set of 
measures aimed at preventing such an accident from happening again, and had 
already introduced significant improvements in operational safety at its 
plants. 
61. Furthermore, in May 1988, Kiev had hosted an internationsl conference 
on the medical aspects of the Chernobyl accident, in which more than 
25 countries had taken part. The conference had highlighted the fact that the 
considerable efforts deployed to alleviate the consequences of Chernobyl were 
of great interest to the whole world. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 18 


62. His country also attached great importance to the disposal of 
radioactive waste and to the conditions under which nuclear power plants were 
decommissioned, and felt that the Agency should play an important role in 
those areas. 
63. The Agency had been very successful in the application of nuclear 
techniques to agriculture, medicine and other sectors of great importance to 
developing countries. In that context, the Agency should contribute to the 
development and application of nuclear techniques which were harmless to the 
environment and which would help solve the agricultural problems encountered 
in many countries, particularly in developing countries. His country 
supported the Agency's aim of making nuclear techniques available to all 
countries and had pledged, for 1989, a voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) of US $533 400. On the whole, his 
country approved of the Agency's programme for 1988 and 1989. 
6A. In conclusion, the increasing role played by nuclear energy called for 
the strengthening of international co-operation, and the Agency's activities 
in that area provided an excellent example of the way in which the complex 
problems of the modern world could be resolved while taking mutual interests 
into consideration. 


65. Mr. KAHILUOTO (Finland) was satisfied to note that the Director 
General, in his statement, had strongly emphasized the ecological aspects of 
energy production. The harmful emissions from burning fossil fuels had long 
been a source of problems, but their devastating effects on the environment 
had for the most part been neglected. It was gratifying that experts at both 
the national and the international level were now urgently calling for 
measures to protect the environment, and also that the nuclear option, among 
others, was being considered in a new light. 
66. In that connection, he recalled that the Nordic countries had submitted 
a draft resolution on sustainable development. It would be very appropriate 
for the Agency to set forth in a broader context its activities to promote 
environmental protection, including the application of various nuclear 
techniques as well as the long-term role of nuclear power. Many countries had 
adopted legislative and regulatory measures, but they were still far from 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 19 


adequate. However, ecological aspects were clearly being given increasing 
attention in the planning of nuclear power plant projects; that could be 
favourable for the nuclear option. His own country had been able, thanks to 
nuclear power, to achieve a very significant reduction in the volume of 
harmful emissions (sulphur dioxide reduced by 110 000 tonnes, nitrogen dioxide 
by 54 000 tonnes and carbon dioxide by 15 million tonnes). 


67. The acceptance of nuclear energy depended primarily on maintaining high 
standards with regard to safety, waste management and safeguards against the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. At the end of 1987, 120 reactors had been 
under construction world wide, which should lead to a significantly increased 
demand for Agency services in general, and should be accompanied by a 
strengthening of international co-operation. The safety assessment services 
offered by the Agency were already very much in demand, and would be more so 
in the future. In addition to the valuable work already done - NUSS Codes, 
inspections by operational safety review teams (OSARTs), expert groups such as 
the International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) - the Agency would be 
called upon more and more to become involved in the area of waste management 
and other aspects of the back end of the fuel cycle. If nuclear energy was to 
gain wide acceptance, it was absolutely necessary that those challenges be met. 
68. Nuclear power occupied a significant place in his country's total 
energy production. Finland had every interest in promoting international 
co-operation in nuclear energy and had therefore always given the Agency its 
full support. If the Agency was to be able to fulfil its mandate, it should 
be guaranteed adequate resources. In June 1988, the Board of Governors had 
succeeded, after considerable effort, in arriving at a compromise budget 
for 1989 which, however, was not entirely satisfactory: the time had surely 
come to heed the Director General's warnings and to reflect on the 
consequences of applying the principle of zero growth to the Regular Budget in 
the coming year. 
69. His country attached particular importance to the Agency's safeguards 
role. The assurance that nuclear materials were not being diverted to 
non-peaceful uses was a prerequisite for the civil utilization of nuclear 
energy and its acceptance by the public. It was therefore alarming that 
in 1987, according to the Safeguards Implementation Report, the Agency had not 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 20 


fully met its safeguards goals. Fortunately, it had been possible to conclude 
that all significant quantities of safeguarded material were adequately 
accounted for. In any case, it was important that the Agency should have at 
its disposal the necessary financial resources to exercise its safeguards 
functions, and that it should receive full support from its Member States on 
that matter. 


70. It was well known that certain information on the implementation of 
safeguards could be misinterpreted and misused. Member States, by taking the 
utmost care to comply with Agency procedures and by facilitating inspections, 
should contribute to dispelling all doubts as to the effectiveness of 
safeguards. In addition, by exercising strict control over nuclear 
transactions which took place on their territory, Member States could reduce 
the number of incidents which brought discredit on the whole sector. The 
Director General's proposals concerning the role which could be played by the 
Agency in that connection deserved closer study. 
71. During the current year, his country had initiated a safeguards support 
programme which focused on the development of non-destructive testing methods 
and on the training of inspectors. The programme would be carried out over 
five years and would be financed completely by Finland. 
72. Recalling that 1988 marked the 20th anniversary of NPT, he stressed 
that, for many countries, a stricter adherence to the clauses of the Treaty 
would lend more credibility to the nuclear sector and dispel certain 
misgivings. Finland appealed to countries not parties to NPT to undertake not 
to acquire nuclear weapons and to place all their nuclear material used for 
peaceful purposes under Agency safeguards. It was encouraging to note that 
all nuclear-weapon States had at last accepted safeguards on at least part of 
their nuclear activities. The coverage of the safeguards system should be 
further expanded, because the public continued to fear that peaceful 
activities might lead to the production of nuclear explosive devices. 
73. With regard to the programme and budget for 1989-90, he noted that the 
Agency's programmes had undergone little change in the past 10-15 years and 
did not fully reflect all the developments in nuclear technology which had 
occurred meanwhile. Of course, many sectors using that technology had 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 21 


developed to the point where they no longer needed the Agency's help, apart 
from technical assistance and co-operation activities. However, he felt that 
Member States should welcome the Director General's proposal to review the 
programme during the course of the next two years. 


74. He welcomed the steady growth shown by the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation activities. His country would continue its 
financial support of the Agency in that area and intended to increase its 
extrabudgetary contribution. It would be desirable for the Agency's projects 
and the general development plans of the countries concerned to be brought 
more closely in line. In that context, it would be of advantage to improve 
further the preparation of projects, making good use of the new two-year 
planning period. A great many new methods and ideas were emerging in that 
sector, and the Agency was to be commended on its effectiveness and vitality. 
75. With regard to the conventions for which the Agency was depositary, it 
seemed that the international community had genuinely grasped how important it 
was not to forget the health and safety of people living in other countries. 
During the current week, the Joint Protocol relating to the application of the 
Vienna Convention and the Paris Convention would be opened for signature. His 
Government intended to sign the Protocol and urged other countries to sign the 
Vienna Convention so as to widen the scope of the Protocol. The Convention on 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material would also soon be ratified by his 
Government, which had not been able to do so earlier owing to legislative 
obstacles. 
76. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director General and his staff for 
the fruitful work they had performed since the previous session of the General 
Conference and assured them of his Government's full support. 
77. Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland) said that the past year had seen many events 
which had led to a distinct improvement in international relations, to a 
better climate of mutual confidence and to broader co-operation. The entry 
into force of the INF Treaty had been the first step on the road to nuclear 
disarmament. The summit meetings between the General Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, 
and the President of the United States, Mr. Ronald Reagan, in Washington and 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 22 


Moscow had opened up the way for a real step forward to be made on issues 
which jeopardized the peace and prosperity of humanity. It was to be hoped 
that those meetings would lead to significant advances in disarmament, in 
particular to the conclusion of an agreement on a 50% reduction in strategic 
offensive weapons by the Soviet Union and the United States. There had also 
been progress in Soviet-American negotiations on the restriction of nuclear 
testing, which would perhaps lead to a total ban. 


78. Poland welcomed anything that could counter the threat of nuclear war 
and reduce the tension in the relations between governments or groups of 
countries, and it would itself strive to contribute to that process, 
especially on the European continent. In that connection, the Chairman of the 
Polish Council of State, Mr. W. Jaruzelski, had proposed a Polish plan to 
reduce armaments and to introduce a regime of confidence in the central part 
of the continent. 
79. Poland had played an active role in working out long-term Warsaw Pact 
initiatives for the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Europe from the 
Atlantic to the Urals, and it remained in favour of the strictest observance 
and strengthening of NPT on the European continent and in all other parts of 
the world. The positive developments on the international scene should also 
contribute to expanding co-operation, especially in areas of human activity 
related to safety and to the beneficial development of the world. The 
organizations of the United Nations system had an important role to play, and 
the Agency in particular amongst them. Certainly, the Agency, as an organizer 
of scientific and technical co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, as depositary for four international conventions and as the 
international body for verifying compliance with non-proliferation 
commitments, could be credited with many achievements. 
80. The fact that 136 States with different political systems and at 
various stages of development in the utilization of atomic energy had become 
parties to NPT was proof that political realism, clear-sightedness and a sense 
of responsibility towards the future were not lacking in the world. Poland 
therefore welcomed the conclusion of safeguards agreements between the Agency 
and the People's Republic of China and between the Agency and Nigeria, as well 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 23 


as Spain's accession to NPT. None the less, even wider adherence to NPT and 
to other international agreements related to the banning of nuclear weapons 
and to non-proliferation would be desirable and would strengthen international 
peace and security. In the long run, that would lead to the total abolition 
of nuclear weapons. 


81. For the past two years, the Agency had focused on issues related to the 
safety of nuclear energy. The Agency had given priority to strengthening 
international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiation protection, in 
particular through programmes such as the operational safety review 
teams (OSARTs), analysis of safety-significant events teams (ASSETs), Incident 
Reporting System (IRS) and Operational Safety Indicators Programme (OSIP). He 
also welcomed the basic safety principles prepared by INSAG, and noted that 
the training courses organized by the Agency on the safety of nuclear power 
plants had accounted for 25% of training-related Agency activities in 1987. 
82. Currently, Poland was party to three of the four international 
conventions for which the Agency was depositary (Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material, Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident and Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency). His country was currently examining the possibility 
of acceding to the Vienna Convention, but first had to make a decision on a 
number of internal legal regulations. However, it considered that increasing 
the number of States parties to the Vienna Convention should not be regarded 
as a substitute for more active steps towards formulating a convention on 
international liability for nuclear damage. Poland, along with other 
socialist countries, therefore undertook to carry out an in-depth analysis of 
all aspects of international liability for nuclear damage, and to organize an 
ad hoc group on that question, as well as submitting a draft resolution on it. 
83. All types of energy had unfavourable effects on the environment. 
However, Poland was convinced that nuclear energy was the least harmful, and 
for that reason would keep to its decision to develop the use of that energy. 
Nevertheless, the problem of protecting the environment must be a focus of 
general concern, in the same way as the problems of the fight against hunger, 
armed conflicts and the threat of nuclear war. Although environmental 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 24 


protection matters were the responsibility of other organizations in the 
United Nations system, the Agency should contribute to resolving the problem 
within the area of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. In that respect, he 
welcomed Agency programmes such as those of the Department of Research and 
Isotopes aimed at using nuclear and radiological techniques to help solve 
ecological problems. Poland supported the draft resolution submitted by the 
Scandinavian countries in favour of sustainable development. 


84. It was essential to convince the international community that nuclear 
energy was the energy source which represented the least danger to the 
environment, and to that end it was necessary to provide information on 
specific action taken to eliminate causes for concern: the programmes on the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, on the safety of nuclear installations 
and on the storage of radioactive waste. 
85. He was pleased to note that the Agency's programme for 1989-90 focused 
on techniques for the use of radiation to purify gaseous effluents and on the 
establishment of an interregional technical co-operation programme in that 
area. A purifying unit using the electron beam technique was currently under 
construction in a thermal plant at Warsaw. 
86. He also welcomed the considerable progress made by the Agency 
(particularly in the areas of technical co-operation, research and isotopes) 
towards better utilization of the funds allocated to technical assistance. He 
therefore hoped that all States would help to improve the situation even more 
by paying their assessed and voluntary contributions promptly and by making 
full use of non-convertible currencies. Poland had already paid 75% of its 
assessed contributions and was making every effort, together with the Agency's 
Department of Technical Co-operation, to develop methods that would allow the 
best use to be made of non-convertible currency. It had proposed to supply 
specialized equipment and training services for specialists from developing 
countries. It had also proposed to organize a specialization course on topics 
related to genetic mutations. Many countries sent their specialists to attend 
courses in Polish research establishments. In 1977, 33 persons had 
participated in training courses of that kind, and for 1989 Poland was 
prepared to offer 10 fellowships to representatives from developing countries. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 25 


87. Poland could approve the Agency's accounts for 1987 and the draft 
programme and budget for 1989-90, though still regretting the decrease in 
activities foreseen for nuclear safety and radiation protection. Finally, he 
assured the Agency that Poland would continue to support the Agency in its 
mission and announced that it would pay in full its 1989 contribution to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
88. Count Francis de la BARRE d'ERQUELINNES (Belgium) said that 
nuclear power production in his country was continuing in line with the energy 
policy chosen by Belgium and in accordance with the guidelines of the European 
Economic Community (EEC) in that area. 
89. The seven pressurized-water reactors at Doel and Tihange had maintained 
their good performance, continuing to provide users with more than 
two kilowatt-hours out of three, thereby making it possible to control the 
cost of the electricity generated despite unpredictable variations in energy 
products. The savings made through the use of nuclear power at present 
amounted to more than 100 billion Belgian francs (US $2.5 billion). 
Furthermore, the reactors significantly reduced harmful releases into the 
environment, such as those which caused acid rain. That was why, for example, 
releases of sulphur dioxide had declined by 60% per kilowatt-hour in Belgium 
over the decade starting in 1973. 
90. Belgium, through the intermediary of the EEC, the Nuclear Energy Agency 
of the OECD and the Agency, was sharing with others the experience which it 
had accumulated in safety and radiation protection during the many years of 
operation of its nuclear reactors and facilities. 
91. It had participated as much as possible in the many meetings organized 
under the Agency's safety programme. Its experts had taken part in the 
International Conference on Nuclear Power Performance and Safety, held in 
Vienna in September-October 1987, where they had highlighted economic and 
safety-related aspects of nuclear power plants and discussed the industrial 
use of plutonium-containing fuel in light-water reactors and waste management. 
92. In addition, the Belgian authorities were observing with great interest 
the establishment of the Worldwide Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), 
which had been decided upon in Paris on 6 and 7 October 1987 following an 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 26 


agreement by representatives of 130 nuclear operators in 26 countries. That 
association's tasks would include the direct dissemination of more extensive 
and more detailed information on the performance and safety of facilities to 
the officials responsible for everyday management. It was essential that very 
close contact should be maintained between WANO and the Agency, not only to 
avoid duplication, but also, and primarily, to give the Agency access to a 
database which it could use in order to ensure optimum implementation of its 
nuclear energy and safety programmes, so as to be better able to play the role 


in those areas devolving to it under its Statute. The participation of WANO 


in the scientific programme on nuclear safety organized during the current 
session of the General Conference demonstrated the desire of the two 
organizations to work together. 


93. The "Transnuklear" affair, which had aroused an overblown international 
publicity campaign, had called in question the implementation of safeguards 
and of radiation protection standards. It was therefore worth briefly 
recalling the facts. The irregularities noted during the transport and 
processing of wastes from abroad had been the subject of various inquiries by 
competent authorities (European Commission, European Parliament, Belgian 
Parliament and so on). The fraudulent practices in question, involving a very 
small number of people in Belgium, had concerned only the transport and 
processing of low-activity wastes from abroad due to be treated by a 
department of the Nuclear Energy Research Centre CEN/SCK at Mol. It was 
important to stress that Belgian nuclear power plants and fabrication plants 
had been in no way involved in those transactions. 
94. With regard to the crucial question of the application of radiation 
protection standards for the purposes of safety and health, the various 
inquiries, including those by experts from all the countries appointed by the 
European Commission, had concluded that there had been no negative comments to 
be made on that subject. There had been no violation or infringement of the 
radiation protection regulations. 
95. The decision not to continue operation of the Eurochemic reprocessing 
plant, despite the agreement of the Belgian Parliament, had led to a change in 
the role of the Belgoprocess Company via the National Organization for 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 27 


Radioactive Wastes and Fissile Materials (ONDRAF/NIRAS). As a result, 
processing and conditioning of waste was being carried out since March 1988 by 
Belgoprocess, a 100% subsidiary of ONDRAF/NIRAS. That decision recognized the 
responsibility and functions which the public authorities must discharge in 
that area by assuming direct and total control of such activities. 


96. In the area of radioactive waste management, it was worth mentioning 
the remarkable technical developments in the Belgian programme, namely the 
beginning of the demonstration stage for the deep burial of waste in clay, the 
supercompaction of low-level wastes, and high-temperature scorifying 
incineration for both radioactive and non-radioactive industrial wastes. In 
the area of radiation detection, the Belgian Government had approved the 
establishment of a national monitoring network (TELERAD) which, linked to a 
central computer, could detect in real time any variations in radioactivity 
levels which might be caused by Belgian facilities or by fallout from other 
countries. 
97. Safeguards implementation had been called in question during the 
"Transnuklear" affair through the repetition of information, already refuted 
by the Belgian authorities more than two years previously, suggesting that 
Alkem had concealed 800 kg of plutonium in the Belgonucleaire facility over a 
period of several years. That false allegation had been denied promptly and 
categorically at the highest level, namely by the authorities of the Agency 
and EURAT0M, in the form of communiques and press conferences. His country 
could only welcome that action. In the same context, the question of 
safeguards implementation had been the subject of a Belgian parliamentary 
inquiry during which hearings had established that the accounting inventories 
for plutonium and fissile material reserves had always been correct. 
98. Belgium had noted with satisfaction the conclusion in 1987 of the 
Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics on the Elimination of their Intermediate-range and Shorter-range 
missiles. It regarded that Treaty as a first step towards implementation of 
Article VI of NPT, and believed that other, wider-ranging agreements would 
have to follow if Article VI of NPT, in which the majority of States party to 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 28 


that Treaty had placed such hopes, was not to remain a purely formal provision 
that would give rise to doubts during the discussions which were to take place 
in 1995. 


99. Belgium welcomed the findings of the Safeguards Implementation Report 
for 1987. Like other Member States, it stressed the need for proper editing 
and translation of that document. Ambiguities must be avoided in both the 
original and translated versions, as they might give opponents of nuclear 
energy a clear field to question the effectiveness and reliability of Agency 
safeguards. Reference should also be made, among others, to Articles 18 
and 19 of document INFCIRC/153, which assigned a major role to the Board of 
Governors in considering measures to verify the non-diversion of nuclear 
material and, in the case of such non-diversion, afforded the State every 
reasonable opportunity to furnish the Board with any necessary reassurance. 
100. Furthermore, to assist the Agency in carrying out its technical 
activities in the area of safeguards, Belgium was continuing its research 
under its support programme. With the experience it had gained in that area, 
it would provide all that was necessary to ensure that its participation in 
the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation was beneficial. 
101. His country wished to recall the importance it attached to the 
discussions of the informal working group set up to examine different 
proposals on the revision of Article VI of the Statute. It hoped that a 
solution to that problem could be found soon, and remained convinced that only 
the formal proposal for the amendment of Article VI which Belgium had 
co-sponsored was a suitable compromise formula. That amendment could 
accommodate the demands of regions which believed themselves to be underrepresented 
under the terms of paragraph A.2 as well as the aspirations of 
members of groups including a large number of countries advanced in the field 
of nuclear technology (paragraph A.l) without upsetting the delicate balance 
which existed in the Board of Governors. The presence and increased 
participation in the Board of Governors of States which contributed in various 
ways to the Agency's activities could only improve the effectiveness of that 
body. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 29 


102. Lastly, the proposals regarding the advisory bodies responsible for 
reviewing the technical programmes (GOV/2350) showed the Director General's 
and the Secretariat's concern to promote the Agency's efficiency. Those 
administrative management proposals should be complemented by an in-depth 
consideration of the directions which the programmes should follow. The 
Director General had already begun that consideration, notably in his opening 
statement, and Belgium fully endorsed his pertinent analysis of the 
utilization of nuclear energy and the impact of energy choices on the 
environment. That analysis was an ideal instrument for the optimum 
orientation of the Agency's priority tasks in accordance with its Statute. 
103. Mr. STEPANENKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
since its establishment the Agency had played an essential role in 
international co-operation for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and had made 
its contribution to prevent additional countries from using that energy to 
manufacture weapons of mass destruction. 
104. The success of the special session of the General Conference had once 
again shown that the international community had a reliable and confident 
mechanism for co-ordinating activities related to the peaceful use of atomic 
energy, and the programme to establish an international regime for the safe 
development of that form of energy contained all the elements necessary for 
achieving that goal. 
105. The Byelorussian SSR was preparing to celebrate the 70th anniversary of 
its founding. In the course of all those years, under a socialist regime, it 
had been transformed into an industrial State with a diversified economy and a 
high technical and scientific potential. His country believed that all 
nations could and should help to create the conditions of security, 
independence and progress which were necessary for all aspects of life. It 
took a realistic and flexible approach to international problems, guided by a 
new direction in its political thinking. It was working steadily so that, by 
the third millenium, States would reject nuclear weapons, by no longer 
tolerating the stationing of destructive devices in space and by reducing 
their number on the ground before ultimately eliminating them entirely. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 30 


106. His country fully supported the idea of verifying disarmament, perhaps 
along the lines of the Agency's existing safeguards system. In that 
connection, he noted with satisfaction that during the period under review, as 
in previous years, the Agency's inspectors had not detected any anomaly which 
would indicate the diversion of safeguarded nuclear materials or the misuse of 
facilities subject to safeguards, for the manufacture of any nuclear weapon, 
or for any other military purpose, or for the manufacture of any other nuclear 
explosive device. His delegation believed that the Agency should concentrate 
its safeguards efforts in States which were about to develop nuclear power. 
The Agency should also play an active and constructive role in strengthening 
international co-operation in the area of nuclear and radiation safety, 
including the prohibition of attacks on peaceful nuclear facilities, the 
prevention of nuclear terrorism and the establishment of standards. 
107. Under those conditions, it would also become urgently necessary to 
formulate and implement a universal system of international liability in the 
nuclear field. The lack of a comprehensive international legal instrument 
governing that important aspect of the peaceful use of nuclear energy could 
lead to distrust in relations between governments and could slow down the 
development of nuclear power. His country therefore considered that it would 
be useful for preparations to be made in the very near future, under the 
auspices of the Agency, with a view to drawing up an international legal 
document which on a universal level would cover not only questions of civil 
liability, but also those of State liability in the event of nuclear damage. 
108. His delegation had examined with care and interest the Annual Report 
for 1987 and joined other delegations which had already praised the Agency's 
activities. It supported the Agency's programmes and policies such as those 
in the areas of nuclear and radiation safety, safeguards, nuclear power, 
technical co-operation and the International Nuclear Information System. 
109. His delegation welcomed with satisfaction the increase in co-operation 
between the Agency and countries of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA). The co-ordination meeting between the Agency and CMEA 
concerning a research programme on the probabilistic modelling of accident 
sequences in nuclear power plants, which had been held in Moscow in May 1988, 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 31 


was a good example of such co-operation. Important lines of research work 
conducted at the Nuclear Power Institute of the Byelorussian SSR Academy of 
Sciences included the study of nuclear and radiation safety, the detailed 


investigation of emergencies and the construction of new-generation safe 
reactors. The results of that research would be used in building the first 
Byelorussian nuclear power plant. 


110. His country appreciated the Agency's activities in the area of 
technical co-operation. It paid its voluntary contribution to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund regularly and in full. In the current year, 
it was increasing its contribution to a total of US $142 800 in national 
currency. 
111. As part of its activities to support the Agency's technical assistance 
and co-operation programmes and co-ordinated research programmes, as well as 
its efforts to help expand and strengthen international co-operation between 
Member States, his country was prepared to organize training courses for 
specialists at various institutes of the Byelorussian SSR Academy of Sciences 
in the following areas: operation of nuclear reactors; application of 
ionizing radiation in medicine, agriculture and construction; study of 
radionuclides in solution; dosimetry of ionizing radiation; study of the 
scientific principles and methods of microanalysis in radioimmunology for 
medical purposes; complex heat and mass transfer processes in heterogeneous 
systems (theory, modelling, experiments); heat-exchange equipment for heating 
and cooling systems and systems for the thermal stabilization of components 
and devices. His country could also offer its specialists' services as Agency 
experts in developing countries. In future years, the Nuclear Power Institute 
of the Academy of Sciences would be able to organize courses on neutron 
activation analysis and other subjects using its research reactor. 
112. His country supported unreservedly the expansion and strengthening of 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of the atom. In its view, 
there could be no real international co-operation in that area without a 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime and due observance of the 
existing international agreements controlling nuclear exports. International 
exchanges in the nuclear field must not promote the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and other nuclear explosive devices. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 32 


113. His country would continue to provide the Agency with its political, 
scientific, technical and material support in the implementation of its 
programmes aimed at facilitating the safe and peaceful use of atomic energy, 
the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime and the advent of a world 
free of nuclear weapons. 
114. Mr. PROENCA ROSA (Brazil) began by recalling that Brazil's nuclear 
activities had started taking shape in the 1950s, at which time a set of 
principles had been drawn up whereby Brazil would develop nuclear energy 
through its own efforts as well as through international co-operation, while 
observing international recommendations for the protection of human health and 
the environment. His country had therefore always fully supported the 
Agency's activities in the area of nuclear safety. 
115. Brazil believed that international co-operation in the area of safety 
was vital for all Member States, and it was in that spirit that it wished to 
share the lessons it had learned from its experience, as it had done after the 
very unfortunate accident at Goiania, caused by the breaking open of a 
radioactive caesium-137 source which had been improperly removed from a 
radiotherapy unit. He had himself reported on that event to the Board of 
Governors at its meetings in February. A year later, he was in a position to 
confirm that the situation had soon been brought under control and that the 
levels of residual radiation in the contaminated areas had returned to 
previous background levels - thanks to the capable efforts of the Brazilian 
experts and the valuable assistance which had been promptly received from 
abroad, either direct or through the Agency. His delegation particularly 
welcomed the initiatives taken in that respect by Mr. Leonard Konstantinov, 
the Deputy Director General for Nuclear Energy and Safety. 
116. In order to share with colleagues from other countries the lessons 
which could be learned from the Goiania accident, two international meetings 
had been organized in Brazil: first a seminar sponsored by national 
institutions, and then, in June, a post-accident review meeting. 
117. Another basic principle governed nuclear activities in Brazil: they 
were for peaceful purposes, and his country had always supported, in a nondiscriminatory 
way, international initiatives aimed at preventing the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 33 


proliferation of nuclear weapons. In that context, his country regarded the 
Agency as the best international instrument for promoting the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. It was significant that the new Brazilian 
Constitution stipulated that all nuclear activities carried out on Brazilian 
territory would be permitted only for peaceful purposes and only with the 
approval of the National Congress. That sovereign decision was an expression 
of the popular will and of Brazil's commitment to its international 
obligations. 


118. The energy crisis in the 1970s had taught Brazilians that they must 
rely primarily on national resources and technologies for their energy 
supply. Oil production had increased by 400% since then, and alcohol now 
replaced petrol in nearly 90% of new cars sold on the domestic market. In 
view of Brazil's uranium resources - more than 300 000 tonnes of U0 - it 
3 8 
had been decided to develop nuclear technology, either locally or under 
co-operation agreements. Thus, agreements had been signed with the United 
States for the construction of the Angra I power reactor and with the Federal 
Republic of Germany for the transfer of technology related to the construction 
of power plants and the fuel cycle. 


119. The results obtained so far, and Brazil's economic and financial 
position, had led to a recent decision to restructure the Brazilian nuclear 
sector in order toimprove the efficiency of the nuclear programme and to 
combine the efforts of the public and private sectors. At the same time, the 
Brazilian Government had the firm intention to implement in full the 
commercial contracts and construction projects which had already been agreed 
upon, and to respect in all cases its international obligations. The Agency's 
safeguards would be applied to all technology transfers past or future. 
120. The reorganization of the nuclear sector consisted of two parts: the 
institutional framework and the industrial sector. 
121. Where the institutional part was concerned, a senior council for 
nuclear policy had been set up with the mandate to advise the President of the 
Republic on national nuclear policy. It would consist of ministers, civil 
servants and representatives of the scientific community and would also be 
assisted by advisory committees in the areas of radiation protection and 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 34 


nuclear safety, nuclear development, radioactive waste, industry and trade, 
and nuclear applications. 


122. On the industrial side, the responsibility for the construction of 
nuclear facilities had been transferred to the electricity generating sector, 
which was also responsible for the commercial operation of power plants; a 
company (Industrias Nucleares do Brasil S.A.) which was open to participation 
by the private sector but of which the State was the main shareholder had been 
founded to operate the fuel fabrication plant; the rights of the previous 
associates would be respected; lastly, a subsidiary of the new company had 
been set up for uranium mining, milling and yellow cake production. 
123. The growing participation of the private sector in the Brazilian 
nuclear programme, thus stimulated, was already showing promising results. 
Two major zirconium and beryllium plants were about to start operations 
through the efforts of Brazilian public institutions and private companies. 
124. The fuel elements for the IPEN research reactor at Sao Paulo would 
henceforth be manufactured locally, using indigenous materials and 
techniques. The reactor's capacity had been increased, and it would be 
operated continuously. Brazil's progress was partly the result of its 
co-operation with industrialized countries, under bilateral agreements or 
through the Agency's technical assistance programme. For its part, Brazil 
shared with other developing countries the lessons which it had learned from 
experience, inter alia, at the regional level through training courses. Thus, 
in 1988, it had hosted the first Latin American regional training course on 
State systems of accounting for and control of nuclear material. 
125. The technical assistance and co-operation projects involving Brazil 
were being implemented as planned. For the following biennium, the Agency had 
received proposals from the Brazilian authorities in the areas of nuclear 
safety, radiation protection, medical applications, agriculture and the 
environment. Despite severe budgetary constraints, a number of Type II 
fellowships had been offered to trainees from Latin America and arrangements 
had been made to send cost-free experts. Several Type I fellowships had also 
been accepted for participants from all regions of the world. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 35 


126. Brazil's participation in the AECAL programme had been greatly 
increased in 1988, with the provision of expert services and the hosting of 
three training courses. Brazil, as the Director General had seen during his 
last visit, had been able to achieve positive results using its own 
resources. It had also profited from technical assistance provided by the 
Agency and was therefore, in its turn, in a position to transfer technology 
which was already adapted to the needs and characteristics of developing 
countries. 
127. His country also maintained fruitful bilateral relations with the 
United States and France, as well as with the Federal Republic of Germany, 
which was also sponsoring, through the intermediary of the Agency, the 
Brazilian footnote-a/ proj'ect entitled "Study of multi-layer semiconductor 
structure". 
128. His delegation also wished to make special mention of the wide-ranging 
relations between Argentina and Brazil in the nuclear field. The Heads of 
State of the two countries had recently, on the occasion of the inauguration 
of the Aramar Experimental Centre, set up a permament bilateral committee on 
nuclear policy, and the co-operation between the two countries had led to a 
number of joint projects, for example on the development of techniques used in 
fast-breeder reactors. That long-term project was due to result in the 
construction of a prototype reactor at the beginning of the twenty-first 
century. That was why both countries were requesting that people working on 
that project be admitted as observers to the International Working Group on 
Fast Reactors. 
129. In conclusion, his Government had every confidence that nuclear energy 
could contribute to economic and social development while respecting the 
environment, and remained fully committed to co-operation in the nuclear field. 
130. Mr. MARAVALL (Spain) said that while nuclear power would be called 
upon to play an increasing role in countries lacking energy resources in the 
medium term, its long-term future was scarcely predictable: it would thus be 
necessary to attempt to achieve the highest possible level of safety and to 
seek a definitive solution to the problem of waste management. In addition, 
there were many uncertainties regarding the energy sources of the future (such 
as fusion energy), and also regarding conventional sources where they related 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 36 


not only to the size of existing reserves, but also to problems of pollution. 
There was also the fact that accidents which had occurred at nuclear power 
plants had alarmed ecologically-minded members of the public and, as a result, 
had led to major public discussions in several countries. That phenomenon was 
particularly important in developed countries where, various economic and 
social objectives having already largely been reached, conservation of the 
environment had become a major political issue. In those circumstances, the 
Agency must ensure that information was passed on swiftly and clearly so as to 
improve the public's image of the nuclear industry. 


131. Turning to the question of international instruments in the area of 
nuclear safety, he noted with satisfaction that a conference would be taking 
place during the week to adopt the Joint Protocol relating to the application 
of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Paris 
Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy. He hoped 
a large number of countries would soon sign that Protocol in order to expedite 
its entry into force and to help improve the civil liability regime for 
nuclear damage. 
132. During the past year, Spain had taken some important steps in 
connection with international legal instruments relating to nuclear energy: 
it had acceded to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
on 5 November 1987 and had signed the London Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers 
on 2 September 1988, thus demonstrating its commitment to the controlled use 
of nuclear materials and techniques. 
133. With regard to the Agency's technical co-operation programme, his 
country was convinced that it would help to improve the standard of living in 
developing countries and nuclear safety throughout the world. It therefore 
supported that programme and would make its technology available for it. 
134. Although nuclear fission power had reached an acceptable level of 
maturity, there were still problems to be solved, such as radioactive waste 
disposal, serious accidents and their consequences, the ageing of nuclear 
power plants and the possibility of extending their lifetime, as well as the 
development of new, more reliable and economical generations of reactors. The 
last point was of vital importance for governments when taking decisions 
regarding the future energy structure of their country. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 37 


135. Turning to the Spanish nuclear programme, he said that since the 
previous session of the General Conference, two power plants had started 
operation, one of which was still at the testing stage. In 1987, Spain had 
produced 41 270 GW«h of nuclear power; that constituted an increase of 10.2% 
over the previous year and represented 31.1% of the electricity produced. The 
average load factor had been 80.9%, which testified to the quality of the 
designs and maintenance as well as the qualifications of operating staff. 
136. The results of the OSART mission to the Almaraz nuclear power plant had 
been very positive and had shown that operational safety at that plant was 
higher than the international average. As to possible improvements, they were 
being taken into account by the Almaraz plant. In future, other power plants 
would be evaluated in a similar way. 
137. Anxious to help allay international public concern about radioactive 
waste, his country wished to announce that its programme for the disposal of 
waste from a Spanish plant which had recently been brought into service had 
been approved by the Commission of the European Communities, and that the 
latter already had before it the documents concerning the programme for the 
disposal of waste from a second plant. 
138. Eager to maintain a high level of safety, his country had welcomed the 
revised and updated version of the NUSS Codes as well as the report of the 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) on safety principles and 
objectives. It had taken account of the NUSS Codes from the time of their 
preparation, in which Spanish experts had participated, and the INSAG 
proposals were being studied very thoroughly by his country. 
139. Special attention should be given to radiation protection, including in 
areas which easily escaped proper supervision, such as occupational radiation 
exposure outside nuclear power plants and the very widespread use of certain 
X-ray equipment. Spain particularly appreciated the Agency's attempts to 
rectify the deficiencies which had been detected throughout the world in a 
recent report. Similarly, it was very interested in studies on the experience 
gained following the Chernobyl accident in the area of radiation protection, 
as well as in the dissemination of the results of those studies. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 38 


REPLY BY THE DELEGATE OF IRAQ TO THE STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF THE ISLAMIC 
REPUBLIC OF IRAN 


140. Mr. MAHMOUD (Iraq), exercising his right of reply, said that some 
of the slanderous statements made at the previous meeting by the delegate of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran demonstrated that Iraq's attitude towards the 
Islamic Republic of Iran's acceptance of Security Council resolution 598 was 
well founded. It would be remembered that the Islamic Republic of Iran had 
waited one year before accepting that resolution and then had done so under 
conditions which were well known to everyone, namely after Iraq had been able, 
through a series of military operations, to recover all its territories 
occupied by Iran. The statements made by the delegate of the Islamic Republic 
of Iran showed once again that that country had difficulty in accepting the 
state of peace and in understanding its importance for the Iranian people and 
for other peoples in the region. 
141. The slander put forward by the Islamic Republic of Iran on the subject 
of chemical weapons was part of a great worldwide Zionist campaign aimed at 
denigrating Iraq and preparing the ground for an Israeli military operation 
against Iraqi industrial complexes. The Israeli Minister of Justice had 
already threatened Iraq with such action, and the present climate was strongly 
reminiscent of that which had prevailed before the Israeli military attack on 
the Iraqi nuclear reactor in 1981. His country, which had repeatedly stressed 
its support for international regulations, strongly condemned the slander 
campaign directed against it. That campaign, which had been started in 
certain circles in Washington with Zionist support, had been echoed by the 
words of the Iranian delegation, although one might have expected that country 
to adopt a responsible attitude in view of the establishment of a just peace 
in the region which was at stake. 
142. Believing that it would be enough to draw the attention of delegations 
to a document which in itself sufficed to demonstrate the mendacious nature 
of the Iranian allegations, he recalled that in an interview given 
on 2 September 1988 to Radio Tehran, the Iranian Minister of the Revolutionary 
Guards, speaking about the achievements of his Government in the area of 
weapons manufacture, and in particular in the sectors of chemical, 
bacteriological, biological and nuclear-weapons production, had stated that 

GC(XXXII)/OR.306 
page 39 


the manufacture of chemical weapons no longer presented any scientific 
problems for the Islamic Republic of Iran. It was thus to be presumed that 
that country was producing and deploying chemical weapons in accordance with 
official decisions. He would therefore conclude by inviting the delegate of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran to show more goodwill and sense of responsibility 


in dealing with so important a problem as that of peace in the region. 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (resumed) 


143. The PRESIDENT announced that the delegate of India, in his 
capacity as Chairman of the Middle East and South Asia group, had informed him 
of the agreement reached within that group. He accordingly proposed that the 
delegate of Saudi Arabia be elected as Vice-President of the General 
Conference to fill the outstanding vacancy in the General Committee and that 
the delegate of Bangladesh be elected as additional member. The General 
Committee would thus consist of six Vice-Presidents, namely the delegates of 
Guatemala, Norway, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics and the United States of America, the President of the General 
Conference (himself), the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole (namely the 
delegate of the Philippines) and seven additional elected members, namely the 
delegates of Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Ireland, Liechtenstein 
and Nigeria. The General Committee would therefore have 15 members, of which 
six were Vice-Presidents and seven were additional members, which would 
involve suspending the application of Articles 34 and 40 of the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference. He took it that the General Conference 
accepted such suspension and approved the proposed composition. 
144. It was so decided. 
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN 


145. Mr. SAMIEI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his delegation 
wished to reserve the right at a later stage to exercise its right of reply to 
the comments which had just been made by the delegate of Iraq. 
The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
27 October 1988 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Wednesday, 21 September 1988, at 10.50 a.m. 


President:
later: 
Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 
Mr. Al NUWAISER (Saudi Arabia) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
Arrangements for the Conference 1 6 
(a) Adoption of the agenda and 
allocation of items for 
initial discussion 1 4 
(b) Closing date of the session 
and opening date of the 
next session 5 6 
Requests for the restoration 
of voting rights 
7-1 0 

[*] GC(XXXII)/834. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXII)/INF/262/Rev.2. 


88-4754 
3911e/0470e 



GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 2 


Item of the 
provisional
agenda* 


6


 Paragraph 


 General debate and annual report 
for 1987 (resumed) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Italy 11 - 33 
Saudi Arabia 34 - 39 
Guatemala 40 - 45 
Switzerland 46 - 65 
Sweden 66 - 72 
Commission of the European 


Communities 73 - 84 
Mexico 85 - 94 
Panama 95 - 103 
Norway 104 - 112 
Denmark 113 - 123 



GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 3 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXXII)/834 and Add.1; GC(XXXII)/834, annotation to item 4(a)) 
1. The PRESIDENT announced that the General Committee had recommended 
that the General Conference include in its agenda all the items listed in the 
provisional agenda contained in document GC(XXXII)/834. With regard to the 
supplementary item proposed by the Islamic Republic of Iran set forth in 
document GC(XXXII)/834/Add.1, the General Committee recommended that it be 
included as a matter to be discussed under item 10, "Measures to strengthen 
international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological protection". 
2. The General Committee recommended further that the items be allocated 
for initial discussion as indicated in document GC(XXXII)/834. 
3. It also recommended that the order in which the items appeared in 
document GC(XXXII)/834 be retained, subject to the understanding that changes 
might have to be made in the course of business so as to make the best use of 
the available time. 
4. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
(GC(XXXII)/834; annotation to item 4(b)) 
5. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had authorized him 
to inform the General Conference that it recommended fixing Friday, 
23 September 1988, as the closing date of the thirty-second regular session 
and Monday, 25 September 1989, as the opening date of the thirty-third regular 
session of the General Conference, which would be held in Vienna. 
6. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
REQUESTS FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS (GC(XXXII)/INF/258, 261 and 264) 


7. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee recommended that the 
General Conference should not accede to the request made by Panama that the 
last sentence in Article XIX.A of the Statute be invoked in order that Panama 
might be permitted to vote during the current session of the General 
Conference. 
8. 
The General Committee's recommendation was accepted. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 4 


9. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had further 
recommended that the General Conference should accede to the request made by 
Lebanon that the last sentence in Article XIX.A of the Statute be invoked in 
order that Lebanon might be permitted to vote during the current session of 
the General Conference. 
10. The General Committee's recommendation was accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1987 (resumed) (GC(XXXII)/835) 


11. Mr. MANZOLINI (Italy) expressed appreciation to the Director 
General for the comprehensive and detailed report he had submitted to the 
Conference, which constituted further evidence of his commitment to serving 
the international community. 
12. Governments and public opinion were currently reviewing the prospects 
for nuclear energy, and the past year had seen - as a lesson learnt from the 
Chernobyl accident - widespread and increased awareness of the need for 
renewed commitment to, and closer international co-operation in, ensuring ever 
higher levels of safety in the construction and operation of nuclear power 
plants, and in radioactive waste management. 
13. Italy was convinced that the continued use of nuclear energy would be 
possible only with the parallel development of appropriate technical and 
legislative measures for preventing any possible accidents, and therefore 
supported the specific initiatives taken by the Agency to that end particularly 
since Chernobyl. 
14. Although compliance with the regulations regarding the construction and 
operation of plants was predominantly a government responsibility, the 
fundamental role that the adoption of internationally binding safety 
regulations would play in changing public opinion regarding nuclear energy 
should not be underestimated. He therefore welcomed the recent review of the 
five NUSS Codes of Practice, but felt it was now necessary to make a thorough 
study of mechanisms to ensure the widest possible acceptance by Member States 
of such a comprehensive set of regulations - for example, through a 
multilateral convention. In view of the international nature of the issues 
involved, priority should be given to increasing the degree of standardization 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 5 


of the safety regulations and criteria adopted by different countries in the 
design, construction and operation of nuclear power plants. 


15. Also, an appropriate status should be given to the International 
Nuclear Safety Advisory Group's report on Basic Safety Principles for Nuclear 
Power Plants (INSAG-3). 
16. His country hoped that such documents, together with the technical 
discussions that had taken place within the IAEA over the past two years between 
plant designers, builders, operators, maintenance personnel and 
regulators - could contribute to the spreading of a "safety culture", among 
all operators, and thus to regaining the public's confidence in nuclear power. 
17. The priority given by Italy to those issues did not mean that it did 
not fully support the other activities undertaken by the Agency in the 
aftermath of the Chernobyl and Goiania accidents. The operational safety 
review team (OSART), radiation protection advisory team (RAPAT) and analysis 
of safety-significant events team (ASSET) services were extremely valuable as 
would be the Incident Reporting System (IRS) once an improvement along the 
lines of a long-standing Italian proposal had been implemented. It was also 
urgently necessary to agree upon a definition of the term "radiological 
significance" - used, for example, in the Early Notification Convention since 
the present definition left an element of arbitrariness in determining 
when notification was required. The Agency should also continue and 
strengthen its activities in the fields of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, including work relating to "inherently safe" reactors. Once 
properly developed, such a technology would not only find increasing 
application in the industrialized countries, but could also be made available 
to those Third World countries that had decided to take up the nuclear 
option. By its very nature, such a technology seemed particularly suited to 
gaining access to an extremely important energy source without prejudice to 
specific safety regulations. 
18. Italy noted with satisfaction that the design work on the first stage 
of the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project had 
begun during 1988, since that scientifically extremely ambitious project also 
confirmed the potential which a genuine will to co-operate could offer to the 
international community. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 6 


19. Following an in-depth political debate and three referendums, the 
Italian Parliament had imposed a five-year moratorium on the construction of 
nuclear fission power plants. That period would be dedicated to promoting 
research - in both nuclear fission and nuclear fusion - on new generations of 
plants and reactors offering further improved safety conditions. The Italian 
Government had also drawn up a new National Energy Plan aimed at providing 
Italy with the energy required for its economic development while guaranteeing 
maximum protection of human health and the environment and bearing in mind the 
need to participate actively in the international development of nuclear 
technology, especially in the field of inherently safe reactors. 
20. That document centred on five basic objectives: energy saving, 
environmental protection, development of national resources, diversification 
in the use of imported energy sources and geographical and political 
diversification of supply areas, and competitiveness of Italian industry. The 
prospects for reconsidering the use of nuclear fission energy for electricity 
generation in Italy depended on the availability of plants with innovative 
safety characteristics of two kinds: (i) Appropriate sites within the 
environment, so as to minimize the consequences of any possible accident; 
(ii) Plant design based on enhanced passive and inherent safety features. 
21. Particular attention would be devoted to problems related to the 
conditioning and disposal of radioactive wastes stemming from previous 
electricity generation or produced by still expanding non-energy sectors such 
as health, agriculture, etc. Radiation protection would continue to be 
heavily promoted, both in non-energy applications, such as medical techniques 
for treating radiation exposure, and in the monitoring of environmental 
radioactivity. 
22. Italy planned to intensify nuclear fusion research activities in the 
years ahead. Co-operation within Europe, particularly in the Joint European 
Torus (JET) and Next European Torus (NET) programmes and through the 
association between the Italian National Committee for Research and 
Development on Nuclear Energy and Alternative Energy Sources (ENEA) and the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), would continue with undiminished 
momentum. Italy's major plants using magnetic confinement would be 
completed: the FTU at ENEA's Frascati Centre by the end of 1988 and the RFX 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 7 


at the National Research Council's Padua Laboratories by 1989. In addition, 
the ENEA-EURATOM Association had recently decided to complete the detailed 
design of IGNITOR, a compact high magnetic field tokamak that was to be 
located at EURATOM's Ispra establishment. 


23. The Agency's responsibilities were steadily increasing, and therefore 
participation in the decisions taken by its policy-making organs, especially 
the Board of Governors, should be as broad as possible, since those decisions 
would be certain to have an ever greater impact on the energy policies of 
Member States. 
24. Moreover, it was essential for the Agency to step up its efforts to 
conduct a dialogue with the public and press, which were becoming ever more 
sensitive to nuclear power issues. That would be in the interest of better 
transparency of the Agency's activities and would lend credibility to its role 
in ensuring that essential safety regulations were complied with. 
25. With regard to the Board of Governors, the time had come to amend 
Article VI of the Statute in order to extend and improve representation within 
the Board. Italy, together with Belgium, Portugal, Spain and Sweden, had 
sponsored an amendment proposal aimed at allowing more countries to 
participate in adopting important decisions within the governing body of the 
Agency, while at the same time retaining the principle of equitable 
representation of all regional groups. Representation on the Board should 
reflect, in a more balanced way, the various aspects of nuclear progress, 
taking into account not only installed generating capacity, but also other 
significant criteria such as technological advancement; international 
co-operation including participation in Agency activities; development in 
non-energy areas; and, the ability to evaluate nuclear technology issues in an 
integrated view of future developments in the energy field. If a definite 
willingness to seek ways of extending and improving representation on the 
Board could be shown, that would inspire Italy to pursue its role in the 
non-proliferation sector, in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in plant 
safety, as well as encouraging it in its decisions regarding financial support 
to Agency activities. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 8 


26. Full support for the IAEA safeguards system, was another aspect of 
Italy's policy in the nuclear field. He had noted with satisfaction that the 
Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR) for 1987 did not record any diversion 
of nuclear materials or equipment under safeguards. An overall, positive 
improvement in the level of monitoring activities could be discerned, and he 
welcomed the constant expansion of the safeguards regime to which the 
conclusion of further agreements with Nigeria and, more recently, with China 
and Panama bore witness. 
27. At the same time, his delegation was concerned about the continued 
increase in safeguards expenditure. Even though the trend seemed formally 
justified by the geographical expansion of the system, it should be possible 
to contain costs by expanding national research and development activities 
aimed at improving the quality of safeguards and thereby, in the longer term, 
allowing savings on staff costs. Italy's contribution to that endeavour had 
consisted in supplying ad hoc funds and specialized personnel for a support 
programme on reprocessing plants. In the context of containing costs, his 
country appreciated the initiative aimed at broadening the areas of activity 
of regional offices, but all the same, a thorough revision of safeguards 
criteria and objectives seemed necessary. 
28. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), now over 
20 years old, still enjoyed Italy's full support, as it had constituted a 
milestone in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and promoting effective 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear technologies. He welcomed the 
recent accession to NPT of Trinidad and Tobago, and the announcement of a 
similar move by Saudi Arabia and hoped that other States which had not yet 
acceded to the Treaty would follow their example. However, the progress 
already achieved in reducing existing nuclear arsenals and any future progress 
that might be made in that direction, would undoubtedly constitute the best 
premise for an updated and constructive assessment of nuclear 
non-proliferation on the occasion of the Fourth NPT Review Conference in 1990. 
29. Technical co-operation with developing countries deserved continued 
strong support, not merely out of a sense of solidarity, but also because, in 
the present world economic situation, the interrelations between different 
economic systems were so manifold and deep-rooted that a crisis could be 
overcome only through genuine co-operation at every level. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 9 


30. In that spirit, Italy had always played a major role in supporting the 
IAEA's development aid activities: Italian contributions had often been used 
to finance projects which, though approved by the Agency and considered to be 
of particular importance, could not otherwise have been implemented; research 
and development activities had also been conducted on nuclear technologies in 
sectors of special interest to developing countries, such as agriculture, 
medicine, hydrology and industry. Those contributions had, in recent years, 
brought Italy to the forefront among countries supporting the IAEA's technical 
assistance activities. 
31. His country had also placed special emphasis on activities related to 
training and to science and technology transfer, which were fundamental in 
enabling developing countries to achieve self-sufficiency and progress. Italy 
was not only offering a large number of fellowships for that purpose, but, was 
also making substantial financial contributions to the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, amounting to 9 billion Italian lire per 
year through the period 1987-1990. In addition, the Italian Government had 
allocated a further US $5 million to the Trieste Centre in 1988 so that it 
could carry out selected programmes for the updating of its activities, and 
had also contributed US $3.85 million to the Third World Science Academy 
for 1988. 
32. As for the management of the provision of technical assistance by the 
Agency, the new methods of project appraisal were very sound. They allowed 
corrective measures and modifications to be made, if necessary, to projects 
already under way and to those modelled on previous activities. Ongoing 
co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other 
international organizations, such as the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), International Labour Organisation (ILO) and United Nations 
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), to improve the quality of 
programming and projects, on the basis of a specific evaluation of the 
recipient country's requirements was also extremely important. 
33. In conclusion, he reaffirmed Italy's firm commitment to ever closer 
international co-operation in the nuclear sector, under improved safety 
conditions and with effective safeguards. The Agency should continue to 
perform its valuable role of providing guidance and co-ordination in that 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 10 


sector. At the same time, it was essential for the IAEA to monitor the needs 
of the international scientific community and of those sectors of society 
which quite rightly followed with attention - and sometimes with concern - the 
development of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 


34. Mr. Al NUWAISER (Saudi Arabia) shared the Director General's 
confidence in the future of nuclear energy and the major contribution which it 
would play in meeting the world's electricity needs as expressed in his 
opening statement. Despite the negative effects of the Chernobyl accident, 
the world had continued to develop nuclear power although fears aroused by the 
Chernobyl accident had slowed down that development. Whilst nuclear power 
presented dangers to health and threats to the environment, the use of fossil 
fuels for power generation also resulted in adverse consequences to the 
environment and climate, as had been pointed out by the World Commission on 
Environment and Development. Since the use of solar power, hydroelectric 
power and wind power could not meet the world's continuously increasing energy 
requirements, nuclear power constituted the most satisfactory long-term option. 
35. His delegation welcomed the progress which had been achieved in the 
areas of radiation and radioactive waste management and the work done by the 
RAPAT and OSART missions. It also welcomed the revision of the NUSS Codes and 
the major contribution to the improvement of safety which had also been made 
by INSAG-3. Developing countries, such as his own, looked to industrialized 
countries to design advanced types of reactor which were completely safe and 
had the limited capacity suited to the needs of developing countries. 
36. With regard to the technical assistance and co-operation programme, his 
delegation welcomed the increase in training facilities, the Agency's 
participation in the Amazon Basin project and the success of regional 
co-operation agreements. It was, however, a matter of concern to note that 
the share of technical assistance provided to the Middle East was decreasing. 
The Secretariat had accounted for that decrease by pointing out that the war 
in the region created obstacles to the provision of assistance, but had 
stressed that it was attempting to overcome those problems. His delegation 
hoped that the Secretariat would be successful in its efforts. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 11 


37. As far as the Agency's financial difficulties were concerned, his 
delegation urged Member States to pay their contributions to the 
Regular Budget promptly to avoid a recurrence of such difficulties. For its 
part, Saudi Arabia was making every effort to support international 
organizations and paid its contributions promptly. 
38. His country was particularly concerned about the aggressive designs of 
Israel and South Africa. His delegation believed that the Agency should take 
a positive decision on those issues, since Israel, while calling for a 
nuclear-free zone in the Middle East, refused to accede to NPT and refused to 
accept Agency safeguards and South Africa adopted a similar position, claiming 
to be negotiating with the Agency, whereas in fact it was just playing for 
time. 
39. Finally, his country was also alarmed at the dumping of nuclear waste 
in developing countries and urged Member States to consider the adoption of 
policies relating to the transfer of nuclear waste. 
40. Mr. CASTILLO CONTOUX (Guatemala) said that despite its difficult 
economic situation, Guatemala remained ready to support activities involving 
nuclear energy and its applications, for it was convinced that such 
applications could accelerate its economic and social advancement. The most 
important development in the nuclear energy field in Guatemala was the 
construction, to be completed by mid-1989, of a building that would house the 
General Directorate for Nuclear Energy and contain a number of laboratories 
for calibration and dosimetry, radiochemistry, radiopharmacology and 
agricultural and industrial applications, as well as administrative 
facilities, a computer centre, a library and a greenhouse. In conformity with 
the directives given by the President of Guatemala, those facilities would be 
made available to other Central American States for activities of relevance to 
the region. Guatemala was also planning to use them to expand its 
participation in the ARCAL programme. 
41. His country was grateful for having received a RAPAT mission in 
early 1988, for it attached high priority to radiation protection and fully 
intended to implement the mission's recommendations. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 12 


42. In respect of nuclear technology and its applications, the General 
Directorate for Nuclear Energy had made significant progress in the health, 
agricultural and industrial sectors. Promotional activities had induced a 
number of institutions, in close co-operation with the Department of Nuclear 
Energy, to use nuclear technology in the normal course of their activities or 
in applied research. 
43. The ARCAL programme, which had achieved great success both in technical 
terms and as an instrument of regional integration and co-operation, had won 
Guatemala's full support. Guatemala had joined the programme in 1985 and the 
benefits it had derived had surpassed its own expectations. It would urge the 
Agency to continue to provide all possible support for the programme, and 
wished to express its gratitude to donor countries and the Secretariat. 
44. Guatemala had hosted a successful workshop on implementation of ISO 
standards for qualification and certification of non-destructive testing 
personnel. In November 1988, it would hold a meeting of co-ordinators and 
researchers involved in the ARCAL project on radioimmunoassay of 
thyroid-related hormones, and a seminar was to be held the following year on 
the sterile-insect technique in control or eradication of fruit flies in 
Latin America. 
45. Guatemala wished to thank the Agency for its valuable assistance, which 
had been essential to the development of nuclear technology use in Guatemala, 
and the Government of the United States for its extrabudgetary contribution to 
the implementation of projects on radiation protection and dosimetry equipment 
and eradication of the Mediterranean fruit fly, which were footnote-a/ 
projects - subject to receipt of additional funds. 
46. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) observed that 1988 was the 20th 
anniversary of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
which, together with the Agency's safeguards system, was the cornerstone of 
the international nuclear regime ensuring international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy without increasing the risk of proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. He welcomed the entry into force of the treaty between 
the United States and the Soviet Union on the elimination of medium- and 
shorter-range missiles, which would enhance the credibility of the 
non-proliferation system by removing one category of nuclear weapons. He was 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 13 


also happy to note the conclusion of the safeguards agreement with the 
People's Republic of China. All the five nuclear-weapon States had thus 
agreed to place their civil nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 


47. Referring to the status of nuclear power in Switzerland, he pointed out 
that there were two contradictory trends: the sceptical, if not negative, 
attitude of a large part of the population to nuclear power, on the one hand, 
and a steady increase in electricity demand, on the other. 
48. The scepticism was expressed in the two public initiatives against 
nuclear power, which were to be put to a popular vote in 1990 or 1991. The 
first sought a ten-year moratorium before authorizing any new power plant, 
while the second required the shutting down of all existing nuclear power 
plants at the end of their lifetime at the latest. Moreover, because of 
parliamentary pressure the Swiss Government was considering the termination of 
the Kaiseraugst nuclear power plant project. In those circumstances, the 
nuclear capacity was unlikely to be expanded in the near future. 
49. However, electricity consumption continued to rise at an average rate 
of 4% per annum during the winter months. In view of the uncertain prospects 
for increase in the production of power and especially nuclear power, several 
long-term power supply contracts had to be concluded abroad. 
50. Faced with that dilemma, the Swiss Government was keeping its nuclear 
option open and was asking the people to reject the initiatives. Abandonment 
of the Kaiseraugst project did not, however, mean giving up nuclear projects 
in future. 
51. The existing nuclear programme was working very satisfactorily. The 
five reactors in operation accounted for about 40% of electricity production. 
The safety record was good and in 1987 the average reactor availability was 
again 84%. 
52. As regards radioactive waste, his Government considered that the 
feasability of safe ultimate storage of medium- and low-level waste had been 
proven. The safety of high-level waste had been proven in principle; however, 
it remained to be demonstrated that a large enough site could be found. 
Projects on repositories for interim storage were under way. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 14 


53. With a view to diversification of supply and international 
co-operation, agreements on co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy with Australia and China had been ratified and were in force. A 
similar agreement with Canada had been signed. 
54. In the interest of transboundary nuclear safety, Switzerland and France 
had agreed to intensify and place on a formal basis mutual exchange of 
information and to establish a joint commission for the purpose. A similar 
commission involving the Federal Republic of Germany and Switzerland was 
already in existence. 
55. Considering the criticism of nuclear power at the national level, 
Switzerland attached great importance to close international co-operation 
since it could help in restoring public confidence in nuclear power and 
promote a less emotional approach. It went without saying that the Agency had 
a pivotal role in such international co-opertaion both as a forum and as an 
active institution. 
56. Activities in the field of nuclear safety continued to be of crucial 
importance for international co-operation and for the Agency. Switzerland had 
therfore signed the Conventions on Early Notification and on Assistance and 
called upon those States which had not acceded to them to do so. 
57. The Swiss Government was especially committed to promoting the 
implementation of the relevant provisions of those two Conventions. Trials of 
the system of communication between the points of contact had shown that it 
was essential to have clear procedures for measures to be taken. In that 
context, his Government laid great stress on the definition of the threshold 
for notifying other States and considered that the problem should be resolved 
in the near future by the Contracting Parties with the Agency's help. 
58. The Agency had made a good start with the implementation of the 
Conventions. Emphasis should be placed on establishing a continuously-manned 
focal point within the Agency which would act rapidly. A well-developed 
emergency response system was essential for the operation of the Conventions 
and should have priority in financial matters. In the context of the 
Conventions, an important role belonged to the Global Telecommunication System 
of the World Meteorological Organization, to which he expressed his 
gratitude. While it was too early to make a final evaluation of the nuclear 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 15 


safety measures decided upon within the Agency as a result of the Chernobyl 
accident, one could already say that the actions taken were appropriate. It 
would be desirable to review the status of activities in the early 1990s. 


59. He had taken note with pleasure of the revision of the NUSS Codes, 
which, as well as the safety guides, should be continually updated, if 
necessary, in the light of scientific and technological developments. 
60. In the matter of harmonization of nuclear civil liability, he 
especially welcomed the drafting of the Joint Protocol linking the Paris 
Convention and the Vienna Convention and hoped that the widening of the scope 
of application of those Conventions would attract more States to accede to the 
Vienna Convention. It was desirable, however, to revise certain provisions of 
the latter in order to reduce its differences from the Paris Convention, in 
particular those concerning the amounts of compensation. Moreover, 
Switzerland was willing to join in the efforts to arrive at a system of 
States' liability in case of nuclear accidents. 
61. The Agency's safeguards activities continued to be essential to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that connection, he welcomed the seminar 
which had just been held for the press. Publicizing those activities could 
not but be conducive to the transparency and credibility of safeguards. 
62. In the recent years there had been a substantial growth in the Agency's 
activities in that area, owing chiefly to the continuous increase in the 
quantity of nuclear material and in the number of nuclear facilities. A 
permanent freeze in the safeguards expenditure would be harmful. However, 
Switzerland was open to any initiative with a view to rationalizing the 
application of safeguards so long as the latter's credibility was not affected. 
63. Subject to the preceding comment about safeguards, the Swiss 
authorities upheld the principle of zero growth in the Regular Budget, which 
should be achieved chiefly by laying down strict priorities. 
64. His delegation supported the Secretariat's efforts to overcome the 
financial difficulties, and was concerned at the delay in the payment of 
contributions by certain Member States. He hoped that the latter would meet 
their obligations in accordance with the financial regulations. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 16 


65. The manner in which the Agency had met the challenge of the recent 
years in the area of nuclear energy inspired confidence. Through the actions 
it had taken, it would be in a position to contribute to the credibility of 
nuclear energy. That was of particular importance at a time when the role of 
nuclear energy in the environmental debate deserved to be freshly evaluated. 
In that connection, Switzerland had noted with great interest the Director 
General's recent statements emphasizing the positive contribution of nuclear 
energy to the solution of environmental problems. 
66. Mr. ALER (Sweden) noted that the international community was 
increasingly concerned by the worldwide threats to the environment which were 
manifest in all parts of the globe. The fears expressed by scientists and 
environmental experts during the last decades had been confirmed and 
determined actions by governments were imperative. For its part, the Agency 
should direct its efforts towards the implementation of the recommendations of 
the Brundtland Report. 
67. Although half of Sweden's electricity production was based on nuclear 
power, the Swedish parliament had decided to phase out nuclear power by the 
year 2010. The majority of the Agency's Member States were in fact interested 
in nuclear applications other than power generation. His delegation welcomed 
the expansion of the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme 
in response to increased demand. In particular, studies of environmental 
problems, improvement of agricultural methods, medical applications and 
radiation protection ought to be given high priority. Such projects could be 
carried out efficiently only if the various programmes could be sustained in a 
predictable manner. The resources of the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund did not suffice to meet all urgent requests and in order to 
remedy the situation, an increased flow of extrabudgetary contributions was 
necessary. Sweden provided such support for the joint programmes of the 
Agency and the FAO and for the Trieste Centre. 
68. In the field of safety, the reactor accidents at Harrisburg and 
Chernobyl had dramatically highlighted the need to create and maintain, 
through the Agency, an effective exchange of experience in the fields of 
nuclear safety and radiological protection. The ultimate responsibility for 
nuclear safety would have to remain with the national authorities and the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 17 


nuclear utilities themselves, but the Agency could provide assistance by means 
of the NUSS Codes and OSART missions. Unless radical improvements in reactor 


safety were made, the probability of a major accident remained unacceptably 
high. The basic principles for nuclear power plants established by INSAG 
could substantially reduce the probability of reactor accidents and their 
consequences and obviously such principles should guide the design and 
construction of any new nuclear power plants. However, more than 500 nuclear 
power reactors were already in operation or under construction and the 
fundamental safety characteristics of those plants should also be scrutinized 


in the light of accumulated experience. In Sweden it had been decided that 
nuclear power plants should be subjected to a thorough safety review 
every eight to ten years and an extensive back-fitting programme had been 
initiated, including the layout of the containment building at two units and 
the installation of ventilation filters at all power reactors in the country. 


69. Another important area was the final disposal of high-level waste. His 
country believed that the Agency should establish basic principles in that 
area and that it was essential to establish internationally accepted 
guidelines in that area. In Sweden, the central intermediate storage facility 
for spent fuel, CLAB, had been in operation since 1985 and the central 
facility for final disposal of low- and medium-level radioactive wastes, SFR, 
had recently started operation. High priority should also be given to the 
Agency's work on Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection. In 
particular, the experience of the environmental effects resulting from the 
large-scale release of radioactivity following the Chernobyl accident should 
be systematically collected and analysed. The Swedish Radiation Protection 
Authority was participating actively in that endeavour. 
70. With regard to safeguards, his country believed that it was the 
politically most significant task entrusted to the Agency and that full 
confidence in the reliability of Agency safeguards was the very basis for 
continued international co-operation in the nuclear field. The Third NPT 
Review Conference had recommended the continued pursuit of the principle of 
universal application of Agency safeguards to all peaceful nuclear activities 
in all States. Furthermore, it had recommended an evaluation of the 
possibility of extending the application of safeguards to additional civil 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 18 


facilities in the nuclear-weapon States and consideration of the separation of 
the civil and military facilities in those States. The goal was an effective 
safeguards regime in both nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon 
States. Sweden welcomed the voluntary submission to Agency safeguards by the 
nuclear-weapon States of all or part of their peaceful nuclear activities and 
the recent agreement between the Agency and the People's Republic of China was 
therefore a matter of satisfaction to his country. 


71. Nevertheless, the reluctance by Member States to provide the Agency's 
Department of Safeguards with adequate resoures had limited the possibilities 
of pursuing the recommendations of the Third NPT Review Conference. His 
country had accepted, only with the greatest hesitation, the safeguards budget 
for 1989 and the programme for 1989 and 1990, the year when the next 
NPT Review Conference was expected to be held. Once again the only way to 
remedy the situation was through extrabudgetary contributions in areas where 
the Agency's integrity and objectivity would not be jeopardized. For its 
part, Sweden had established a five-year programme in support of the Agency's 
safeguards activities. 
72. The world community had welcomed the agreement between the USSR and the 
United States on the elimination of land-based intermediate- and shorter-range 
nuclear missiles as a first step towards nuclear disarmament. Transfer to 
peaceful uses of the nuclear material removed from those nuclear warheads 
should be verified by subjecting it to Agency safeguards. Such verification 
should, in fact, be an integral part of a continuing process towards the 
complete elimination of nuclear weapons. In conclusion, his delegation hoped 
that the organizations within the United Nations system would show the 
necessary foresight and determination and take resolute action to secure a 
safe future for later generations. 
73. Mr. MANIATOPOULOS (Commission of the European Communities) said 
that, in the Co-operation Agreement between the European Community and the 
IAEA, the Community undertook to act in close co-operation with the Agency in 
promoting the objectives of its Statute. He reassured the Conference that the 
Community would continue to give the Agency the fullest possible support, not 
only in the safeguards field but in all relevant activities. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 19 


74. The collaborative work in safeguards implementation and verification 
carried on by the Agency, the Community and the Community's member States 
under the agreements of 1973, 1976 and 1978, had continued during the past 
year to be a field where still greater resources, manpower and management 
skills were required. In 1987, the Agency had devoted just under 40% of its 
worldwide inspection effort to operations within the Community. For its part, 
the EURATOM safeguards inspectorate (during 1987) had carried out checks on 
stocks of plutonium and highly enriched uranium, and on major quantities of 
other nuclear material and heavy water held in about 700 nuclear installations 
in the Community - by any standards, a massive effort amounting to almost 
6700 man-days of inspection. 
75. It was the European Commission's responsibility to keep under constant 
review the scope for improvements in safeguards management practice. The 
European Commission's co-operative safeguards research and development 
programme consisted of many tasks which were implemented at the Community's 
Joint Research Centre. Major developments during the past year had included 
physical inventory exercise for highly enriched uranium materials, testing of 
automatic review stations for the analysis of optical surveillance data on 
film and video tape from nuclear installations, and the development of a 
computer system to match accountancy data from shipments and receipts. The 
latter developments had important implications for the reduction of manpower 
requirements. 
76. While the Community's safeguarding system, as provided for under the 
1957 Treaty of Rome, worked closely with that of the Agency, with which it was 
of course fully compatible, it nevertheless had some distinct and important 
features of its own. The NPT provided for the conclusion of agreements by 
non-nuclear-weapon States with the Agency individually, or together with other 
States. The Agency's safeguards system was thus based on contractual 
relationships between the Agency and the States concerned. The Community's 
safeguards system, on the other hand, was anchored in Community law and, 
inter alia, also dealt with obligations entered into by the Community with 
certain key nuclear supplier States. The Agency and Community had therefore 
organized a close collaboration between their two international safeguarding 
systems, whether the Community should now be ready to assist the Agency 

GC(XXXII)/OR;307 
page 20 


further by carrying out a somewhat greater proportion of that collaborative 
safeguards effort within Community frontiers itself was a possibility that 
could well merit investigation. Both the IAEA and the Commission would, of 
course, have,to continue to satisfy themselves that their fundamental 
obligations were being fulfilled, 


77. During the past year, there had been some very regrettable failures by 
certain nuclear operators in the Community at the technical and administrative 
level, involving the handling and transport of nuclear materials and waste. 
Some unfortunate, inaccurate and ill-informed allegations had appeared in 
certain media publications about the efficiency of safeguards activities and 
had aroused wide concern. The Commission appreciated the prompt and thorough 
action of the Agency in rebutting false allegations and misunderstandings. 
Following a considerable information effort both by the Agency and the 
Community, a Committee of Inquiry, set up by the European Parliament, had 
drawn up a series of conclusions followed by a resolution approved by the 
European Parliament at its plenary session in Strasbourg in July. Those 
events had highlighted the difficulty of explaining to the public at large the 
results of safeguards activities and the conclusions to be drawn from them. 
The Commission would be giving increasing attention to the whole issue of the 
public acceptability of nuclear energy. 
78. It was widely known and documented that the European Community had 
decided to complete a single internal market by the end of 1992. In 
June 1988, the Commission had presented to the Community's Council of 
Ministers a communication, which had been published, on the single energy 
market. It identified the possible barriers to establishing such an energy 
market by the end of 1992, and presented a series of actions aimed at 
eliminating those obstacles progressively. The Community was already tackling 
the problems involved. The actions currently being planned would have 
positive consequences across the whole energy sector, including the nuclear 
energy field. 
79. In 1987 some 32% of electricity generated in the European Community had 
been produced in nuclear power stations. In June, the Community's Council of 
Energy Ministers had examined a review, by the Commission, of the energy 
policies of Community member States, and the prospects for meeting the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 21 


Community's agreed 1995 energy objectives. Latest available projections had 
shown that the planned reduction in the production of electricity from 
hydrocarbons to less than 15% by 1995 should be achieved, and that the 
contribution of nuclear energy to electricity generation in 1995 could amount 
to 38%. Clearly, nuclear energy and solid fuels were the major options 
capable of responding adequately to the expected growth in electricity demand 
in the Community. 


80. The problem of the public acceptability of nuclear energy was cause for 
substantial concern in many countries. The Commission regularly performed 
surveys (known as Eurobarometer studies) of public opinion in member States of 
the Community. The results of the autumn 1987 survey indicated that the 
negative effect of Chernobyl was slowly receding, which was encouraging. 
Nevertheless, half the people in the Community thought nuclear power stations 
presented unacceptable dangers, although a higher proportion regarded chemical 
factories as posing greater risks than nuclear plants. 
81. During the past year, the Community had continued to take a number of 
actions directed towards dealing with the consequences of nuclear accidents. 
New regulations had been adopted laying down, inter alia, the procedure for 
determining maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination in 
foodstuffs and animal fodder in the event of a nuclear accident or 
radiological emergency. The controls governing imports of agricultural 
products originating in non-Community countries following the Chernobyl 
accident had been extended for a further two years. The Community had decided 
to adhere to the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, and 
to put into operation its own regional system for the early exchange of 
information. In addition, the European Community Council was considering a 
proposal that the Community should adhere to the Convention on Assistance in 
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. 
82. Following talks at the highest level, representatives of the world's 
four major programmes had reached agreement earlier that year on the 
co-ordination of their efforts, under the auspices of the Agency, to produce 
by 1990 a preliminary design for the International Thermonuclear Experimental 
Reactor (ITER), with the four collaborating parties providing equal 
contributions and having equal status. The Community attached great 
importance to that project. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 22 


83. The Commission would seek to provide further financial support for the 
Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme. Community support 
for the programme was also to take a more active form through the setting up 
of regular laboratory refresher training courses at the Community's Joint 
Research Centre, The priority assigned by that programme to the training of 
personnel was, in the Commission's view, of particular value for developing 
countries. 
84. Finally, with regard to the Joint IAEA/NEA Conference on the Paris and 
Vienna Conventions taking place on 21 September, he stressed that the 
Commission attached great importance to the successful outcome of that work. 
85. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico) said that although many positive 
comments had been heard concerning the international situation and the 
Agency's development, there were still a few causes for concern. The United 
Nations General Assembly had held a special session on disarmament that year, 
but no progress had been made and the Assembly had been unable to produce a 
final act. The lack of understanding demonstrated by both nuclear-weapon and 
non-nuclear-weapon States showed that the fatal tendency to increase levels of 
armament still persisted, and it would be unwise for the Agency to overlook 
that fact in view of the implications for its activities relating to the 
peaceful development of nuclear energy. 
86. The significant progress made in the control of natural forces had led 
man to believe that he could advance beyond his former limitations. 
Unfortunately, the reverse process appeared to be occurring. Many years in 
the past, when the United Nations had been set up in an atmosphere of great 
optimism, there had been a feeling that national sovereignty would gradually 
wither away, and the idea of sovereignty had rarely been referred to - except 
in principle 7 of Article 2 of the United Nations Charter, which had been 
widely viewed as a sign of retrograde conservatism. However, the opposite had 
in fact taken place, and even those agreements which were beneficial to 
humanity were now based on the concept of sovereignty. The linking of nuclear 
technology with that outdated concept was a dangerous move, like forcing a 
steam engine to travel at 200 km per hour, and would inevitably result in 
tragedy. 
87. Positive elements in that general situation were the regional 
agreements on the establishment of nuclear-free zones. The Latin American 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 23 


States had the Tlatelolco Treaty, and OPANAL had done extremely constructive 


work. The Rarotonga Treaty was a worthy successor to the Latin American 


Treaty, and together they ensured that a large area of the Pacific lived up to 


its name. Also very interesting was the draft resolution, submitted by Egypt 


in document GC(XXXII)/852, which opened up new perspectives for a region that 


had long been torn by wars. 


88. After the first 30 years of its existence, the Agency should consider 
what further contributions it could make in its vital role of improving the 
living standards of the world's population. It should not, however, neglect 
the spiritual aspect, as an obsession with material progress would mean 
failing to achieve the great objectives for which it had been established. 
89. The Agency, like other international organizations, was hampered by its 
archaic structure, particularly in the case of the Board of Governors. The 
regional groupings it had adopted were a poor reflection of reality, and there 
was insufficient representation of States that were advanced in nuclear 
technology or of the majority of Member States which required assistance from 
the Agency. The General Conference had before it an excellent report on 
Article VI of the Statute, but there were no signs that any of the proposed 
reforms would be implemented. The Board itself was out of touch with the 
realities of the nuclear age, and was failing to establish the Agency as a 
vital force for change. 
90. The dangers inherent in the population increase, growing energy 
requirements and outdated attitudes were well known. Initial enthusiasm for 
nuclear energy had given way in many places to hesitation and disappointment, 
and although some delegations had spoken of the continued development of 
nuclear power in their countries, others had implied the likelihood of a very 
different course being followed. The Agency alone, and no other organization, 
could take the vigorous action required to counteract those tendencies, but 
only after a thorough review of its governing bodies - which must rise above 
their concern for administrative matters to become leaders in the struggle to 
ensure the future well-being of humanity. They must take bold initiatives on 
research into energy forms previously considered impossible, and on education 
activities aimed at allaying public concern, which was so often based on 
misconceptions. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.3Q7 
page 24 


91. The developing countries were convinced that the environment must be 
protected, and they were ready to proceed in a rational manner and to join 
efforts with other countries to do so. However, solutions to environmental 
problems must be fair, taking into account the differing viewpoints of the 
industrially developed world, with its high standard of living, and of the 
developing countries, the victims of poverty. Many solutions would require 
sacrifices to be made, but it would indeed be unfair for richer countries 
which had benefited from decades of growth without any sign of concern for its 
environmental impact then to impose on poorer countries standards which would 
condemn them to poverty. The developing countries should be speeding up the 
rate of development not cutting it down, and the Agency should contribute 
towards finding fair solutions whereby the developed world would accept that 
its past successes had put it in a position to make greater sacrifices now. 
92. The peoples of the Third World required technical know-how if they were 
to benefit from the applications of nuclear energy. The Agency played an 
important role in filling that need through its symposia and seminars, 
OSART missions and direct assistance in the form of experts and equipment. 
Mexico was very appreciative of the Agency's assistance, and for that reason 
had joined the ARCAL programme in April 1988."* Nevertheless, his Government 
considered the rate of development of technical co-operation too slow. 
Although the target for voluntary contributions had been increased, it was 
still insufficient: for instance, world consumption of sparkling wine each 
year amounted to a far higher sum than that provided for the development of 
peaceful nuclear applications. 
93. The criticisms for poor administration levelled at international 
organizations in general had unfairly also been applied to the Agency, and the 
principle of zero growth had been imposed on it as a result. Although some 
countries, including Mexico, at present supported that principle because they 
were burdened by huge debt repayments, zero growth was in fact harmful to 
the Agency. Thus, that restriction had led members of the Group of 77 to 
oppose an increase in the safeguards budget - not because they were against 
safeguards as such, but because they were against expanding safeguards at the 
expense of technical assistance. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 25 


94. The Agency's contribution to ensuring safety in the use of nuclear 
energy, through its regulatory and standardizing activities, was of 
fundamental importance. It should continue its efforts towards the adoption 
of principles and standards that were legally binding. The political will and 
desire for dialogue and co-operation which had prevailed at the special 
session of the General Conference in 1986 must be maintained, so that the 
principles of international co-operation in the field of nuclear energy could 
be established and measures relating to nuclear safety and radiological 
protection strengthened. It would be unfortunate indeed if the Agency could 
not achieve any progress towards drawing up such instruments, and even worse 
for mankind if it became customary to adopt binding standards only after the 
damage was done. 
95. Mr. KOREF (Panama) wished, first of all, to express his 
appreciation of the valuable assistance which the Agency had provided his 
country in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He recalled the Agency's 
advice on using the country's hydroelectric potential for the following 
50 years. During the preceding 13 years the Agency had given valuable help in 
the form of experts on the use of isotopes, for example in agriculture, in 
which area Panama had been enabled to obtain higher yields of rice and maize, 
by applying the necessary amounts of fertilizer and irrigation water, thanks 
to isotope techniques. Panamanian technicians had been trained in the use of 
those techniques in the field. Improved seeds obtained by mutation had 
increased production so that Panama from having been an importer had become an 
exporter of rice. 
96. The co-operation between Agency scientists and the academics of the 
University of Panama had resulted in producing high-yield mutants of banana 
with resistance to fungus. 
97. The Panamanian cattle breeders had achieved great success by the 
application of radioimmunossay techniques in determining the best time of 
fertilization and in diagnosing and curing infections and other diseases in 
animals. They could determine and correct, where necessary, the quantities of 
hormones in animals. 
98. One of the most important activities of the Agency was related to the 
eradication of harmful insects such as the tsetse fly and the Mediterranean 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 26 


fruit fly. The latter caused enormous damage especially to citrus plantations 
in the Mediterranean area and in Mexico and Central America. The sterile-male 
technique had given excellent results, and he was proud to point out that some 
Panamanian scientists were participating in the campaign to prevent the Medfly 
from reaching Panama, which produced large quantities of orange for internal 
consumption and export in the form of juice. 


99. The Agency was helping his country in the study of water resources both 
above and below the surface, in which area the use of radioisotopes yielded 
considerable data. Since the apparatus, chemicals and technology for 
hydrological investigation were not available domestically, the Agency made a 
vital contribution by supplying those and also by providing experts, by 
training local scientists and by providing the services of its laboratories to 
verify the results of analysis. 
100. Modern medicine was inconceivable without isotopes, and the Agency's 
assistance in training physicians and in supplying the necessary equipment to 
hospitals in Panama had been of great help in combating many diseases. 
Particular mention should be made of eradication of endemic goitre, and of 
diagnosis and treatment of cancer, which had saved many Panamanian lives. 
Those nuclear techniques would have been hazardous without the use and regular 
calibration of dosimeters by the 50 laboratories approved by the Agency. 
101. He was emphasizing in particular the Agency's assistance to his country 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy not only because he wished to express 
his gratitude but also because it was necessary to dispel the widespread 
ignorance about those activities of the Agency; many people believed that the 
organization was concerned only with promoting nuclear power plants, which 
involved hazards for the enivironment and for health. 
102. He appealed to delegates to publicize the information about the great 
help the Agency provided to developing countries and also to industrial 
countries in the construction and operation of nuclear power plants so as to 
prevent environmental contamination and accidents due to human error and 
equipment fault. 
103. The misinformed public which said "No!" to nuclear power should of 
course be told of the Agency's other, very important activities, in the area 
of safeguards involving verification of the production and storage of 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 27 


the main ingredient of nuclear weapons - at nuclear power plants. The 
Plutonium, a by-product of nuclear power plants, was safeguarded under NPT by 
a large number of Agency inspectors, and the inspections were financed by the 
countries which owned those plants. 


104. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) said that, subject to parliamentary approval, 
his delegation could support the proposal for the Agency's programme and 
budget for 1989 and 1990 as submitted by the Board. It could also agree to a 
target of US $42 million for voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1989. Pending parliamentary approval, 
Norway would contribute US $222 600 to the Fund. Furthermore, with a view to 
ensuring the continuous operation of the Agency, Norway was prepared to agree 
to an increase in the level of the Working Capital Fund for 1989 to 
US $4 million. 


105. The need to protect the environment and natural resources and to pursue 
development that was sustainable were questions of vital interest for the 
entire international community, and his country attached considerable 
importance to the contribution which the Agency could make in that area. The 
United Nations General Assembly had passed two resolutions (42/187 and 42/186) 
welcoming the reports entitled "Our Common Future" prepared by the World 
Commission on Environment and Development (WCED), and "Environmental 
Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond", by the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP); in those resolutions, it had called upon the governing 
bodies of the organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations 
system "to review their policies, programmes, budgets and activities aimed at 
contributing to sustainable development" and "to consider the Environmental 
Perspective and take it into account in the development of their own 
medium-term plans and programmes as relevant to their own mandates." 
106. The WCED report highlighted the extremely uneven global distribution of 
primary energy consumption, which in industrial countries with market 
economies was more than 80 times greater, for instance, than in sub-Saharan 
Africa. The report stated that if energy consumption were to become uniform 
world wide at current levels for industrial countries, then by 2025 a global 
population of 8.2 billion would require more than five times as much energy as 
that consumed in 1980. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 28 


107. The report, concluding that in the long run there could be no 
sustainable development unless environmental concerns were taken into account, 
emphasized the risks of increased reliance on fossil fuels: the greenhouse 
effect, air pollution and acidification of the environment. Those risks could 
be avoided by the use of nuclear fuel, which could provide an ample supply of 
energy for a growing humanity. However, nuclear energy had its own problems, 
such as reactor accidents, radioactive waste management and proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. Although means to minimize those problems did exist, there 
was a serious lack,of confidence in the use of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes in several countries, which could be overcome only by excellent 
performance over an extended period within the whole nuclear industry. In 
particular, it was necessary to focus efforts on those issues which caused 
concern and to establish routines which could avoid accidents stemming from 
human and technical shortcomings. Accordingly, the UNEP report, in stating 
its goals for nuclear energy, had rightly recommended that international 
co-operation should aim at the creation of a regime for the safe production 
and use of nuclear energy, as well as the safe handling of radioactive waste, 
taking into account, through appropriate mechanisms including prior 
consultations, the interests and concerns of countries that had decided not to 
produce nuclear energy. 
108. Throughout its existence, the Agency had been active in areas related 
to the effects of nuclear energy on the environment, such as nuclear safety, 
radiation protection and radioactive waste management, and through its 
technical assistance and co-operation programme, the Agency had promoted 
environmental considerations in developing countries. The Agency's programme 
was thus already very much in line with the goals of UNEP and WCED reports. 
Nevertheless, his delegation urged the Agency to pay even more attention to 
the environmental perspective in its future programmes. 
109. His delegation had been gratified to note that in 1987, as in previous 
years, the Secretariat had not detected any anomaly which could indicate the 
diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material or the 
misuse of facilities or equipment subject to safeguards. His country had 
always been a strong supporter of non-proliferation and safeguards, and had 
ratified NPT in 1969. The first Agency safeguards inspection had taken place 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 29 


in Norway, at the NORA reactor, in 1962. His country was prepared to waive 


the right of advance approval of designated inspectors for itself and to 


accept automatically those duly designated by the Board of Governors. Also, 
Norway welcomed Spain's accession to NPT in 1987 and the conclusion of an NPT 
safeguards agreement with Brunei Darussalam. On the other hand, it was a 
matter for regret that the number of non-nuclear-weapon States parties to NPT 
which had not concluded Agency safeguards agreements within the prescribed 
period of 18 months after ratification had increased from 46 at the end of 
1986 to 52 at the end of 1987. 


110. Norway had been a heavy water producer and exporter as early as 1934. 
In the 1950s, it had taken an active part in global international co-operation 
on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and had supplied heavy water to a 
number of countries, including Israel. That country had received 20 tonnes in 
1959 and 1 tonne early in 1970, in accordance with an agreement between the 
Governments of Israel and Norway under which the Government of Israel 
guaranteed that any heavy water supplied to Israel would be employed solely 
for the promotion and development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy and 
not for any military purposes, and that no such heavy water would be 
transferred without prior Norwegian consent. Despite that, Norway had 
approached Israel in 1986 with the aim of subjecting the heavy water to 
regular safeguards; talks on that matter still continued. 
111. Nuclear exports from Norway, including those of heavy water, had been 
conducted in accordance with the provisions of NPT since its entry into 
force. In 1974 Norway, together with several other exporting countries, had 
sent a letter to the Director General (reproduced in document INFCIRC/209) 
specifying the procedures for exports of nuclear materials under NPT. 
Moreover, at the Second NPT Review Conference in 1980, Norway had stated that 
it would adhere strictly to the principle that sensitive nuclear material and 
technology should not be transferred or exported unless all nuclear activities 
in the recipient non-nuclear-weapon States were under IAEA safeguards. As a 
matter of principle, Norway would in future restrict her nuclear exports to 
countries that were parties to NPT or other similarly binding international 
commitments not to acquire nuclear explosive devices. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 30 


112. It had recently become known that a quantity of 15 tonnes of heavy 
water, sold from Norway in 1983 to a company in an NPT country, had not 
appeared in that country despite the receipt by Norway of an international 
import certificate and an end-use statement. Instead, the heavy water had 
gone via another NPT country to a destination probably outside the NPT area. 
That case was now under police investigation in Norway. An export to another 
NPT country in 1984 had been stopped when an investigation had indicated the 
probability of unauthorized re-export. Those experiences had led his country 
to adopt its current rigorous control of all intended exports of heavy water. 
113. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) noted with interest that both the message from 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director General's opening 
statement had emphasized the crucial role of Agency issues in the preservation 
of the natural environment and the provision of energy, and the vital 
importance of the questions dealt with in the WCED, or "Brundtland" Report. 
Denmark was deeply concerned about the negative environmental effects of 
further comprehensive industrial and technological development, and had 
strongly supported the two United Nations General Assembly resolutions on the 
Environmental Perspective and the WCED report. 
114. The Danish Government was of the opinion that serious consideration 
should be given to the views and recommendations of the Brundtland Report in 
future energy planning. It placed great emphasis in its energy policy on 
increased energy efficiency, on energy production and end use, or people's 
awareness of the need to save energy and on the further development and use of 
new and renewable sources of energy. Denmark was one of the OECD countries 
with the lowest energy consumption per unit of gross national product. 
115. With regard to the activities of the Agency, his Government had noted 
with appreciation the Secretariat's preliminary review of the Brundtland 
Report and the Environmental Perspective, which indicated the proportion of 
activities devoted to environmental questions. Those preliminary reviews were 
an important contribution to consideration of the future mix of the Agency's 
activities. The Agency clearly had an important role in the implementation of 
the two United Nations resolutions to which he had referred, and his 
delegation welcomed the draft resolution on the Agency's future activities in 

GC(XXXII)/OR.307 
page 31 


that area that the Board of Governors had recommended by consensus, for 
adoption by the General Conference. His delegation sincerely hoped that the 
Conference would confirm the Agency's dedication to that important field by 
adopting the draft resolution. 


116. Denmark had also noted with appreciation that an increasing number of 
States had acceded to the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency 
Assistance. While the establishment of multilateral agreements was a major 
development in the field of co-operation on nuclear safety, his Government 
wished to stress the importance of bilateral agreements to supplement them. 
His Government considered that the Director General should inform 
Member States once a year of the status of bilateral agreements to which 
Member States were parties. 
117. Denmark attached great importance to the development of universally 
accepted nuclear safety standards and principles at the highest possible 
level. It welcomed the updating and strengthening of the five NUSS Codes to 
serve as a guide for States in formulating national nuclear safety 
requirements. His Government appreciated that it had not yet been possible to 
make those Codes legally binding internationally, but believed that 
Member States of the Agency should notify the Agency, the extent to which the 
relevant requirements of their national legislation and regulations were 
consistent with the revised Codes. In his delegation's view, the NUSS Codes 
would need to be further updated at a later stage, in the light of 
developments in nuclear science and technology. 
118. Denmark had, from the outset, supported the work in INSAG on developing 
basic safety principles for nuclear power plants, and urged Member States to 
give careful consideration to the proposed safety principles contained in the 
INSAG report. 
119. While noting with great appreciation that the number of States parties 
to NPT had increased to 137 by the end of 1987, his Government was gravely 
concerned to learn that 52 of the non-nuclear-weapon States party to NPT had 
failed to comply, within the prescribed time limit, with their obligations 
under Article II.A of the Treaty regarding the conclusion of the relevant 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. His Government appreciated that the 

GC<XXXII)/OR.307 
page 32 


Agency had developed a highly effective safeguards system, but stressed the 
need for it to be continuously expanded and improved. It considered that all 
nuclear facilities, without exception, should be subject to safeguards, and 
that all Member States should participate in the financing of safeguards, 
which were a collective responsibilty and benefited all countries. 


120. The Danish Government had noted with satisfaction the completion of a 
safeguards agreement pursuant to the voluntary offer by China to place some of 
its civilian nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. It was also pleased 
to note that during 1987 the number of safeguards agreements had increased 
by 2 to a total of 166 with 97 States. 
121. His Government was pleased to see the Secretariat's conclusion that 
in 1987, as in previous years, nuclear material under Agency safeguards had 
remained in peaceful nuclear activities or had been otherwise adequately 
accounted for. 
122. As always, Denmark attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
assistance activities. It accepted the target of US $42 million for 1989 and 
had pledged its full share. 
123. Lastly, he wished to express his country's great appreciation of the 
dedicated work performed by the Director General and his staff, and to assure 
them of its full support in their future work. 
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
9 December 1988 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OB' THE THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 21 September 1988, at 3.5 p.m. 


Item of the 
agenda* 


[*] GC(XXXIl)/856. 

President: Mr. HAL1M (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 


General debate and annual report 
for 1987 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of the 
following States and organization: 


Austria 
Indonesia 
New Zealand 
Greece 
Cote d'lvoire 
Thailand 
Sri Lanka 
Mongolia 
Turkey 
Netherlands 
Sudan 
Venezuela 
Bangladesh 
Portugal 
Oman 
Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance 
Islamic Republic of Iran 


Paragraphs 


1 - 157 


1 -12 
13 -23 
24 -40 
41 -48 
49 -54 
55 -66 
67 -72 
73 -75 
76 -83 
84 -100 
101 -111 
112 -121 
122 -133 
134 -139 
140 -145 


146 -154 
155 -15 7 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXlI)/lNE/262/Rev.2. 


88-4935 (4214e/0454e) 



GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1987 (GC(XXXII)/835) (continued) 


1. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) noted that during the past 12 months the 
future of nuclear energy had continued to be the subject of discussions and 
even controversies. On the one hand, 22 new nuclear power plants had entered 
into service during 1987 in 9 Member States, bringing the total number of 
nuclear power plants in operation to 417 in 26 countries and the total annual 
nuclear capacity worldwide to nearly 300 000 MW(e), or more than 16% of the 
world's total electricity production; that increase had taken place despite 
the risks involved in nuclear power technology and the existence of other 
problems related to nuclear energy, for example radioactive waste management 
and physical protection. On the other hand, only a small number of the Member 
States in which nuclear power was at present an economically viable option had 
an energy policy which involved steady development of their nuclear energy 
potential. Other countries, guided by economic or safety considerations, had 
adopted a more cautious approach which involved imposing a freeze, or virtual 
freeze, on the growth of their nuclear power potential. Other countries had 
gone even further and had decided to phase out nuclear power gradually, while 
some, including Austria, had deliberately renounced the use of nuclear energy 
for electricity production. 
2. There were also very different, even diverging attitudes and positions 
within countries, and in some cases government options in favour of nuclear 
power were opposed by large sectors of the population. It was interesting to 
note that, in January 1988, the European Parliament had adopted by a large 
majority a recommendation on nuclear accidents which was severely critical of 
nuclear power. Among the measures included in that recommendation were: a 
moratorium on all new construction of nuclear facilities until international 
standards on design, safety and operation rules had been established; the 
closure of facilities which did not meet international standards; the 
preparation of principles of public international law on liability, as well as 
regulations providing for adequate compensation by the responsible government 
for damage in the event of an accident; recognition of the rights of 
neighbouring States when nuclear facilities were built inside a 100-km-wide 
frontier zone; and arrangements providing for consultations with the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 3 


neighbouring States and populations concerned, prior to any decision to build 
nuclear facilities in frontier regions. 


3. During the general debate at the General Conference in 1987, his 
delegation had stated that the central element of any expanded nuclear safety 
programme undertaken by the Agency should be the adoption of internationally 
binding nuclear safety standards and mandatory control of their application by 
the Agency on a global scale in all countries. His delegation was aware that 
that was a minority position. All that could be expected from the Agency in 
that area was the revision and updating of the NUSS Godes and the preparation 
of new basic safety principles for nuclear power plants, neither of which 
would be legally binding on Member States. However, his delegation was 
unwilling to accept the argument that since nuclear safety was considered to 
lie exclusively within the field of national responsibility and jurisdiction, 
it must necessarily be outside the scope of international regulations with 
binding standards. Obviously any matter under national responsibility could 
be made subject to international control, provided there existed an 
appropriate legal commitment. Since nuclear facilities all over the world 
were subject to international inspection under Agency safeguards, it was 
difficult to understand why there could not be a parallel system of inspection 
and control in the area of nuclear safety. 
A. Those who lamented the negative effects of public opinion on the 
development of nuclear power should realize that the existence of 
internationally binding safety standards and a mandatory control mechanism 
through the intermediary of the Agency would increase confidence in nuclear 
technology. It had been very clearly demonstrated that state frontiers 
provided no barrier against the potential for radioactive contamination of the 
environment inherent in nuclear power plants, and that such contamination 
could affect a whole continent. Public concern about the risks associated 
with such facilities was therefore justified, not only in relation to plants 
located within the national territory, hut also in relation to foreign plants, 
particularly those in neighbouring countries. Foreign plants could, and often 
did, cause more concern than those built within national territory. For that 
reason, another argument used in favour of making nuclear safety exclusively a 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.308 
page A 

matter of national responsibility - the claim that no one could be more 


interested in the safety of a plant than the authorities of the country in 
which it was situated - did not seem convincing. One should not forget that 
the population of a country which had given up the nuclear option for energy 
production expected its government to secure a particularly high standard of 
protection against nuclear risks. 


5. The question of liability for nuclear damage was one of the major 
problems which had to be resolved by the Agency. Considerable achievements 
had already been made in that area, but further important work remained to be 
done. Austria welcomed the formulation of the Joint Protocol relating to the 
application of the Vienna and Paris Conventions and would be pleased to concur 
in the adoption of that instrument. His delegation thanked the joint TAEA/NKA 
working group of government experts for its efforts, which had enabled an 
effective bridge to be established between the two Conventions and had thus 
brought about a considerable expansion of their scope of application. The 
time had come to take a further step and to deal with the question of State 
liability with a view to drawing up an international convention on that 
subject. 
6. Such an instrument was essential. The concept of civil liabiity seemed 
fully applicable only between States with comparable legal systems, and in any 
case it would be inadequate in the event of large-scale accidents which caused 
damage not only to large numbers of people but also to the environment in 
general. Since the previous session of the General Conference, his Government 
had noted with satisfaction the positive reaction by a large majority of 
Member States to considerations formulated within the Agency on the question 
of drawing up an international instrument on State liability for damage 
arising from nuclear accidents. 
7. On several occasions his delegation had cited the Convention on 
International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects as an excellent 
example of a widely accepted international instrument dealing with liability 
and compensation for damage. Therefore, in its view, the essence of a new 
convention, namely the principle of State liability for nuclear damage and the 
mechanism for settling claims, should be based on the provisions of that 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.308 
page 5 


Convention. The necessary definitions and provisions relating to the scope of 


the new instrument could be based on the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability. State liability should be subsidiary to the existing international 
regimes on civil liability, but its provisions should nevertheless be strict, 
and, in the light of the potentially catastrophic effects of a nuclear 
accident, should not only provide for reparation in respect of damage to 
persons and property but also for preventive measures, as well as reasonable 
measures aimed at restoring the environment. As to the argument that a system 
of liability which made someone other than the polluter himself liable would 
inevitably encourage pollution, it seemed obvious that the national law of the 
State in which a facility was situated could, in turn, provide for recourse 
against the operator. 


8. His Government sincerely hoped that, at the present session of the 
General Conference, Agency Member States would be able to reach agreement on 
the establishment of an open-ended working group of government experts to draw 
up a draft convention. Austria would fully support such an endeavour and was 
ready to submit an initial draft. His delegation was firmly convinced not 
only of the possibility but also of the necessity of settling the difficult 
question of State liability for nuclear damage by means of an appropriate 
instrument. 
9. The Agency had an impressive record of formulating the international 
legal instruments covering various aspects of nuclear energy. One of its 
great achievements in that area was the Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material, which had entered into force the previous year. That 
Convention had been submitted to the Austrian Parliament for approval and the 
instrument of ratification would be deposited shortly after approval had been 
given. His delegation therefore did not hesitate in joining the appeal made 
to governments to ratify that important Convention or to accede to it. His 
country would also support any initiative to establish internationally binding 
regulations regarding physical protection measures to be applied to nuclear 
material at the national level. In March 1988, Austria had ratified the Early 
Notification Convention and the Austrian authorities were at present preparing 
parliamentary approval procedures for the Emergency Assistance Convention. 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.308 
page 6 


10. Apart from seeking to associate itself with multilateral legal 
instruments, his country had a policy of promoting bilateral treaty 
arrangements - particularly with neighbouring countries - on matters of mutual 
interest related to nuclear energy, especially nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. The first such agreement had been concluded with Czechoslovakia, 
and Austria had recently received assurances concerning the application of 
that agreement to all nuclear power plants in Czechoslovakia. The agreement 
with Hungary covering nuclear facilities everywhere in the territory of the 
two contracting parties had entered into force in November 1987, and the joint 
commission established by that agreement was to meet for the first time the 
following week. An agreement between Austria and the German Democratic 
Republic on the exchange of information and experience in the field of 
radiation protection had been signed on 3 May 1988. Lastly, on 
13 September 1988, an agreement had been signed between Austria and the USSR 
on the early notification of nuclear accidents and the exchange of information 
on nuclear facilities. 


11. His Government was convinced that the development of international law 
through bilateral agreements establishing systems of information and 
consultation on issues associated with nuclear power could make a substantial 
contribution to the positive development of bilateral relations, particularly 
between neighbouring countries, and especially if those countries followed 
different policies with regard to the use of nuclear power. As in the past, 
his country would contribute actively to the expansion of that new and 
important type of international legal commitment. 
12. As in the previous year, the Director General had stressed, in his 
opening statement, the view that nuclear power would inevitably become the 
most important source of energy worldwide during the coming decade, in view of 
the lack of other ecologically and economically acceptable solutions. Austria 
believed, however, that the range of technical options should be expanded so 
that the world was not confronted one day with a single scenario excluding all 
alternatives. In the report which it had submitted to the United Nations 
General Assembly, the World Commission on Environment and Development, in 
dealing with aspects of future energy development, had concluded not only that 
ways of increasing the safety of nuclear energy must be found, but also that 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 7 


the highest priority should be given to research on and development of 
environmentally sound and ecologically viable alternatives. His country 
supported that recommendation. 


13. Mr. SASTROHANDOYO (Indonesia) said that the thirty-second session 
of the General Conference was taking place at a time of renewed hopes for the 
establishment of international peace and security, although a number of 
problems remained to be solved and potentially explosive situations still 
existed. The delegation of Indonesia wished to thank the Director General for 
his opening statement, which had done much to clarify the basic issues of 
nuclear energy and had laid stress on various alternative energy options. 
14. Indonesia's foreign policy aimed to establish a peaceful world based on 
justice and prosperity. In South East Asia, Indonesia had always stressed the 
importance of regional security. In December 1987, the heads of Government of 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations had reaffirmed their commitment to 
make South East Asia a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality, one main element 
of which would lie in its being declared a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
15. World peace was not possible without sustained development, 
particularly in Third World countries. Indonesia had helped to define the 
concept of sustainable development, since it was firmly convinced that that 
was the right path. It was essential to ensure accelerated growth and 
development in order to meet the present needs of countries without 
compromising the well-being of future generations. As the Director General 
had said, it was important that those in favour of the use of nuclear power 
and those who had doubts about it or were opposed to it, should discuss 
without acrimony practical measures to avert disaster. In the area of nuclear 
energy, his country believed that the Agency's experience and knowledge would 
be the appropriate basis for establishing internationally accepted criteria 
for the use of nuclear energy for electricity production. Provided proper 
safety precautions were taken and the impact on the environment was kept to an 
acceptable minimum, nuclear power would remain a viable energy alternative and 
there would not be any reason to regard it as incompatible with sustainable 
development. Indeed, recourse to nuclear power might prove to be absolutely 
essential in the interests of furthering that concept. To be sure, nuclear 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.308 
page 8 


energy posed certain problems, but the level of technology was continuing to 
improve. It must also be acknowledged that no form of energy was without risk 
to the environment, not even new and renewable sources. 


16. Since it was already using nuclear energy, his country attached great 
importance to safety and had been able to benefit greatly from the Agency's 
assistance in that area. It was also benefiting from the Agency's commendable 
efforts to assist developing countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The results of research carried out with radioisotope tracers had 
enabled the National Atomic Energy Agency to transfer to the Ministry of 
Agriculture the necessary know-how for making animal feed supplements and a 
coccidiosis radiovaccine during the past year. Indonesia, which was already 
operating two research reactors, had a new multipurpose 30 MW reactor which 
had been commissioned in 1987, as well as several other support facilities 
Which would become fully operational by 1991. It intended to make that 
reactor and its related facilities available to countries in South Asia, East 
Asia and South East Asia for research and training activities. 
17. Indonesia had benefited from technical co-operation under the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for Asia and the Pacific and had acted as host to 
training courses and other activities organized under that agreement. It had 
recently played host to a seminar which had established several draft 
recommendations on the applications of nuclear energy in developing 
countries. Those recommendations would be studied in greater detail at the 
meeting of representatives of parties to the RCA which was to be held 
concurrently with the present session of the General Conference. 
18. One of the problems associated with nuclear power lay in convincing the 
public of its acceptability, and in that regard his delegation commended the 
Agency's information activities which, in association with similar activities 
in Member States, had made it possible to re-establish confidence in nuclear 
power after Chernobyl. The remarks made by the Director General himself on 
that question had helped significantly to clarify the facts and to dispel many 
unfounded fears about nuclear power. Indonesia had also undertaken major 
information campaigns with a view to enlightening the public on energy 
options. Nuclear energy required sophisticated technology and involved high 

GC<XXXII)/OR.308 
page 9 


investment costs, but the country had to recognize that the hydroelectric 
potential of the island of Java had already been exhausted, the country's 
geothermal possibilites were limited and the use of coal raised environmental 
problems. Therefore, Indonesia had no choice but to prepare to embark on the 
use of nuclear power. As far as the risks in terms of safety were concerned of 
which it was fully aware - Indonesia believed that the only way of keeping 
them to a minimum was to ensure that, when it was in a position to make use of 
nuclear power, it would have mastered the necessary technology and management 
capability. 


19. It was comforting to note that technical assistance, which was one of 
the Agency's two main functions, was continuing to develop and that an 
increasing number of experts from developing countries, including Indonesia, 
had been selected as consultants. 
20. His delegation was particularly pleased to announce that the Indonesian 
Parliament had before it a Government recommendation concerning ratification 
of the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency Assistance. Member 
States would recall that Indonesia had already ratified the Convention on 
Physical Protection. 
21. As far as safeguards were concerned, his country had of course signed 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and had also set 
up its own national system of control. It was pleased to hear that all 
countries operating a nuclear reactor had agreed to submit all or part of 
their nuclear facilities to safeguards. In that context, the voluntary offer 
agreement between China and the Agency was particularly welcome. 
22. With regard to a revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole, his 
delegation's position was that any consensus on increasing the number of seats 
on the Board should be based on the principle of maintaining balanced 
geographical representation. Although the efforts made so far had not been 
very successful, his delegation supported the idea of establishing a new 
working group to continue examination of the problem. 
23. No organization could survive and operate without healthy financial 
resources and it was regrettable that the Agency had experienced serious 
difficulties during the past two years. As many delegations had indicated, 

GC(XXXI1)/0R.308 
page 10 


the problem was due to slackness in the payment of contributions. While some 
countries were not in a position to pay their contributions owing to real 
economic difficulties, that was not always the case. It was therefore 
essential that all Member States should fulfil their financial obligations. 
His delegation was grateful to the Secretariat for having provided information 
on the systems of incentives currently being used in other international 
organizations. It would be useful for the Secretariat to study those systems 


in greater detail, particularly those used by the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) which had been in 
operation for several years. 


24. Mr. WALKER (New Zealand) said that the Agency was a unique 
organization which had very important responsibilities in the area of nuclear 
energy applications. However, it should also take into account the fears 
generated throughout the world by the dangers of nuclear weapons proliferation 
and the improper or unsafe use of nuclear technology. 
25. The Agency's record was a good one. It was a well-run organization 
with a highly competent staff. It administered the safeguards system, which 
was a crucial aspect of the non-proliferation regime effectively, and 
discharged its responsibilities properly towards developed and developing 
countries by helping them to benefit from the peaceful applications of nuclear 
technology. Some people in New Zealand were suspicious about the Agency's 
activities. They feared the consequences of widespread development of nuclear 
power, questioned the safety standards applied in that sector, and drew 
attention to the problem of waste management, which, it seemed, had not yet 
been resolved. Those fears could not be disregarded or discounted, because 
there was too much evidence which suggested that they were well-founded. In 
that light the Agency's work seemed all the more important. Efforts to 
improve nuclear safety standards, the intensification of international 
co-operation in the area of radiation protection and the role played by 
nuclear medicine and the other peaceful uses of nuclear energy to ensure 
better standards of living all helped to dispel distrust about nuclear energy 
and, what was more important, to make its utilization safer. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 11 


26. The Agency's most important task was its crucial verification role 
under the non-proliferation regime. Its responsibilities in the area of 
safeguards under NPT and its Statute constituted the corner-stone of security 
in the modern nuclear world. It was comforting to note that, in 1987, the 
Agency had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the diversion of a 
significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material. 
27. Preparations for the Fourth NPT Review Conference would begin shortly. 
Once again, the operation of the safeguards system would be examined in terms 
of its non-proliferation objectives. His country would contribute actively to 
consolidating and strengthening the role of NPT in international security. 
28. The fact that 52 States party to NPT had not concluded a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency called for comment. Although a large number of 
those countries did not have significant nuclear activities, to conclude such 
an agreement would be consistent with their professed support for NPT. 
Despite the fact that his country had no nuclear material requiring a 
safeguards agreement of that kind, it had concluded an agreement which had 
been in force since 1972. 
29. It should not be forgotten that the absence of international safeguards 
would greatly undermine world stability. The way to encourage other States, 
particularly those which had advanced nuclear programmes, to submit them to 
appropriate inspections, was by demonstrating one's own attachment to that 
regime. That applied particularly to those NPT States with significant 
nuclear fuel cycles. 
30. Nuclear-weapon States had already recognized the "back-stopping" role 
of nuclear safeguards by submitting some of their nuclear activities to 
inspections. The United Kingdom and the United States had led the way by 
voluntarily submitting all their nuclear activities to safeguards, except for 
those which had direct national security significance. An agreement 
concerning designated nuclear material had been concluded with France and 
another concerning certain designated peaceful nuclear facilities had been 
concluded with the Soviet Union. A voluntary offer agreement had just been 
concluded with China, and New Zealand welcomed that fact. All peaceful 
nuclear activities in all nuclear-weapon States should, in due course, be 
submitted to Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXXI1)/0R.308 
page 12 


31. Of course, drastic reductions in nuclear arsenals would make the 
biggest contribution of all to the non-proliferation regime. However, his 
country could not accept the argument put forward by some, that nuclearweapon 
States must first reduce their arsenals before other States renounced 
the nuclear weapons option. Both should occur without conditions. So long as 
nuclear threshold States retained their nuclear weapons option, they were 
undermining both the Agency's valuable work in maintaining the 
non-proliferation regime and the spirit of NPT supported by the 137 States 
which had signed it. 
32. His country welcomed Saudi Arabia's announcement of its intention to 
accede to NPT, as well as the moves undertaken by South Africa towards 
accession. It was imperative that those moves should result soon in an 
unconditional commitment on the part of South Africa to NPT. More generally, 
his country believed that all nuclear facilities in all non-nuclear-weapon 
States should be submitted to Agency safeguards through accession to NPT. In 
his statement of 1 July 1988, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary 
of NPT and of New Zealand's signing of that Treaty, New Zealand's Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and Disarmament and Arms Control had appealed to those States 
remaining outside NPT to reconsider their position. 


33. The Agency's non-proliferation activities extended beyond the framework 
of NPT and the Agency's Statute. His country was pleased to note that, during 
the past year, the Agency had agreed to assume safeguards responsibilities 
under the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty (Rarotonga Treaty) under 
which all parties were to conclude safeguards agreements with the Agency in 
the 18 months following the entry into force of the Treaty for them. Together 
with the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
(Tlatelolco Treaty), the Rarotonga Treaty constituted an important regional 
supplement to NPT. 


34. It was important that adequate resources should continue to be 
available to ensure thorough implementation of Agency safeguards, in view of 
the increasing number and growing sophistication of the facilities to be 
safeguarded. All Member States should support the Agency in the pursuit of 
further productivity gains in the safeguards and inspection areas. 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.308 
page 13 


35. The safe development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes was a 
major element in the non-proliferation process. The United Nations Conference 
for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of 
Nuclear Energy (UNCPICPUNE), held in 1987, had shown how difficult that task 
was. Although New Zealand did not need to use nuclear energy owing to the 
abundance of its other energy sources, the Chernobyl accident had served as a 
reminder of the interdependent nature of the modern world. The Agency and its 
Member States had carried out valuable work in strengthening the existing 
nuclear safety standards and by improving the related operational monitoring 
techniques. 
36. The Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency Assistance had 
gained further support and his country hoped that all countries which had not 
yet done so would accede to them. 
37. In the area of radioactive waste management in accordance with 
environmentally sound principles, his country was particularly concerned about 
the possibility of radioactive pollution of the South Pacific Region. 
Provisions governing the dumping of radioactive waste at sea were contained in 
both the Rarotonga Treaty and in the Convention for the Protection of the 
Natural Resources and Environment of the South Pacific. His country strongly 
supported a stricter international regime to protect the marine environment 
against the dumping of hazardous wastes, including radioactive wastes. His 
country's concerns were not confined to the marine environment or to its own 
region, and it would welcome international measures aimed at establishing a 
code of conduct governing the dumping of hazardous wastes. 
38. His country welcomed the initiation of the waste management advisory 
programme and was pleased to see that the Agency's efforts were continuing, in 
liaison with other international organizations, to improve the operating and 
safety standards governing radioactive waste disposal. 
39. Like all Member States, his country benefited from the Agency's role as 
a centre for the exchange of information, advice and experience and recognized 
the importance of its technical assistance and co-operation activities. 
New Zealand experts had participated in regional training projects in the past 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 14 


and they hoped to do so in the future. New Zealand was following with 
interest international activities in the area of food irradiation under the 
Agency's auspices. 


40. In 1988, New Zealand had had the pleasure of welcoming the Director 
General, and that visit had provided a further opportunity of emphasizing the 
country's commitment to the Agency's principles and objectives. 
41. Mr. ANT0N0P0UL0S-D0MIS (Greece), recalling the provisions of 
United Nations General Assembly resolution 42/24, urged the Agency to continue 
its efforts and its central role in strengthening and broadening international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
42. He applauded the entry into force, in 1987, of the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the Convention on Assistance in 
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. He expressed full 
support for the Joint Protocol relating to the application of the Vienna and 
Paris Conventions and urged all Member States to sign it. 
43. The United Nations General Assembly, in resolutions 42/186 and 42/187, 
had stressed the paramount importance of "environmentally sound development", 
and had urged all the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to 
consider the Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond when making 
medium-term plans. Thus, he fully supported the intention of the Agency to 
take into account that study when drawing up its future programmes. Equally, 
he welcomed the launching of the TAEA/UNEP/WHO joint project on the management 
of risks associated with complex industrial systems. 
44. As to Agency activities in 1987 in the waste management area, he 
welcomed the increased provision of aid to Member States through the Waste 
Management Advisory Programme and the programme concerning the management and 
disposal of sealed radiation sources. 
45. With regard to nuclear safety, while it was the duty of each country to 
guarantee the highest standards of quality in that area, the Agency should 
play a central role in encouraging and facilitating international 
co-operation. For that reason, he firmly supported the extended programme 
which had been undertaken by the Agency in 1987 in the nuclear safety and 
radiological protection areas. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 15 


46. The Agency's indispensable role in the safeguards area had of course to 
be mentioned. That Agency activity was one of the most important since it 
contributed significantly to non-proliferation. He noted with satisfaction 
that no anomalies had been detected such as might indicate that there had been 
diversion of significant quantities of safeguarded nuclear material, or misuse 
for illicit purposes of facilities, equipment or non-nuclear material subject 
to safeguards under certain agreements, whether for the manufacture of nuclear 
weapons or for other military purposes, for the manufacture of any other type 
of nuclear explosive device or for unknown ends. 
47. Greece, both as a donor and as a recipient of technical assistance, 
greatly appreciated the Agency's assistance in many areas (uranium 
prospecting, research reactor safety and radiological protection, development 
of radiopharmaceuticals, and so on). 
48. The Greek Government firmly intended to continue its support for the 
Agency's activities. Thus, Greece had already pledged to meet in full the 
increased share of voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1988 corresponding to its base rate of assessment. 
49. Mr SAKO (Cote d'lvoire) said his delegation was pleased to see 
that the Agency's assistance had contributed to increasing electricity 
production from nuclear sources, which currently constituted just over 16% of 
world electricity production. Equally, he commended the Agency's contribution 
to the improvement of agriculture and food production in developing 
Member States, and the help given to those countries in the application of 
nuclear techniques in medicine and in nutrition and health ecology studies, in 
applied radiobiology work and work in the radiation dosimetry area. He noted 
with pleasure that, in 1987, the use of isotopes and radiation in agriculture 
had occupied second place in the assistance provided by the Agency to 
Member States, and that agriculture had been the main activity area in Africa; 
nevertheless, he deplored the fact that the proportion of technical assistance 
supplied to Africa by comparison with the technical co-operation programme as 
a whole as approved by the Board of Governors had gone down from 24% 
to 18.5%. Measures should be taken to put a halt to that trend, which had 
been going on for several years, and he hoped that the new method of drawing 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.308 
page 16 


up the programme would help remedy the situation. Moreover, Cote d'lvoire 
continued to be of the opinion that the zero growth principle should not be 
applied to promotional activities. 


50. He applauded the exemplary co-operation between the Agency and Member 
States. The moment seemed to have arrived where co-operation between African 
States in nuclear science and technology should be instituted on the same 
model as in Latin America and Asia. He therefore urged the Secretariat to 
help draw up appropriate regional agreements. 
51. The use of nuclear energy was inconceivable without nuclear safety and 
radiation protection measures. Particularly welcome, therefore, was the work 
the Agency had done in 1987 on radiation protection of the population, as well 
as the various meetings it had organized on the treatment of radiation 
injuries and epidemiological studies subsequent to a nuclear accident. The 
accidents which continued to occur in places throughout the world were a clear 
incentive to devote ever greater attention to those problems. 
52. He noted with pleasure that, in 1987, in the course of executing the 
Agency's safeguards obligations, the Secretariat had not detected any anomaly 
which might indicate that a diversion of significant quantities of safeguarded 
nuclear material had taken place. The threat posed by certain situations to 
international peace and security invited, as a reaction, the creation of 
nuclear-weapon-free zones, and the placing of the nuclear facilities situated 
there under Agency safeguards. 
53. In line with other African countries, Cote d'lvoire was extremely 
concerned by the fact that firms from certain advanced countries were 
disposing of industrial and toxic waste in Africa. Such practices not only 
undermined the efforts of African Governments to preserve the balance of 
nature by means of environmental protection programmes implemented at the 
national and regional levels, they also caused direct harm to human beings. 
It seemed highly desirable that such practices should stop. Moreover, the 
Agency, in close co-operation with the United Nations Environment Programme 
and other interested organizations, should assist African countries with a 
view to setting up appropriate mechanisms for detecting and controlling the 
disposal of industrial, nuclear and toxic waste. 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.308 
page 17 


54. In conclusion, he recalled that co-operation between Member States 
remained the only way of meeting future challenges to the Agency and ensuring 
the triumph of nuclear energy. 
55. Mr. KONGSIRI (Thailand) said that the Agency was one of the most 
efficient organizations in the United Nations system. Thailand derived great 
benefit from the Agency's programmes, for the group of countries in Asia and 
the Pacific to which Thailand belonged had been receiving assistance from the 
Agency for four years. Thailand had benefited greatly in its national 
development from the technical assistance and co-operation programme, and it 
had, in its turn, actively co-operated with other Member States. 
56. The visit to Thailand of the Director General and the Deputy Director 
General for Technical Co-operation had helped to alert decision-makers to the 
importance of nuclear energy in various sectors. 
57. Thailand attached importance to regional projects, particularly those 
which came under the Regional Co-operation Agreement for Asia and the 
Pacific. In that area, Thailand had collaborated with the Agency during the 
current year, playing host to several regional courses or meetings, notably 
under the UNDP Regional Industrial Project. It was also carrying out a new 
regional demonstration project for the Agency related to coal processing, 
which was receiving finance from an extrabudgetary contribution of the 
Australian Government. 
58. For some years, the implementation of technical assistance projects had 
been proceeding more expeditiously, and the rate of implementation could now 
be described as satisfactory; he paid tribute to the efforts of the Department 
of Technical Co-operation, the worldwide co-operation effort of the Agency, 
and to the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and the 
Federal Republic of Germany for their extrabudgetary contributions which had 
made it possible to implement several footnote-a/ projects. 
59. Thailand was continuing its efforts with regard to the use of ionizing 
radiation to preserve and treat food; pilot installations were under 
construction as part of a bilateral project concluded with Canada and made 
possible by the Agency. Those installations, which should be ready by the end 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.308 
page 18 


of the year, would be used to demonstrate to Thai industrialists from the food 
sector the technological viability of the commercial use of food irradiation 
in the local food industry, and would also be used to conduct advanced 
research in that area. 


60. Thailand had played an enthusiastic part in the Agency's waste 
management programme, and particular commendation was due for the organization 
of the interregional course on the management of radioactive waste which had 
taken place in Karlsruhe (Federal Republic of Germany) in 1987. 
61. Thailand attached great importance to the high technology area of 
nuclear medicine. In the previous year it had organized a national workshop 
on quality control of nuclear medicine instruments. 
62. He expressed unreserved support for the Agency's activities in the 
nuclear safety area, which constituted an indispensable element of all 
programmes. Thailand had hosted a study mission from the Agency as part of 
the preparations for the IAEA/UNEP/WHO project on the evaluation and 
management of the risks posed by energy systems and other complex industrial 
systems to human health and the environment. Thailand had, moreover, hosted 
an INSARR mission which, in 1987, had assessed the safety of the research 
reactor of the Thai Office for the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. The 
preparation of documents on safety criteria and principles for research 
reactors and safety assessment was already well under way. 
63. Thailand was a signatory to the Convention on Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency, and applauded the fact that the Agency had 
been able to give concrete and efficient support to Brazil during the Goiania 
accident, as had several countries. 
64. He also commended the Agency's achievement in drafting the Joint 
Protocol relating to the application of the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Paris Convention on Third Party Liability 
in the Field of Nuclear Energy. The Thai delegation was planning to take part 
in the conference to adopt that protocol. Regrettably, that instrument was 
not complete, because it dealt only with civil liability and not with the 
liability of the States that might be involved in a nuclear accident. He was 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 19 


therefore in favour of the Secretariat's proposal that a working group be set 
up to examine further the question of State liability with a view to drafting 
a specific convention. 


65. With regard to the financial situation of the Agency, he appreciated 
the measures taken to resolve the financial problem caused by late payment or 
non-payment of regular contributions on the part of certain Member States, but 
he thought that such measures could only alleviate the problem to a certain 
extent and would not remedy it. The only real and lasting solution was full 
and punctual payment of contributions. For that reason, he called upon all 
Member States to co-operate. The Thai Government had just announced its 
contribution to the Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, which 
would be $37 800. 
66. Turning to the question of safeguards, another fundamental function of 
the Agency, he recalled that no nuclear programme could obtain the support of 
the public or command international confidence if it were not accompanied by 
concrete assurances that its aims were strictly peaceful, and that it would 
not be deflected under any circumstances from those ends towards military 
activities. As a party to NPT, Thailand noted with satisfaction the 
reassuring conclusion of the Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR) for 1987. 
In addition, he noted with pleasure that the number of safeguards agreements 
in force in 1987 was greater than in 1986. He welcomed in particular the 
recent conclusion of a safeguards agreement between the People's Republic of 
China and the Agency. 
67. Mr. DHARMAWARDEHA (Sri Lanka) said that the Sri Lankan nuclear 
programme had developed significantly during the 1980s, most notably in areas 
which brought direct benefits to the population. The national resources 
allotted to the programme since 1980 had enabled it to be effectively 
implemented. The University of Colombo and the University of Moratuwa were 
currently giving licentiate courses in nuclear engineering and science. 
Several other courses were being given in a number of specialist areas: 
instrument maintenance, non-destructive testing and the use of N in 
agriculture, for example. With the help of the Agency, it had proved possible 
to lay on the first course in radiation protection in Colombo, in 1988, and 

GC(XXX11)/OR.308 
page 20 


that course would in future be run regularly for students. The number of 


institutions or establishments using nuclear techniques had more than doubled 


since 1980. Among those who had started to use nuclear techniques during the 
previous eight years were industries, hospitals, organizations for the 
management of water resources, and pollution regulation services. All those 


institutions were more closely involved in the economic development and the 
general well-being of the population than the research institutes which, up 


to 1980, had been the principal users of the techniques under consideration. 
That meant that nuclear energy was contributing directly to economic 
development and the improvement of the living conditions of the population. 


68. Sri Lanka had made steady progress in various directions during the 
first five years of the decade, but during the previous two to three years the 
activities of terrorists operating principally in the north, east and south 
had engulfed everyday life. A number of problems had had to be faced, in 
particular, the impossibility of gaining uninterrupted access to certain 
experimental zones where projects on soil erosion, hydrology and agriculture 
were being conducted and the emigration of a large number of Sri Lankan 
scientists. However, the authorities thought that a point had been reached 
where those difficulties were beginning to diminish. Despite all the 
setbacks, the Sri Lankan nuclear programme would soon enter a new phase. To 
date, Sri Lanka had made use of the Radioisotope Centre, which came under the 
Faculty of Sciences of the University of Colombo, for most of its basic 
activities such as training, repair of instruments, provision of services and 
radiation protection. Indeed, other institutions using nuclear energy for 
various purposes made use of that centre and carried on their activities with 
its assistance. The Sri Lankan authorities now intended to break up that 
establishment into two distinct units: a nuclear science department whose job 
it would be to train undergraduates on a large scale, and a nuclear science 
institute which would have more extensive premises and laboratories better 
equipped than those currently available. 
69. As to electric power generation, Sri Lanka was largely dependent at the 
present time on hydro power but had just about reached the limits of its 
potential: any further development would inevitably require imported coal or 
petroleum, or else nuclear energy. In the first instance there were plans to 

GC(XXXU)/OR.308 
page 21 


install coal-fired stations with an aggregate capacity of a few hundred 
megawatts; subsequently, towards the beginning of the next century, the 
country would have no alternative but to go on with coal or to accept nuclear 
power. 


70. His country was pleased at the success of regional co-operation 
programmes. In the region to which it belonged, regional co-operation had 
developed in such a way as to make a real contribution to economic development 
and the well-being of the population. 
71. The Agency had succeeded in improving safety in the uses of nuclear 
energy on a global scale. The measures taken during the two years after 
Chernobyl were truly commendable. The Agency and its Director General had 
been able to create a climate in which humanity could, in the future, go 
forward and use the enormous potential of nuclear energy for its own 
well-being on an ever greater scale. That would, no doubt, make a significant 
contribution to the reduction of hunger, suffering, and the effects of 
illness, in particular in the Third World. And that was the ultimate goal and 
purpose of the Agency. 
72. In conclusion, he declared the intention of his Government to 
contribute its full share to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, 
an amount of US $42 000. 
73. Mr. CHULTEM (Mongolia) noted that the thirty-second regular 
session of the Agency's General Conference coincided with a detente in 
international relations: that was evident, in particular, from the signing of 
the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty by the USSR and the United States. 
Detente favoured the intensification of international co-operation, 
particularly with regard to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The growing 
place occupied by nuclear power, an option which permitted rising energy 
requirements to be satisfied, posed various safety problems. Mongolia had 
adhered to the two Conventions adopted in 1986 during the extraordinary 
session of the General Conference, thus supporting the efforts of the Agency 
in the safety area. In addition, it was in favour of establishing an 
open-ended working group of governmental experts to study the question of 
liability for nuclear damage. Finally, he recalled that the deliberate 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.308 
page 22 


destruction of nuclear facilities and nuclear terrorism represented great 
dangers. It would not be enough simply to discuss that topic: practical 
measures would have to be taken to counter such dangers. In that respect, the 
Agency should draft a complementary protocol to the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material. 


74. Stressing the particular importance which his delegation attributed to 
the Agency's activities in the safeguards area - activities aimed at ensuring 
international peace and security - he declared his approval of the Annual 
Report for 1987, and his support for the recommendations of the Board of 
Governors with regard to the Agency's programme and budget and the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1989. The draft regular budget for 1989 
respected the principle of zero growth, and was the result of painstaking work 
on the part of the Secretariat and the Board of Governors aimed at maintaining 
programme priorities and improving the Agency's work efficiency. 
75. With regard to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and the 
revision of Article VI as a whole, he doubted whether such moves were 
opportune but would nevertheless not oppose further consultations aimed at 
improving the structure of the Board, Mongolia had always attached great 
importance to the technical co-operation activities of the Agency, and it had 
benefited itself from various projects related to agriculture, medicine, 
geology, research, education and environmental protection. The Agency 
provided it with modern equipment and sent qualified experts to help it make 
use of nuclear techniques to aid development. Mongolia wanted to thank those 
experts, and hoped the Agency would continue to provide it with technical 
assistance and approve the projects it submitted. The country would do its 
utmost to make the best possible use of the Agency's assistance, and would 
participate actively in activities aimed at promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
76. Mr. ERNER (Turkey) said that the unique nature of nuclear energy 
had led politicians and technicians to create a unique international 
organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency. During the three 
decades which had gone by since its creation, it had made a major contribution 
to world peace and to strengthening the collective security of Member States. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.308 
page 23 


77. The first of July 1988 had marked another important anniversary: the 
opening for signature, twenty years earlier, of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The international community had 
devoted particular attention to nuclear energy because it could be used 
equally well for peaceful and for hostile purposes. When it had been used for 
the first time in an atomic bomb during the Second World War, it had produced 
the greatest catastrophe humanity had ever experienced. In subsequent years, 
there had been a move towards the development of nuclear armaments. The NPT 
had been drawn up at that time in order to protect the planet from a new 
holocaust of the same type, and to check the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. Turkey was most desirous that nuclear energy should be used for 
peaceful purposes, for the well-being of humanity, and that developing 
countries should be able to benefit from it. Accordingly, it urged all 
countries which had not yet done so to adhere to NPT, conscious as it was of 
the importance of securing universal acceptance of NPT if the peace and safety 
of the world were to be guaranteed. However, NPT should not be seen as an 
obstacle to the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing 
countries, nor should it be used as such. On the contrary, the international 
community should work towards remedying the present imbalance to be found 
throughout the world in that area. 
78. It would be recalled, in that connection, that the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply, which since 1980 had been busy trying to draw up 
generally acceptable principles of international co-operation in the field of 
nuclear energy, had been created to remedy that situation. Although the 
Committee had achieved a number of commendable results, it had not yet been 
able to lay down such principles in final form owing to persistent political 
and technical differences of opinion. Turkey hoped that consultations would 
be finished by June 1989 and that the Committee would be able to meet again. 
79. Turkey had always supported, and continued to support strongly, all 
initiatives aimed at making the use of nuclear energy more safe and at 
strengthening public confidence, which had been somewhat shaken after the 
Chernobyl accident. Safety levels had to be kept as high as possible in all 
nuclear activities and, as the regrettable accidents which had taken place had 
shown, openings for international co-operation in that area were immense. As 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.308 
page 24 


everyone knew, Turkey was among the countries that had signed the Early 
Notification and Emergency Assistance Conventions, and its instruments of 
ratification would be deposited once the required formalities - which were 
under way - had been completed. 


80. The catastrophic consequences of the Chernobyl accident had made the 
international community take more notice of the need for co-operation to 
guarantee safety in the design, maintenance and operation of nuclear 
facilities, and to strengthen co-operation between neighbouring States in an 
emergency. In that context, he took pleasure in informing the General 
Conference that Turkey had just negotiatied two bilateral agreements, one with 
the Argentine Government on co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, which had been signed on 3 May 1988, and the other with the Soviet 
Union on early notification of a nuclear accident and the exchange of 
information on nuclear facilities. 
81. Turkey applauded the adoption and opening for signature of the Joint 
Protocol relating to the Application of the Paris and Vienna Conventions, 
which would improve the protection of victims from a nuclear accident and 
would extend the field of application of the liability regimes established by 
those two Conventions, thus enabling the gaps in international law in that 
area to be filled. Turkey had taken part in all the meetings which had led up 
to the drafting of the Joint Protocol and would be one of the signatory States. 
82. As all Members of the Agency recognized, the strictest possible safety 
standards had to be applied to the applications of nuclear energy. The Agency 
was fulfilling its tasks in the safety, safeguards, technical co-operation and 
research and isotopes areas to the best of its ability, in view of the 
prevailing financial restrictions. Turkey applauded the activities of the 
operational safety review teams (OSARTs), the radiation protection advisory 
teams (RAPATs), and the analysis of safety-significant events teams (ASSETs), 
who were making a notable contribution to the efforts of national operators 
and governmental authorities to maintain safety in nuclear facilities. 
83. Before concluding, he recalled that Turkey had already announced a 
voluntary contribution for 1989 to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund corresponding to its share of the assessed budget. It had paid in full 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 25 


its contribution for 1988, during which year Turkey had, moreover, hosted a 
research co-ordination meeting in Ankara, a technical committee meeting, and 
the fifteenth meeting of the IN1S liaison officers in Istanbul. In addition, 
a workshop and interregional seminars on sampling procedures would take place 
in Istanbul during the following month. The technical assistance activities 
of the Agency had been carried on in a satisfactory manner in 1988, and he 
thanked the Department of Technical Co-operation and Member States who had 
offered extrabudgetary contributions. 


84. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that the Agency was vitally 
important in three distinct but interrelated areas: the promotion of the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy under adequate safety conditions; the 
transfer of nuclear science and technology to developing countries through 
technical assistance and co- operation; and the prevention of misuse of nuclear 
material for military purposes, through the deterrence of the safeguards 
system. The Agency had performed its role excellently for 31 years. 
85. Following the Chernobyl accident, the area of nuclear safety had, quite 
rightly, received particular attention, both within and outside the Agency. 
There was certainly still much to do to make nuclear energy entirely safe. 
However, as the Fourth NPT Review Conference approached, it would be 
particularly important to focus attention most sharply on the Agency's 
non-proliferation mission. The NPT was the corner-stone of the Netherlands' 
policy in that area. The Agency had a specific and vital role to play, and 
many of the recommendations of the Third NPT Review Conference were of 
relevance to the Agency and were yet to be implemented. They pertained 
primarily to Article III of the Treaty, but the Netherlands also considered 
the Agency to have a clearly defined and important role under Article IV. The 
Netherlands had noted with satisfaction that the number of parties to the 
Treaty had again increased, and hoped that the recent decision of Saudi Arabia 
to accede to it would encourage other countries to do so. The Netherlands 
Government urged the Republic of South Africa to sign the Treaty as soon as 
possible, and fully supported the statement of the Depositary Governments. 
86. Referring to the annual report and the statement of the Director 
General, he noted that 1987 had, on the whole, been a year of steady growth; 
the growth of nuclear power and total installed capacities; an increase in the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 26 


number of installations and the quantity of material safeguarded; and finally, 
expansion of the Agency's activities, particularly in the nuclear safety area, 
with the approval of a Supplementary Nuclear Safety Programme. 


87. Communication to a wide audience was of great importance for an 
international organization dealing with sensitive areas. The annual report 
should be supplemented by other publications covering a wide range of subjects 
in a convincing and accessible form. The Agency should be seen for what it 
was: an organization engaged in strengthening nuclear safety and effectively 
safeguarding the peaceful use of nuclear energy. His delegation had noted 
improvements in several areas, particularly the more active stand taken on 
safeguards. It supported that stand, for, although not wishing to take part 
in a lobbying campaign on behalf of nuclear energy, it was concerned to 
correct or prevent the misrepresentations and distortions appearing in the 
media. 
88. He then referred to the report of the World Commission on Environment 
and Development, which his Government considered an impressive attempt to map 
out the problems in those two areas. The Netherlands had fully accepted the 
need for sustainable development. However, the remarks of the Director 
General concerning the energy chapter of the World Commission's report were 
very pertinent. The Netherlands shared the view that nuclear energy, together 
with energy savings and renewable energy sources, could contribute to reducing 
the environmental problems caused by the emission of sulphur, nitrogen oxides 
and CO and the Agency had an essential role to play in the creation of a 
sustainable energy system. The World Commission's report had clearly shown 
the areas of concern surrounding the use of nuclear power: safety, waste 
disposal and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
89. Safety matters were absolutely vital to the future of nuclear energy. 
His delegation had pleaded in the past for them to be given a structurally and 
financially stronger base in the Agency, and it was still in favour of 
establishing a Nuclear Safety Committee within the Board of Governors, 
analogous to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee and the 
Administrative and Budgetary Committee. 

GC(XXX11)/OR.308 
page 27 


90. The Netherlands had advocated binding international safety standards 
based on the NUSS Codes. Although consensus had not yet been reached on that 
point, his country proposed to use those Codes as a basis for its national 
reactor safety legislation, which was at present being drafted. The Agency 
was to be commended on completing the Codes on schedule, and the idea of a 
further revision of the Safety Guides and the preparation of other safety 
documents relating to interpretation of the Codes had the full support of the 
Netherlands delegation. In order to emphasize the consensus that had been 
reached on nuclear safety standards - something which had not been made clear 
in the World Commission's report - his delegation had taken the initiative of 
submitting a draft resolution on the subject to the General Conference. 
91. The operational safety review teams (OSARTs) had proven to be a very 
useful instrument for strengthening nuclear safety. He appreciated that many 
Member States had requested such missions, and appealed to those who had not 
yet done so to share in that form of collaboration. 
92. The Netherlands had followed closely the implementation of the 
Conventions on Early Notification and Mutual Assistance, had participated in 
the testing of the WMO Global Telecommunication System, and had given a 
preliminary indication of its potential resources for assistance in the event 
of a nuclear accident. It had been able to provide Brazil with some equipment 
under the Mutual Assistance Convention following the accident in Goiania. 
Ratification of the two Conventions by the Netherlands should follow shortly, 
but meanwhile their provisions were being fully implemented. He noted that 
many Member States had not yet designated the points of contact foreseen in 
the Conventions and hoped that that would be done as soon as possible. 
93. The adoption and signature by 19 States of the Joint Protocol linking 
the Paris and Vienna Conventions signified good progress, and it was to be 
hoped that many other States would thereby be encouraged to accede to the two 
Conventions. The scope and content of the agreements on liability could also 
be expanded and strengthened. His delegation felt that the possibility of 
bringing certain provisions of the Vienna Convention up to date should be 
studied, and favoured the establishment of a working group to analyse other 
aspects of international liability, particularly State liability. It welcomed 

GC(XXK1I)/OR.308 
page 28 


the draft resolution submitted by Poland on the subject and hoped that a 
consensus would be reached. 


94. The problems of waste disposal were of growing concern, although there 
had been no reports of any illegal dumping of nuclear material. However, 
concern was justified and it would be prudent for the Agency to give due 
attention to the problems of illegal shipments of nuclear waste. 
95. As to safeguards, the horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons was 
by its very nature a factor making for instability. Twenty-five years 
earlier, it had been feared that many States would acquire "the bomb"; that 
fear had proved ungrounded, but the risk of proliferation remained. There had 
been positive developments in the last few years: some States had accepted 
new non-proliferation commitments, and others had accepted inspection of their 
nuclear installations. Nevertheless, in some areas the situation was still a 
source of concern to his Government. Agency safeguards were an essential 
mechanism to inspire mutual confidence between States regarding nuclear 
weapons capabilities. It was gratifying that the Agency had once again 
reached positive conclusions as a result of its safeguards activities and had 
removed all doubts by unequivocally declaring that no nuclear material had 
been diverted for nuclear weapons purposes. Similarly, the Agency had been 
able to react swiftly and decisively to state that no nuclear material had 
been diverted in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Netherlands delegation 
had undertaken to do everything within its power to preserve and strengthen 
the safeguards system so that the Agency's authority in that area would 
persist. 
96. It was gratifying to note that, after several years of zero growth, the 
Department of Safeguards had been allowed a modest 3% budget increase. From 
the very start of the 1989 budget deliberations, his delegation had been 
convinced that the arguments in favour of growth in the Safeguards Department 
were justified. Some savings were perhaps possible, and the Netherlands would 
co-operate in the search for reasonable savings and ways to rationalize the 
programme - for example by strengthening procedures and encouraging a more 
positive political response among Member States to the needs of the safeguards 
system. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 29 


97. The Netherlands Government had decided to re-evaluate the nuclear 
option following the Chernobyl accident, which had happened just as 
parliament - having already approved a nuclear development programme - was 
about to decide on the sites for the new plants. Twenty reports covering 
various aspects of the accident and safety matters in general had been 
published by mid-1988 as part of the Netherlands nuclear energy review 
project, and various bodies had been asked to submit their recommendations. 
The Government was expected to reach a decision on the new nuclear power 
plants in 1989, taking into account the studies, external recommendations and 
public opinion. 
98. The national body responsible for radioactive waste management, COVRA, 
had submitted a licence application at the end of 1987 for the construction 
and operation of a central interim storage facility near the Borssele nuclear 
power plant. During the licensing process it had emerged that another site 
within the same municipality would be more appropriate, and licensing 
procedures were to resume in 1989. 
99. He was pleased to announce that the Netherlands had pledged US $722 400 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1989. His Government 
was prepared to consider the financing of extrabudgetary projects in keeping 
with the priorities defined in its own overall development co-operation 
policy, and at present a project for the eradication of the tsetse fly was 
under consideration. 
100. The Netherlands Government firmly believed that political issues with 
no direct bearing on the mandate of the Agency should not be introduced into 
the debates. The very essence of the Statute was that any State could be a 
member of the Agency, regardless of its political, economic or social system 
or policy, unless the State had clearly and repeatedly violated the Statute. 
For the Agency in particular, it was vital that all States, particularly those 
most active in the field of nuclear energy, should continue to participate in 
the work of the organization. The Netherlands would therefore oppose any 
proposal aiming to suspend the membership rights of any Member. In 
conclusion, he hoped that the Agency would maintain its excellent level of 
competence and its high reputation for efficiency and good management. 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.308 
page 30 


101. Mr. SAAD ABBADDI (Sudan) congratulated the Agency, the Director 
General and the Secretariat on the way in which they had carried out their 
work during the preceding year; particular praise was due to the personnel of 
the Seibersdorf Laboratory and to the administrative staff in technical 
co-operation. 
102. His delegation had listened with great interest to the Director 
General's statement, and wished to make a few remarks concerning the Agency's 
activities and future programmes. 
103. With regard to nuclear energy, great importance had been attached to 
the safe operation of nuclear power stations, which were increasing in 
number. The exchange of information should be promoted and training improved, 
if higher safety levels and standards were to be achieved. Noting that those 
matters were related to radiation protection measures, he recalled that 
the Sudan had also benefited from the Agency's assistance in that area, 
commended the role played by the radiation protection consultative teams and 
agreed that the activities of those teams should be continued and extended. 
He also commended the revision of the NUSS Codes, which should lead to a 
strengthening of nuclear safety as well as re-establishing public confidence 
in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
104. An important problem meriting wide discussion was the disposal of 
nuclear wastes. He appreciated the unceasing efforts of the Agency and 
nuclear specialists to improve techniques for disposing of nuclear wastes, 
while retaining the priority of safety and security; however, some western 
industrial and commercial interests were bringing those efforts to nought and 
alarming public opinion by their irresponsible behaviour, trying to get rid of 
nuclear wastes at any cost by sending them to developing countries. Those 
interests were exploiting the financial difficulties of certain less developed 
countries - particularly in Africa - in order to dump their nuclear and other 
toxic wastes in those countries. The Sudan, a vast country where border 
surveillance was problematic, considered those practices extremely worrying, 
and a serious danger to the environment and human health. His delegation 
therefore requested the international community to denounce those acts and 
condemn their perpetrators, and to co-operate closely with the Agency and the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 31 


United Nations Environmental Programme in drawing up appropriate measures to 


combat those practices. Those illegal acts had been taking place on such a 
scale that it was no longer possible to ignore them, and countermeasures were 
urgently required. 


105. Promotional activities and technical assistance and co-operation 
activities in general were one of the most important aspects of the Agency's 
work. As a "developing" country, the Sudan attached considerable importance 
to training as well as the transfer of technical skills, particularly in the 
areas of medicine, foodstuffs and hydrology. It was grateful to the 
Secretariat for the consultative services provided under technical 
co-operation programmes, and emphatically opposed the application of the zero 
growth principle to the budget for the Agency's promotional activities. His 
delegation also hoped that all States, particularly those which were not in 
serious financial difficulties, would pay their total financial contributions 
on time, so that the Agency could complete the work entrusted to it, namely 
the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. On that subject, 
Sudan shared the view of other African States which had called for the 
implementation of an African regional co-operation programme, modelled on the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific and the Regional 
Co-operation Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology 
in Latin America. It was prepared to co-operate closely with the Secretariat 
and other Member States with a view to taking preliminary measures to that end. 
106. The Sudan, one of the first countries to sign the Mutual Assistance and 
the Early Notification Conventions, approved the measures taken by the 
Agency's Secretariat as well as the efforts made by the World Meteorological 
Organization for the Early Notification Convention to be fully implemented in 
the year to come. It hoped to ratify the two Conventions soon, and would in 
fact do so as soon as the protracted constitutional procedure required for 
ratification had been completed. 
107. As a member of the group of experts responsible for drawing up the 
Joint Protocol establishing a link between the Paris and Vienna Conventions, 
the Sudan was currently considering the possibility of acceding to the Vienna 
Convention and was in favour of continuing efforts to define State liability. 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.308 
page 32 


108. The fact that the five Member States which possessed nuclear weapons 
had all decided to conclude safeguards agreements with the Agency was most 
welcome. However, in spite of that achievement, the safeguards system 
remained fragile and incomplete, which meant that international peace and 
security were still seriously threatened. In that connection, he drew 
attention to an important problem, namely the fact that the Zionist regime of 
Israel and the South African racist regime were still refusing to submit their 
nuclear installations to safeguards. The argument that other States had made 
a similar refusal was not convincing. Indeed, it was unnecessary to recall 
that the two regimes in question persisted in violating the territorial 
sovereignty of other States, practised a policy of aggression against the 
legitimate populations of those States, and threatened the peace and security 
of their regions. Those States were deliberately and persistently ignoring 
charters, statutes and resolutions of United Nations organizations, notably 
the Statute of the Agency, as well as resolutions adopted at various sessions 
of the General Conference. Accordingly, the Sudanese delegation requested the 
Director General to continue consideration of the question of Israel's nuclear 
capabilities and the Israeli nuclear threat and to present a report dealing 
with all aspects of that subject. 
109. As far as South Africa was concerned, it was time the General 
Conference applied the recommendation of the Board of Governors contained in 
document GC(XXXl)/807. South Africa had had sufficient time since the 
thirty-first regular session of the General Conference to heed the requests 
made at that session. In spite of everything, that country persisted in 
violating the Agency's Statute and refused to apply the decisions adopted at 
preceding sessions of the General Conference. Until serious sanctions were 
imposed, the situation would not change. 
110. He thanked the Agency for the technical advice and rapid assistance 
offered to his country at the time when a rumour had spread concerning the 
illegal entry of uranium into Sudanese territory. He was particularly 
grateful to the Agency for having contradicted reports, which had proved to be 
inaccurate, that a black market in uranium existed in the Sudan. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 33 


111. He concluded by saying that his country would continue to co-operate 
with the Agency and Member States, and hoped to receive more assistance in all 
areas, particularly in the monitoring of radioactive contamination of the 
environment and foodstuffs. He emphasized that the Sudan was at present in 
even greater need of assistance in view of the recent series of catastrophic 
floods. 
112. Mr. PABON (Venezuela) said that Venezuela's nuclear policy was 
directed towards the regulation of activities and the promotion of technical 
applications, particularly in the areas of agriculture, health, and industry. 
Moreover, Venezuela sought to take full advantage of international technical 
assistance, in particular that of the Agency. 
113. Although Venzuela did not intend to construct nuclear power stations in 
the immediate future, it had drawn up, with Agency assistance, an energy 
planning programme using the Model for Analysis of Energy Demand (MAED). That 
study, which covered a period up to the year 2010, would be extremely useful 
in deciding on the possible use of nuclear electrical energy. The Venezuelan 
Government had always firmly supported the Agency's activities, and it had 
received valuable and substantial technical assistance in many areas, such as 
the irradiation of foodstuffs, pedology, radiation protection, nuclear safety, 
radioimmunoassay, crop improvement, and nuclear engineering, physics and 
chemistry. Convinced as it was that technical assistance and co-operation 
from the Agency were essential for development, Venezuela had always insisted 
that greater resources should be allocated to technical co-operation, and that 
it should be considered as the Agency's main activity. It was indeed 
necessary to improve the balance between the Agency's promotional and 
normative activities, in the planning, implementation and evaluation of 
programmes just as in budgetary allocations. 
114. Regional co-operation was of great importance, particularly for the 
developing countries. In that regard, Venezuela, a country which supported 
the Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science 
and Technology in Latin America (ARCAL), fully supported the Agency's 
activities in regional co-operation. Valuable assistance had been received 
within the framework of the regional programmes in relation to radiation 

GC(XXX11)/OR.308 
page 34 


protection, dosimetry and application of nuclear techniques to agriculture. 
In 1989, Venezuela would be implementing, with Agency help, projects related 
to dosimetry (the second phase of a secondary standards laboratory), 
intracavitary therapy, X-ray fluorescence, the application of nuclear 
techniques to agriculture and, with extrabudgetary financing, low-intensity 
radiation. He reiterated his delegation's support of the ARCAL programme, 
congratulated the Agency on the way in which it had managed that co-operation, 
and thanked those countries outside the region which had contributed 
financially to the programme. 


115. The Venezuelan Government associated itself fully with the proposals 
aimed at achieving more equitable participation of developing countries in the 
Agency's decision-making process. He supported in particular the proposal to 
broaden participation in the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee 
and the Administrative and Budgetary Committee, which would enable the 
majority of Member States to participate in debates which were of significant 
importance for prograiome development. The practice recently introduced by the 
Chairman of the Board of Governors, which involved wide-ranging consultations 
with all Member States on various questions dealt with by the Board, was in 
that respect very satisfying. The working group on the revision of Article VI 
of the Statute as a whole should continue its activities, taking particular 
care to preserve the technical nature of the Agency. 
116. With reference to document GC(XXXII)/841 relating to the financing of 
technical assistance, the Venezuelan delegation felt that resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/388 remained valid and that technical assistance should be 
financed from the Regular Budget. It also hoped that the criteria for 
allocating resources among the regions would be reconsidered, account being 
taken of fair and appropriate principles which would secure an appropriate 
balance in the implementation of technical assistance and co-operation 
projects. 
117. Venezuela continued to oppose the principle of zero growth in the 
Regular Budget, which was incompatible with the Agency's promotional role. A 
formula had not yet been found which would permit that role to increase 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.308 
page 35 


without increasing Member States' contributions. Although Venezuela could not 
accept further financial obligations towards the Agency, it should be possible 
to use budgetary resources more efficiently to avoid such an increase. In 
that connection, the proposals made by the Director General in his opening 


statement deserved consideration. Furthermore, the amendments to 
Articles 5.3, 7.1 and 7.2(b) of the Financial Regulations, provisionally 
approved by the Board of Governors, should facilitate the implementation of 
programmes of direct benefit to developing countries. 


118. Nuclear safety and radiological protection would be effectively ensured 
only if the standards adopted were binding for all countries. There was no 
doubt that the linking of the Vienna and Paris Conventions was an important 
step in that direction. Nevertheless, an efficient and complete civil 
liability regime should be universal in scope, and that in turn presupposed a 
general consensus for the drafting of the relevant legal instruments. After 
considering the Vienna and Paris Conventions with the greatest care, the 
Venezuelan Government had found several legal and technical difficulties which 
prevented its accession to either of those instruments: and so Venezuela 
could not participate in the limited liability regime. He nevertheless hoped 
that the adoption of the Joint Protocol, rather than completing the process, 
would mark the first stage in the elaboration of a broad and positive system 
of liability for nuclear damage. 
119. The report of the World Commission on Environment and Development 
reflected Venezuela's concern to harmonize the development process with 
protection of the ecological balance and quality of the environment. 
Venezuela had undertaken in the previous year a study for the creation of a 
centre to measure environmental radioactivity and planned to establish a 
laboratory to measure low-level radiation in the environment. Environmental 
pollution could thus be evaluated effectively and the necessary measures 
taken. In that connection he recalled that States wishing to dispose of their 
nuclear and toxic wastes should avoid inflicting on other States the damage 
caused by those wastes. Having itself been a victim of the dumping of toxic 
wastes, Venezuela had had to adopt in 1987 regulations prohibiting that 
practice and obliging the Ministry of Energy and Mines to keep a register of 

GC(XXX11)/0R.308 
page 36 


radioactive wastes. Those national measures were not sufficient, however, and 
international agreements were required to make it impossible to dump nuclear 
or toxic wastes in developing countries. 


120. Recalling that 1988 marked the twentieth anniversary of NPT, he noted 
that under Article X.2, a conference was to be held in five years' time to 
decide on the future of the Treaty. The attitude of States would then depend 
on the extent to which they believed NPT had achieved its objectives: the 
prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation, the promotion of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, and progress in nuclear disarmament. Although it was 
true that NPT had largely contributed to restricting horizontal proliferation, 
vertical proliferation had not yet been stopped, and the first task should be 
a complete ban on nuclear weapons tests. 
121. As for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Agency deserved the 
warmest congratulations for its efforts within the framework of technical 
co-operation programmes. On the other hand, it was only during the last few 
months that the world had seen some progress in nuclear arms reduction. 
Venezuela attached great importance to the signature and entry into force of 
the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty and hoped that within the next five 
years it would be possible to see new and definitive progress towards 
achieving all the objectives of NPT. 
122. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh) said that, with the impetus imparted to 
it by its Director General, the Agency had further widened the scope of its 
activities and had increased its importance to the major powers, Member States 
and international organizations; the impact of its role in the 
non-proliferation sphere and in the transfer of technology was felt 
everywhere. Furthermore, the linking of energy and the environment was very 
timely and could only serve to promote the cause of nuclear power. 
123. His country had just experienced the worst floods in its history and 
the whole nation was struggling to recover from the huge losses. The 
international community had provided assistance, in some cases on a large 
scale, and his country was grateful for that assistance. However, the Agency 
itself could perhaps provide support in future. Nuclear techniques could be 
applied to the study of river-bed movements and sediment deposition, since 
Bangladesh and other countries had to find ways of controlling such floods. 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.308 
page 37 


124. Despite everything, Bangladesh wished to continue its development work, 
since to delay economic progress would only impede its ability to deal with 
natural calamities. 
125. One of the keys to rapid development was the expansion of commercial 
energy production, including electricity production. Bangladesh's present 
electricity production capacity was very small, and it was necessary to 
develop it as quickly as possible. With the exception of natural gas - which 
had other competing uses - Bangladesh had very few indigenous fuel resources 
for electricity production and therefore had to import them. Preparations for 
the introduction of nuclear power into the country had been under way for a 
long time; the necessary infrastructure, including personnel, had been largely 
established, thanks mainly to assistance received from the Agency. A 3 MW 
research reactor had been commissioned two years previously and institutes of 
computer science and electronics had been established to provide the necessary 
technical support. 
126. The Agency had for a long time been making a survey of the nuclear 
power needs of developing countries and, recognizing the low-grid capacity, 
had undertaken to evaluate the viability of small- and medium-power reactors. 
The Agency had also been very active in the areas of technology, financing and 
personnel training. The manufacturers of nuclear power plants in some 
developed countries were beginning to be interested in studying small power 
reactors, and new reactors with passive safety systems had been developed. 
The future prospects of such reactors deserved to be examined seriously. 
127. His country was very keen to launch its nuclear power programme with a 
small reactor, and had ordered a new feasibility study for that purpose. The 
draft final report had been submitted to the authorities. It recommended that 
a small reactor be linked to the grid by the end of 1995. The main obstacle 
to the implementation of the project was financial, and the Governments of 
developed countries had not yet shown any interest in assisting Bangladesh in 
its undertaking. In order to make a real contribution to the eradication of 
poverty, technical and economic assistance from developed countries to 
developing countries should have two components: one for long-term 
development programmes and the other for immediate needs. If the feasibility 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.308 
page 38 


study concluded that a project was economically and financially viable, then 
direct or indirect government support operating through commercial and export 
banks could greatly help in arranging the necessary finance. That was why his 
delegation requested the Agency to use its influence to convince developed 
countries and their regional groups or financial institutions - the Commission 
of the European Communities, the Organization of Economic Co-operation and 
Development, the World Bank, regional banks and so on - that they should relax 
their attitude with regard to the financing of nuclear power projects in 
developing countries, particularly those which were in greatest need of 
electricity and lacked fuels. Their own nuclear industry could benefit at a 
time of some recession in orders. 


128. His country favoured the idea of entrusting the establishment of 
nuclear power plants to an international joint venture company where the 
nuclear plant supplier would be the major equity partner with the local 
nuclear power utility: in that way, not only would the risk be shared, but 
the manufacturer's experience would make the project more credible in the eyes 
of financiers. The "build, operate and transfer" concept could also be tried. 
129. His delegation commended the Agency for having acted so promptly after 
the Chernobyl accident to restore public confidence in nuclear power. The 
problems of safety and waste management did not help to promote the 
applications of atomic energy and were particularly detrimental to electricity 
production; his delegation therefore urged the Agency to continue its tireless 
efforts in that area. In the unlikely event of an accident in a nuclear power 
reactor designed and built with very stringent safety standards, the accident 
could be considered as one of international significance and immediate action 
could be taken by the Agency, which would use all its available resources. 
The Conventions which had earlier been drafted and signed at the Agency's 
instance, and the Protocol at present open for signature, could constitute the 
legal basis for actions to be undertaken. It would be necessary to have an 
effective world communications network and to ensure liaison with other 
international organizations. That was why his delegation requested the Agency 
to set up a special fund to meet any emergency assistance needs of developing 
countries, although it hoped that such situations would not occur. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 39 


130. Bangladesh was at present entering the practical application stage of 
research and development work involving the use of radioisotopes. In addition 
to the establishment of nuclear medicine centres and the development of new 
crop varieties, Bangladesh had started non-destructive analysis and quality 
control in industry and was using radioisotopes as tracers in hydrology; in 
collaboration with private-sector industry, it had recently embarked upon the 
construction of commercial irradiation facilities for food preservation and 
medical sterilization - a project made possible by the Agency through the 
supply of a Soviet irradiator under the technical assistance programme. That 
irradiator was due to become operational at the end of 1989. His delegation 
urged the Agency to take all the appropriate measures, together with 
international organizations such as FAO, WHO and ICRP, so that food 
irradiation would become universally accepted and international trade in 
irradiated food would prosper. 
131. During the past year, the research reactor had operated very well; it 
had been used for the training of operators, neutron spectrum measurements, 


activation analysis, the experimental production of radioisotopes such as 
99 m 131 
Tc and I and, more recently, for neutron diffraction. 


132. With regard to technical assistance, his country approved the Agency's 
new policy which placed the emphasis on programmes rather than projects and 
involved establishing a multi-year programming cycle. It was thus easier to 
evaluate the assistance received. 
133. Bangladesh welcomed the success of the Regional Co-operative Agreement 
for Asia and the Pacific (RCA), particularly the technical co-operation 
between developing countries which had now been extended to the energy field. 
Some time ago it had proposed the establishment of a regional centre for Asia, 
but without much success. His suggestion now was that the Agency should 
consider strengthening certain existing "centres of excellence" in Asia or in 
other development regions. Each of those centres could have a regional or an 
international status. Like the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
in Trieste, an international centre could be set up in Asia for food 
preservation by irradiation, or a reactor technology training centre, or 
several such centres. Other important disciplines for developing countries, 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.308 
page 40 


such as nuclear medicine, nuclear instrumentation maintenance, or radiation 
protection and waste management could also be explored. In that connection, 
his delegation requested the Agency to revive its Asian regional office so 
that it could co-ordinate research activities under the RCA and promote 
technical co-operation between developing countries. 


134. Mr. DOS SANTOS (Portugal) commended the Agency and its Director 
General and drew special attention to the excellent management of financial 
resources which had made it possible to establish a balanced budget 
for 1989-90. 
135. His delegation believed that the Agency's most important activities 
were those related to safeguards, nuclear safety and technical co-operation. 
136. Portugal regarded the Agency's safeguards system as an essential 
element of the non-proliferation policy. During the past year, as in previous 
years, the Agency had not detected any anomaly which would indicate the 
diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material for 
non-peaceful purposes. That was a very important result which always deserved 
to be mentioned. However, his delegation believed that, although the Agency's 
activities in that area were very valuable, they were not yet sufficient: the 
most important thing was that all States should accede to NPT and that the 
Depositary States should comply with the provisions of Article VI of that 
Treaty. 
137. It was important that safeguards should develop, but they should not do 
so at the expense of other activities, particularly technical co-operation. 
Even so, there was no reason why attempts should not be made to achieve a 
zero-growth budget for the Agency's programme as a whole. 
138. With regard to the Agency's activities in the field of nuclear safety, 
his delegation felt that stress should be laid on the work which had been done 
following the Chernobyl accident - an effort that could well be favourably 
regarded by world public opinion. The strengthening of international 
co-operation, and particularly co-operation between neighbouring countries, 
was an essential element in a successful safety programme. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.308 
page 41 


139. In the area of technical assistance, his delegation stressed that the 
procedure of submitting technical assistance requests on a biennial basis 
could help to make the management of programmes much more flexible. During 
recent years, technical co-operation had become increasingly effective as a 
result of multi-year programming and regional programming. 
140. Mr. AL-WAHAIBI (Oman) expressed the hope that the participants in 
the General Conference would be successful in their endeavours. Although Oman 
was not a member of the Agency, it followed the Agency's activities with a 
great deal of interest. The transboundary consequences of any nuclear 
accidents and other aspects of nuclear safety were problems which affected the 
whole international community. 
141. Countries which opted to establish a nuclear programme should assume 
the responsibilities and shoulder the consequences resulting from such a 
choice, and should try to solve the problem of nuclear waste management. 
Nuclear energy should be used in such a way that it did not have adverse 
consequences for any sector of humanity and the environment; in other words, 
efforts should be made to ensure that one man's meat was not another man's 
poison. 
142. The Agency's efficient training of technical professionals from 
developing countries, and indeed the results of the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme as a whole, were very positive achievements. Oman, 
which was itself a developing country, attached great importance to the 
Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities. The safeguards 
system, although it was not applied in full, made a major contribution to the 
prevention of nuclear proliferation. 
143. His country was particularly concerned about the serious threat posed 
by the development of Israel's nuclear capabilities, by the refusal of 
Israel - a Member State of the Agency - to submit its facilities to 
international safeguards, by the fact that Israel pretended to ignore the will 
of the international community which was endeavouring to use nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes and, lastly, by the fact that Israel and the 
South African Government were co-operating closely to develop their own 
nuclear military potential. 



GC(XXXI1)/0R.308 
page 42 


144. Apart from damaging the Agency's credibility, such behaviour seriously 
endangered a whole region of the world. That was why his delegation joined 
with those who felt that the situation simply had to be brought under 
control. Those delegations had called for adoption of the necessary measures 
to ensure that the two States in question complied with the will of the 
international community and submitted their nuclear facilities to 
international safeguards and inspection so that the regions of the Middle East 
and Africa could eventually become nuclear-weapon-free zones. 
145. The latest peace initiatives, the climate of international detente and 
the agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States of America on the 
elimination of certain categories of intermediate-range nuclear weapons in 
Europe, which had led to the withdrawal and simultaneous destruction of a 
whole series of nuclear weapons, all gave hope and confidence in the noble 
humanist objective that nuclear energy would be used to serve humanity and 
that the world would be rid of all nuclear weapons. Oman supported all 
measures which would make it possible to devote nuclear techniques, as soon as 
possible and on the largest possible scale, to the service of peace and 
well-being in the world. It hoped that the Agency would be able to fulfil its 
noble ideals in the near future. 
146. Mr. BUHOVECKI (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA)) said 
that, during its forty-third session, CMEA had decided to transform its 
structure in order to improve co-operation between its Members. Those changes 
included the establishment of a Standing Commission for Co-operation in the 
Field of Electricity and Nuclear Power. The Commission, which was responsible 
for determining CMEA policy in that area, was particularly interested in the 
safe operation of plants and the training of personnel in matters of design, 
construction and operation. Furthermore, the CMEA Secretariat had a new 
department, the Department of Electricity and Nuclear Power, which served as 
Secretariat of the Commission. 
147. Nuclear power was assuming an increasing role in CMEA Member States. 
There were now 56 power reactors in operation in Bulgaria, Hungary, the German 
Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union, representing a total 
installed capacity of 44 300 MW. The share of nuclear power in the 

GC(XXXII)/0R.308 
page 43 


electricity production of CMEA Member States had thus increased from 5.5% 
in 1980 to 10.4% in 1985 and to 11.2% in 1987. A. programme for the 
construction of nuclear power plants for combined electric power generation 
and district heating up to the year 2000 aimed to bring the total capacity of 
plants in CMEA Member States - with the exception of the Soviet Union to 
50 GW as compared with about 6.5 GW in 1985. Nuclear power would then 
represent 30 to 40% of total electricity production in those countries. In 
the USSR, the share of nuclear power would increase significantly, from 10.8% 
in 1985 to 30%, which would mean increasing the aggregate generating capacity 
of the plants by a factor of 5 or 6. Furthermore, in the USSR, as in other 
CMEA Member States, there were plans to construct plants for district 
heating. The nuclear development programme would enable CMEA Member States to 
save 400 to 500 million tons of fossil fuels by the year 2000. 


148. Such intensive development of nuclear power required close co-operation 
between CMEA Member States in order to minimize the risks and consequences of 
nuclear accidents. In that connection, CMEA Member States had taken steps 
based partly on the programme to establish an international regime for the 
safe development of nuclear energy, presented by the Soviet Union at the 
special session of the General Conference in September 1986, and partly on 
Agency documents produced in connection with the supplementary nuclear safety 
and radiation protection programme. In October 1987, the Executive Committee 
of CMEA had adopted regulations for the transport by rail and water of spent 
nuclear fuel from power plants in Member States. In preparing those 
regulations, CMEA had consulted Agency documents, notably the Regulations for 
the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials. It had also taken into account 
obligations deriving from NPT and the safeguards agreements concluded with the 
Agency by CMEA Member States. 
149. With regard to nuclear law, five CMEA Member States (Hungary, the 
German Democratic Republic, Poland, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union) had 
signed a convention on liability for damage arising from a radiological 
emergency situation caused by the international transport of spent fuel from 
nuclear power plants of CMEA Member States. Furthermore, CMEA Member States 
supported unreservedly the Early Notification and Emergency Assistance 
Conventions. Since the majority of its Members used the same type of nuclear 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.308 
page 44 


facility, CMEA was in the process of preparing an agreement on mutual 
assistance in the event of a nuclear accident. That regional agreement could 
complement and widen the Agency's two Conventions. It provided for technical 
and organizational measures to co-ordinate efforts aimed at limiting the 
consequences of nuclear accidents; greater speed in the transmission of 
information in the event of a nuclear accident; immediate assistance in the 
event of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency so as to minimize the 
consequences; and the establishment of measures to deal with the consequences 
of accidents. 


150. CMEA was carrying out detailed studies on environmental protection. 
Thus, levels of radiation in the Baltic Sea had been monitored since 
the 1970s. In 1987, the total capacity of plants situated on the Baltic Sea 
had been 17 GW. Studies carried out jointly during the past ten years by 
Poland, the German Democratic Republic and the USSR had brought together a 
vast amount of information. Regular monitoring of the environment around the 
Bruno Leuschner plant (German Democratic Republic) and the Leningrad plant had 
not indicated any anomaly in the radiation levels of the Baltic Sea. 
151. Seven nuclear power plants representing a total capacity of about 20 GW 
had been built in the Danube Basin. Since that river crossed eight countries, 
close radiological surveillance was obviously essential, and Bulgaria, 
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, the USSR and Yugoslavia had concluded an 
agreement for that purpose. The agreement provided for exchange of 
information on radionuclide levels in the water and river bed and in the 
aquatic biota, flood plains and agricultural products, as well as data on 
exposure doses to populations using the resources of the Danube for food, 
industry or leisure. The results obtained would be used to compare levels of 
radioactive contamination in the riparian States. 
152. Under an agreement concluded in 1975, CMEA and the Agency exchanged 
documentation regularly. Several CMEA Member States were also participating 
in the Agency's research programme on the simulation of accidents in nuclear 
power plants. The first co-ordination meeting for that programme had taken 
place from 23 to 27 June 1988 in Moscow at the CMEA Secretariat with 
16 participating countries, seven of which were CMEA Member States. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.308 
page 45 


CMEA attached particular importance to waste management; it had sent a 
representative to the Agency Symposium on the Management of Low and 
Intermediate Level Radioactive Wastes, held in Stockholm in May 1988, who had 
described the co-operation activities of CMKA Members in that area. 


153. Co-operation between CMEA and the Agency was thus fruitful, though CMKA 
believed that it could be further strengthened. To that end, the Standing 
Commission for Co-operation in the Field of Electricity and Nuclear Power was 
in the process of preparing a work programme on implementation of the 
co-operation agreement between CMEA and the Agency. After its approval by the 
Executive Committee of CMEA, that work programme would be submitted to the 
Agency. Its objective was to expand and clarify the areas of co-operation 
between the two organizations. CMEA believed that co-operation should focus 
on improving safety. Exchange of information could be supplemented by joint 
preparation of legal documents, organization of regional courses and 
co-ordination of technical activities. 
154. Convinced of the need to develop nuclear power, CMEA Member States 
would continue to strengthen their international co-operation and work to 
promote public confidence in nuclear power and to ensure transparency of 
information in that area. To that end, they would develop international 
co-operation with other countries and with international organizations, 
primarily the Agency. 
155. Mr. SAMIEI (Islamic Republic of Iran), exercising his right of 
reply in connection with a statement made the previous day by the delegate of 
Iraq, stressed that the factual statement made by the head of the delegation 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran had no bearing at all on the peace 
negotiations at present under way. The Islamic Republic of Iran was firmly 
attached to the establishment of genuine peace and security in the region and 
that was why it fully accepted Security Council resolution 598. It therefore 
had no intention of undermining those negotiations. 
156. Moreover, the statement quoted by the Iraqi delegate which had 
allegedly been broadcast by Radio Tehran was completely false and his 
Government categorically denied that such a statement had ever been made. 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.308 
page 46 


157. Lastly, his delegation wished to recall that the Islamic Repuhlic of 
Iran was a signatory of NPT and had accepted the application of full-scope 
Agency safeguards. Therefore, the Islamic Republic of Iran rejected any 
allegation aimed at undermining its strong commitments in that respect. 
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
31 October 1988 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 22 September 1988, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 
later: Mr. CHAPMAN (United States of America) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


Arrangements for the Conference 
(resumed) 


(c) 
Timing of Conference sessions 
(d) 
Review of the Conference's 
working practices 
General debate and annual report 
for 1987 (resumed) 21 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Israel 


4 12 
Ireland 13 21 


[*] GC(XXXII)/856. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXII)/INF/262/Rev.2. 


88-4778 
3916e/0462e 



GC(XXXI1)/0R.309 
page 2 


Item of the 
agenda* 


Paragraphs 


Report by the Chairman of the Special 


Scientific Meeting on Nuclear Safety 


and Radiological Protection 22 - 29 

General debate and annual report 
for 1987 (resumed) 30 - 78 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Morocco 30 - 45 
Tunisia 46 - 52 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 53-60 
Holy See 61 - 69 


Jordan 70-78 


Election of Members to the Board 
of Governors 79-82 



GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 3 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(c) TIMING OF CONFERENCE SESSIONS (GC(XXXII)/GEN/73) 
(d) REVIEW OF THE CONFERENCE'S WORKING PRACTICES (GC(XXXII)/GEN/74) 
1. The PRESIDENT announced that the General Committee had recommended 

that an inter-sessional working group be set up to consider ways of 
streamlining the General Conference's working practices and timing. As 
Chairman of the General Committee, he would hold consultations with regional 
groups and other interested parties and would set up a small but 
representative group which would report to the General Conference the 
following year. 


2. Furthermore, the General Committee had recommended that, in the 
interests of economy, summary records of the plenary sessions and meetings of 
committees be issued only once, and any corrections requested by delegates be 
issued separately in consolidated form for the entire series of meetings. 
Such a change would involve an amendment to Rule 89 of the Rules of Procedure 
of the General Conference (which could be formally considered the following 
year), but since the Agency's budget for 1989 had been prepared on the 
assumption of savings on that account, it was proposed that the new practice 
be initiated with immediate effect. 
3. The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1987 (resumed) (GC(XXXII)/835) 


4. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said that the past decade had seen a 
slow-down in the growth of nuclear energy usage, apparently as a result of 
economic and ecological considerations and of the controversy surrounding 
nuclear energy. In a number of European countries, the anti-nuclear movement 
had gained ground after Chernobyl. In many countries, the public believed 
that the national and international investigations carried out had underestimated 
the accident's impact on technology and health. Yet, responsible 
studies had indicated that economic and environmental protection 
considerations made it necessary to increase reliance on nuclear energy in the 
next few decades. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 4 


5. Israel commended the Agency for the many constructive actions it had 
taken following the accident. Now that the causes of the accident were well 
understood and the Agency's expanded nuclear safety and radiation protection 
programme was well advanced, the Agency should devote more attention to 
educating and reassuring the public. The collection and dissemination of 
reliable information on the benefits and risks of nuclear energy compared with 
alternative energy sources would be useful in that connection. 
6. His delegation welcomed the additional steps taken by the Agency 
pursuant to its responsibilities under the Convention on Early Notification of 
a Nuclear Accident, especially the establishment and testing of the Global 
Telecommunications System (GTS) of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). 
Once the early notification system was fully operational, an important stage 
in the international effort aimed at improving readiness to deal with severe 
nuclear accidents would have been accomplished. 
7. Recently, and especially after the Bhopal accident, a universal need 
had been felt for the safety standards of chemical plants to be brought closer 
to those of the nuclear industry. The Agency, which had accumulated vast 
knowledge and experience in the field of nuclear safety, could contribute 
significantly to a global effort to transfer such safety-related know-how to 
the chemical industry. Some effort in that direction had already begun as a 
joint project with UNEP and WHO, but a much broader scope of activity should 
be undertaken. 
8. Israel endorsed the Agency's work in promoting the development of 
small- and medium-power reactors that used passive safety features. The 
Agency could help define appropriate safety features for the next generation 
of nuclear reactors, promote an independent evaluation of critical safety 
issues, and assist developing countries in studying whether specific reactor 
concepts matched their needs. Agency leadership in the field of advanced 
nuclear reactors would unquestionably help win wider public acceptance for 
those designs. 
9. The crisis in the nuclear industry had resulted in a substantial 
decrease in the number of persons choosing nuclear engineering as a profession 
and might lead to a severe shortage of nuclear engineers and technicians in 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.309 
page 5 


the future. To forestall such an event, which would have considerable 
implications for safety, the international nuclear community should tackle 
that issue now to ensure that human resources would be available when needed. 
The Agency could play a helpful role in that area. 


10. During the past year, Israel had continued its efforts to achieve a 
proper balance between innovative basic research and economically viable 
practical applications. Noteworthy achievements had been attained in 
radiopharmaceuticals, while in the field of radiation protection sophisticated 
instruments such as multipurpose radiation monitors and detectors had been 
developed. The Israeli Atomic Energy Commission had, through the Agency, 
donated a set of such instruments as part of international efforts to deal 
with the radiological emergency at Goiania. Israel had also presented to the 
Agency a set of two monitors and five types of detector for use by the 
Division of Nuclear Safety and for training purposes. The food irradiation 
programme had reached the stage of commercial implementation, with over 50 t 
of spices and condiments being treated in 1987. 
11. Member States' representatives convened annually at the General 
Conference to enhance international co-operation in nuclear science and 
technology. It was therefore regrettable that much valuable time was wasted 
on irrelevant political issues that the Agency had never been meant to deal 
with and which could not possibly be solved in that assembly. It seemed that 
narrow national politics were more important to Iraq, Syria and their 
supporters than the promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He hoped 
that common sense would prevail and that the General Conference would reject 
decisively the destructive proposals put forward under agenda item 7. The 
concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone - advocated by Israel for years - was 
now receiving international attention. A draft resolution referring to it had 
been introduced by the Egyptian delegation. The question of such a zone was 
of great significance and deserved to be discussed on its own merits, not 
under the item entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat". Israel did 
not threaten the existence of any State in the region. Discussing a nuclearweapon-
free zone under the item relating to Israel undermined the constructive 
approach that such an important and sensitive issue required. 

GC(XXX1I)/0R.309 
page 6 


12. Mutual assistance and free and direct negotiations among the States in 
the region constituted the basis for any agreement on a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. That subject had been thoroughly studied by the Independent Commission 
on Disarmament and Security Issues (the Palme Commission) and the Conference 
of the Committee on Disarmament. Those studies, together with the precedents 
established by the Tlatelolco and Rarotonga Treaties could offer a firm basis 
for devising appropriate modalities to be negotiated and agreed upon, thus 
ultimately providing mutual assurances for all the States concerned. 
13. Mr. FITZGERALD (Ireland) said that the utilization of nuclear 
energy in both the military and civilian sectors carried with it great risks 
which had to be recognized and abated by every means possible. The 
year 1988 marked the 20th anniversary of the opening for signature of the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), and the 30th anniversary of the initiative 
taken by Ireland at the United Nations which had led to its elaboration. The 
special role that Ireland had played had been marked by the fact that Ireland 
was the first country to sign the new Treaty in 1968. The NPT was the 
centrepiece of a world system aimed at limiting the dangers posed by nuclear 
weapons by preventing their proliferation and achieving nuclear disarmament 
under international control. The commitment undertaken by the rion-nuclearweapon 
States party to NPT had undoubtedly had the effect of limiting 
horizontal proliferation and avoiding an even more serious escalation of the 
problem of nuclear weapons. The Treaty had been adhered to by some 140 States. 
However, several countries had chosen to remain outside NPT, and some of those 
might have acquired nuclear-weapon capability. 
14. A universal and effective nuclear non-proliferation regime was in the 
best interests of international peace and stability and of all countries. 
The Agency had a crucial role to play in that process, for without the 
safeguards provided by the Agency it would not have been possible to implement 
the non-proliferation regime. Ireland welcomed the recently approved 
voluntary offer agreement between China and the IAEA, and noted with 
satisfaction that agreements had now been concluded by the Agency with all 
five nuclear-weapon States. Furthermore, all countries in which a nuclear 
reactor was operating had now accepted Agency safeguards on all or part of 
their nuclear activities. All countries should co-operate fully with 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 7 


the Agency by permitting and facilitating full inspection of all their civil 
nuclear installations. It was cause for grave concern that there were still a 
number of States with sensitive installations not under safeguards. He 
appealed to those States, in the interests of international peace and 
stability, to submit their facilities to safeguards. 


15. Ireland had over the years made significant contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) in the belief that it would 
help less prosperous countries acquire basic nuclear technology and facilities 
for peaceful purposes. He found the Agency's promotional work in the fields 
of medicine, agriculture, environmental studies and life sciences to be 
especially valuable, and noted with approval that two thirds of the resources 
available for technical assistance were currently being devoted to non-power 
projects. Ireland had also hosted training courses and would be glad to 
assist in organizing further courses for the Agency. 
16. Ireland's continued support for technical assistance had to be viewed 
in the context of the large-scale and costly restructuring of essential 
radiation protection facilities in Ireland. At a time of increasing domestic 
budget stringency, which had resulted in a significant reduction in overall 
public expenditure, the Irish Government had been forced to increase the level 
of funding for radiation protection almost four times over its level of 
three years previously, and was now in the middle of a large re-equipment 
programme. So far, that programme was being implemented without help from 
the TACF. The programme had been necessary owing to the serious threat to the 
health and economic well-being of the Irish population posed by the large 
concentration of nuclear facilities in north-west Europe and the effects of 
the Chernobyl accident on international trade in food products. The scope of 
the TACF should be broad enough to support such intensive programmes for 
radiation protection in Member States. 
17. With regard to nuclear safety, the Director General, in his wideranging 
and thought-provoking address, had discussed issues which were of 
fundamental importance to all governments in planning future long-term energy 
systems in a way which would be compatible with an acceptable environment and 
meet the real needs and expectations of citizens. Clearly, there was no 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 


page 8 


single or ready-made solution to such problems. The Report of the World 


Commission on Environment and Development was a useful starting point for 


consideration of the issue. It had been stressed by some speakers that 


increased reliance on nuclear power would avoid the adverse effects attributed 
to continued large-scale use of fossil fuels. That, of course, was only one 


side of the picture. Certainly in its present stage of development, nuclear 
energy had and would continue to have for many years to come real risks. It 
was the potential scale of the damage that had to be judged and not its 
measured impact so far. 


18. A number of countries had already made up their minds not to develop 
nuclear energy and some were considering the question. Others were pursuing 
active nuclear development programmes. Decisions to choose the latter road 
carried with them the responsibility to ensure not only the safety of their 
own population but also that of other countries which might be affected by 
their decision, and that not simply by means of statements of assurance but by 
positive co-operation and openness on issues related to the regulation and 
operation of nuclear facilities. The public would not accept assurances on 
safety that were not backed by full transparency, mutual inspection and 
verification, and without public acceptance the issue of nuclear power would 
remain a matter of international controversy and its role as a supplier of 
energy would be impeded. It was therefore essential that there be much 
greater voluntary acceptance of the need for mutual verification and assurance 
with regard to the application of safety standards and practices and the 
effectiveness of regulatory authorities. The Agency had already achieved a 
great deal in that area, and he hoped the Board would continue its positive 
promotion of safety. 
19. Happily, many of the lessons of the several accidents of the past 
decade seemed to have been well learned. Ireland appreciated the essential 
role played by the Agency in identifying, understanding and applying those 
lessons at an international level. However, whereas the mistakes of 
operators, maintainers and designers had been readily pointed out and 
accepted, the shortcomings of regulators and legislation had not been 
identified in all cases, nor was it clear that appropriate corrective action 
had always been taken. The Agency symposium on safety standards and practices 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 9 


for nuclear power plants to be held in Munich in November would, he hoped, 
help to correct that deficiency. He also expressed the hope that Ireland's 
proposal concerning independent review of regulatory practices in Member 
States along the lines of OSART missions would gain greater recognition as 
being a practical and useful way forward in that area, and he emphasized that 
the proposal was aimed at reinforcing rather than undermining the competence 
and responsibility of national regulatory authorities. 


20. In his opening address, the Director General had referred to the often 
heard suggestion that nuclear power would be more acceptable if new reactors 
incorporating greater inherent safety were available; but the 400 or so 
existing reactors still had to be taken into account. While it was necessary 
to continue work aimed at improving the safety of existing reactor types, it 
was most important that the Agency's work should encourage the introduction, 
wherever possible, of newer, safer and smaller reactors. Also, future 
development should not be determined exclusively by the producers or users of 
equipment, influenced by commercial considerations. 
21. In parallel with the safe development and operation of nuclear 
facilities, acceptable solutions had also to be found for the problems 
associated with transport, particularly by air, and with the storage and final 
disposal of nuclear materials and waste. Ireland was opposed to any solutions 
which involved continuing regular discharges or dumping of waste material at 
sea or in the sea-bed. A rigorous control system was essential to prevent any 
possibility of unauthorized disposal of nuclear or other dangerous toxic 
wastes. 
REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING ON NUCLEAR SAFETY AND 
RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION 


22. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had recommended that 
the outcome of the Special Scientific Meeting on Nuclear Safety and 
Radiological Protection should be reported to the Plenary meeting. He would 
therefore ask Sir Edward Pochin, Chairman of the Special Scientific Meeting, to 
address the Conference. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 10 


23. Sir Edutard POCHIN said that the Special Scientific Meeting on 
Nuclear Safety and Radiological Protection had been very successful and 
informative. It had comprised four sessions: current issues of scientific 
and practical importance in radiation protection; the need for better control 
of small radioactive sources used in industry; the Agency's work in a wide 
range of important fields; and, lastly, public perception of ionizing 
radiation and the distorted use of resources which could result from 
exaggerated anxiety about the effects of small radiation exposures as compared 
with other sources of much greater public danger. 
24. The meeting had noted the increasing precision with which the effects 
of low radiation doses could be estimated. Several authoritative reports 
reviewing available epidemiological data were nearing completion and suggested 
that, in the case of occupational exposure, the frequency of fatal cancers 
caused by radiation was 2 or 3 times greater than had been thought 11 years previously. 
The completion of the study by the United Nations Scientific Committee on the 
Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) at the end of 1988, and of other 
authoritative studies the following year, would probably have implications for 
the review of dose limits. In the case of occupational exposure, the 
increasingly accurate estimate of risk was much less likely to affect working 
practices than the dose limits themselves, since in most forms of occupational 
exposure the average dose rate was commonly less than one twentieth of the 
annual dose limit. 
25. Participants at the meeting had also reviewed the appropriate 
precautions to be taken after severe accidents when, for example, it might be 
desirable to restrict food supplies to avoid unduly high doses. Obviously, 
the harm associated with such restrictions should be less than the harm which 
they prevented. There had also been discussion of exposures which were so 
small as to be exempt from consideration since the risk involved was trivial. 
A possible limit of 10 ySv was suggested for exposures which could be exempt 
from consideration. Such a radiation dose would be equal to a dose received 
in any two weeks from natural sources. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 11 


26. In the second session, which dealt with small industrial sources, it 
had emerged that on 10 occasions in the past 28 years such sources had been 
abandoned, often on building sites, and picked up by people, frequently 
children, who were unaware of the danger. Twenty-six deaths had occurred as a 
result. Such accidents could easily be avoided by improved education of those 
responsible for the use of such sources. The session had also emphasized the 
need in many countries, not only in developing countries, for assistance in 
the disposal of radium sources which had formerly been used for medical 
purposes and were no longer used for those purposes. It was gratifying to 
note that the Agency was in the process of publishing advice on ways of 
dealing with such sources. 
27. It had been seen at the third session, which dealt with the Agency's 
work, that the Agency was carrying out an impressive range of important 
activities. Several general points had been raised such as the value of a 
national protection structure or organization in countries to act as an 
interface between, on the one hand, international bodies which offered advice 
(e.g. the Agency, UNSCEAR and ICRP) and, on the other hand, national bodies 
such as scientific advisory authorities and regulatory services, which 
accepted aspects of such advice. 
28. The last session, reviewing the communication and acceptance of 
information on safety procedures, had shown the continuing need for education 
of the public at various levels. The issue of waste disposal had been raised 
and the opinion was expressed that it involved more political than technical 
problems. It had also been noted that the evaluation of risk by the public 
and in the media tended to be more in terms of the source and cause of the 
risk than in terms of the size of the risk. As a consequence of the sometimes 
confused attitudes about the size of risks, there was a much greater 
expenditure of resources to prevent a single death from radiation than to 
prevent many deaths from more familiar hazards of modern civilization. 
29. Finally, the meeting had expressed the hope that similar scientific 
sessions could take place on a regular basis in future years. 
30. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) noted that there had been an appreciable 
increase in the preceding year in the use of nuclear energy for power 
production and in nuclear applications in the economic and scientific fields. 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.309 
page 12 


During the year 22 nuclear power plants had been commissioned and the total 


installed capacity had risen by 8%. That increase had not resulted in any 
significant radiation exposure, thanks to design improvements and other 
measures. 


31. In the area of safety, the International Nuclear Safety Advisory 
Group (INSAG) had done commendable work on the basic safety principles for 
nuclear power plants, and the NUSS Codes had been revised. The Agency had 
continued to contribute greatly to the safety and to the improvement of 
nuclear power plant design and operation by organizing technical meetings, 
publishing codes of practice and sending operational safety review 
teams (OSARTs) to Member States. In that connection, he emphasized the great 
importance of those documents for Morocco and considered that the latter, and 
especially the basic safety principles, should be accepted by all 
Member States. Although safety standards were a matter that lay within 
States' competence, the consequences of the Chernobyl accident and the new 
dimensions of nuclear safety clearly showed that international co-operation 
was vital in that area. 
32. It was satisfying to observe that in 1987 there had been no nuclear 
power plant accidents with radiological consequences for human health or the 
environment. However, the Goiania accident underlined that safety must be 
taken seriously in the case of all uses of nuclear energy. The Agency had 
therefore an important role in helping the developing countries to establish 
and to strengthen their infrastructures and capabilities in the field of 
safety and radiation protection. 
33. As regards waste management, which was closely related to safety and 
protection, he appreciated the information given in the Director General's 
statement on the modern techniques of waste treatment and disposal. His 
country had full confidence in the Agency's expertise in the area. He 
welcomed in particular the establishment of the Waste Management Advisory 
Programme (WAMAP). 
34. Morocco strongly condemned the activities of some multinational 
companies involved in the dumping of toxic waste in developing countries, 
without regard to the possible dangerous consequences, taking advantage of the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 13 


economic weakness of those countries. He urged Member States and the Agency 
to withold any co-operation in those activities and hoped that the latter 
would continue to help the developing countries to counter such irresponsible 
acts. 


35. The Moroccan delegation was highly appreciative of the Agency's support 
for the implementation of the nuclear programmes of developing countries and 
of its assistance in strengthening their infrastructure for that purpose. He 
commended the Senior Expert Group on Mechanisms to Assist Developing Countries 
in the Promotion and Financing of their Nuclear Power Programmes for its 
report, and supported the idea of participation of international financing 
institutions in those programmes. 
36. He wished to thank the Agency and in particular its Department of 
Technical Co-operation for the fruitful collaboration and valuable help which 
his country had received in a number of areas, and hoped that the 
collaboration would be further strengthened. 
37. Morocco attached importance to co-operation between developing 
countries and especially in Africa, where regional co-operation within the 
Agency was lacking. In that connection, he suggested the establishment of a 
regional programme in Africa on the lines of the co-operative arrangements 
which countries in Asia and Latin America had concluded, namely RCA 
and ARCAL. His country was willing to make available its not inconsiderable 
experience in the uses of nuclear energy, including human and material 
resources, for such a programme, and could in particular set up a regional 
radioimmunological laboratory with the assistance of the Agency. 


38. Referring to the recent developments in Morocco's nuclear programme, he 
pointed out that a site had finally been selected for its first nuclear power 
plant, which was to be commissioned at the beginning of the following 
century. The one-megawatt research reactor for its nuclear research centre 
was expected to go into operation at the end of 1992. Generally speaking, 
Morocco had made great progress in its nuclear programme and had acquired 
considerable human and material potential, thanks to its co-operation with the 
Agency and friendly States. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.309 
page 14 


39. The international conventions prepared by the Agency constituted a 
organizational framework which effectively contributed to the enhancement of 
safety. The Conventions on Early Notification and on Assistance, which had 
demonstrated their effectiveness in the case of the Goiania accident, dealt 
with one aspect of international co-operation. The Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material was concerned with protection during transfer 
between States, while physical protection within States was always the 
responsibility of the States themselves. As for civil liability for nuclear 
damage, the Vienna and Paris Conventions provided a satisfactory legal 
framework. Morocco was satisfied with the work of the working group which had 
drafted the Joint Protocol relating to the application of those two 
conventions. However, the question of international liability continued to 
lack a legal framework, and it was necessary to take steps at the 
international level so that an international liability regime could be arrived 
at. He had pleasure in announcing that his Government had decided to sign the 
Joint Protocol at the current session of the Conference, and that the process 
of ratification of the aforementioned four conventions was in its final stage 
and would shortly be completed. 
40. On the subject of non-proliferation, his delegation welcomed the treaty 
between the United States and the Soviet Union on banning medium- and 
short-range nuclear missiles, signed in December 1987. He hoped that similar 
agreements would be concluded in the future with a view to extending the 
non-proliferation regime. 
41. As concerned the application of safeguards, he wished to congratulate 
China on its decision to conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
With that, the latter would have such agreements with all the nuclear-weapon 
States. He also welcomed the accession of Saudi Arabia and Spain to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and hoped that their 
example would be followed by other States which had not done so. 
42. Extension of the scope of application of NPT and also universality of 
the safeguards system, which was one of the hopes cherished by a majority of 
Member States, were bound to strengthen the non-proliferation regime and its 
credibility and lead to greater international control of the use of nuclear 
energy. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 15 


43. In that context, Morocco deeply regretted the obstinate stand of Israel 
with regard to the resolutions of the General Conference and those of the 
United Nations Security Council and General Assembly. Israel had recently 
declined to comply with General Conference resolution 470 and continued its 
refusal to renounce possession of nuclear weapons and to place all its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. At the same time, it persisted in its 
policy of aggression and expansion in the Middle East and that of suppression 
of the Arab people in the occupied lands. It had of late sought to link the 
full application of safeguards, a technical matter within the Agency's 
competence, to the quite separate political question of a nuclear-free zone, 
which was the concern of the Security Council and the General Assembly. 
44. He also condemned the existing nuclear co-operation between the Israeli 
entity and the racist Government of South Africa as it was a threat to the 
safety and security of Africa and the Middle East. The latter Government's 
refusal to place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards in 
accordance with General Conference resolution 485 and those adopted before it 
was a matter of grave concern. It was to be recalled that, in view of that 
Government's expression of readiness to sign NPT, the matter of its suspension 
from the Agency had been postponed from the preceding to the current session. 
However, since it was clearly persisting in defying the General Conference 
resolutions, he called upon Member States to take appropriate decisions in the 
matter. 
45. In conclusion, he reiterated the Moroccan Government's support for the 
Agency's efforts and wished it every success in fulfilling its basic objective 
of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the progress and 
happiness of mankind. 
46. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) said the peace process hailed by many 
delegations and characterized by detente, the end of certain regional 
conflicts and the signature of the treaty on nuclear-weapons reduction between 
the United States and the Soviet Union had, unfortunately, not benefited all 
countries throughout the world. In the Middle East, Israel was still refusing 
to place its nuclear installations under Agency control and continued to 
occupy Palestine and other Arab territories, subjecting their populations to 
savage repression. 

GC(XXXI1)/OR.309 
page 16 


47. Practising what was actually State terrorism by exporting its attacks 
beyond the Middle East, Israel had committed aggression against Tunisia 
on 16 April 1988 with the assassination of the Palestinian leader Abu Jihad a 
criminal act which had created a number of innocent victims and been 
unanimously condemned by the Security Council. That event pointed to the 
growing danger represented by the Israeli nuclear installations run by 
irresponsible and aggressive elements and made the institution of Agency 
safeguards on those installations a matter of utmost urgency. 
48. In another part of the world, South Africa was still refusing to comply 
with the United Nations and IAEA resolutions calling on it to place its 
nuclear installations under Agency safeguards. It was highly regrettable that 
a number of Member States nevertheless continued to co-operate with Israel and 
South Africa in the field of nuclear energy and technology. 
49. While drawing attention to those sources of concern, his delegation 
welcomed the courageous and efficacious role played by the Agency in a number 
of areas. Be it in nuclear safety, safeguards, radiological protection or 
technical assistance, the Agency was making a contribution everywhere, 
permitting Member States to draw on its resources and on the competence of its 
experts. 
50. While nuclear safety was an important concern, as the events at 
Chernobyl had clearly demonstrated, his delegation hoped that it would not be 
pursued to the detriment of promotional activities. Environmental 
protection - in particular, careful supervision of the handling, transport and 
storage of radioactive waste - was just as important as nuclear power plant 
safety and deserved additional attention from the Agency. For example, the 
recent initiatives aimed at transforming certain developing countries into the 
"waste basket" of the industrialized countries should be condemned. 
51. The growing interest of developing countries in the Agency added new 
urgency to the questions of the expansion of the Board of Governors and of 
more equitable representation of Member States on it. The consultations being 
carried out within the ad hoc working group established by the Board in 
September 1987 for the purpose of drafting amendments to Article VI and, in 
particular, Article VI.A.2 of the Statute should be pursued: those amendments 
should aim at achieving broader representation of African States on the Board. 

GC(XXXII)/OR,309 
page 17 


52. In general terms, Tunisia was satisfied with its fruitful co-operation 
with the Agency. Far-reaching reforms undertaken by the Tunisian authorities 
since 7 November 1987 would stimulate the development of structures and 
expertise that could take advantage of all the opportunities offered by the 
Agency and some of its Member States concerning the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. The climate of understanding now prevailing among Arab Maghreb States 
could result in large-scale joint projects which, owing to the financial, 
technological and human resources required, could not be undertaken by a 
single State. The Arab Maghreb States hoped that a regional co-operation 
agreement similar to those already existing in Asia and Latin America would be 
concluded with the Agency for the African continent. Such an agreement should 
lead to the elaboration of a programme for Africa in such fields as radiation 
protection and the use of isotope techniques in industry, agriculture, 
medicine, food preservation and basic nuclear science, a programme that would 
promote co-operation among African States in those areas and facilitate closer 
co-ordination of their policies regarding the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes. 
53. Mr. El MADANI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) commended the Agency's 
active role in strengthening the infrastructure and in transferring the 
technology needed by Member States, which had helped them in using nuclear 
energy in various fields for progress and prosperity. Libya appreciated the 
Agency's assistance in building up its scientific and technical infrastructure 
for its ambitious programme on the use of nuclear energy in power production, 
industry, agriculture and medicine. As a result, there was a greater need for 
assistance and advice expecially as regards technology transfer, know-how, 
integrated training and improvement of operating and maintenance capability. 
54. The economic and industrial growth that was taking place in Libya had 
increased the demand for electricity, making it necessary to consider other 
sources of energy in addition to the main source which was petroleum. His 
Government attached importance to the nuclear option and had resumed the 
economic, financial and technical studies initiated with the Agency's help. 
He hoped that the Agency would render effective assistance and that other 
Member States would provide the advice, training and technology needed in the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 18 


area of nuclear power production on a non-discriminatory basis under 
conditions and at a cost which were reasonable and consistent with the world 
economic and financial situation. 


55. While he approved in principle the Agency's programme for 1989-1990 and 
the budget for 1989, he shared the misgivings of the other developing 
countries about the zero-growth budget and about the fluctuations in the 
technical co-operation programme and the fall in the implementation rate, one 
reason for which was the slowness and reluctance on the part of some 
industrialized countries to respond to the requirements of developing 
countries and the delay in supplying equipment under contract. Libya was also 
concerned at the increasing appropriations in respect of manpower and material 
resources in the safeguards budget at the expense of other activities. 
56. As regards the Agency's efforts fully to carry out its safeguards 
functions, one could not but mention the activities of the Zionist entity, 
which was occupying Palestine, and of the racist regime in South Africa 
relating to the development of nuclear destructive capability. Those were a 
clear threat to peace and security in the world. They ignored international 
conventions and instruments and rejected the world community's demand to cease 
those activities and to comply with its demands. Libya called upon the 
Conference to apply deterrent sanctions against them and to deprive them of 
their membership in the Agency, and appealed to all peace-loving countries to 
persuade those co-operating with the Zionist entity in strengthening its 
nuclear potential to refrain from such co-operation. 
57. He recalled that the current year was the 20th anniversary of the 
conclusion of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), 
which defined the Agency's role in ensuring that nuclear energy was not used 
for non-peaceful purposes. In that connection, he supported the Director 
General's statement about the Agency's willingness to play an active part in 
the preparation of the Fourth NPT Review Conference. He emphasized that the 
comprehensive safeguards system had become an element of security and was 
essential in international relations and must be supported by all lovers of 
peace. 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.309 
page 19 


58. He strongly condemned the dumping by many States and companies of 
industrial and nuclear waste in many areas of the world, especially in Africa 
and in the Mediterranean, where it posed a threat to the future of the 
population, and urged the international community to take a strict stand with 
regard to that criminal act. 
59. An item which had been on the Conference's agenda for many years was 
the question of amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute. Libya's 
stand on the issue had remained unchanged since 1977, when it had submitted, 
together with other States, the proposal about increasing the representation 
of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia on the Board by three and two 
seats respectively. The time had come to repeat that demand. Another longstanding 
issue was the staffing of the Secretariat. His delegation considered 
it necessary to strike a geographical balance in the appointments to posts in 
the Secretariat, taking into account the qualifications and experience of 
applicants from developing countries, who were in no way inferior to those 
from developed countries. The selection of candidates should therefore be 
based only on technical competence. 
60. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that Member States would be more 
responsive to the aspirations of the developing countries to make use of 
nuclear energy and that the Agency would continue its efforts to help them in 
mobilizing science and technology for the benefit of their peoples and for 
mankind as a whole. 
61. Mr. CEIRANO (Holy See) said that the Holy See - a founder Member 
of the Agency - had, whenever appropriate, sought to draw attention to the 
moral aspects of what could be termed the nuclear problem and to the 
associated responsibilities of the international community. 
62. Throughout the history of the Agency the key word "responsibility" had 
been used mainly in relation to the matter of nuclear armaments and to the 
ways and means of reducing the threat of nuclear war. One such means, 
although certainly not a sufficient one, was the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (NPT), together with the Agency's safeguards system. The Holy See had 
subscribed to both, not because the Vatican City State posed any danger in 
that connection, but in order to add its support and moral encouragement to 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 20 


the provisions of the Treaty. Under NPT, nuclear-weapon States pledged their 
intention to achieve full disarmament as soon as possible, and it was to be 
hoped that the present superpower detente would facilitate and accelerate the 
disarmament process, now reinforced by the Treaty between the United States of 
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of 
Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles. 


63. Over the previous 10 to 15 years, however, the idea of responsibility 
had also come to be associated with the grave risks involved in the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy. Nuclear safety had also become a moral issue. Just as 
in the military field the task was to avoid a nuclear holocaust, so, in the 
field of the peaceful use of nuclear energy, it was to avoid accidents with 
disastrous consequences for humankind and the environment. 
64. Nuclear safety - a primarily, but not exclusively, national 
responsibility - was a major factor in the siting, construction and operation 
of nuclear installations. Nuclear safety activities were aimed at protecting 
plant personnel, the general public and the environment from the potentially 
harmful effects of ionizing radiations, as well as from their actual effects 
in the event of a nuclear accident. National decision-makers had a grave 
responsibility in relation to nuclear safety, not least because the fate of 
future generations would to a very large extent depend upon its continued 
improvement. 
65. Nuclear safety was also an international responsibility, since a 
nuclear accident could have serious transboundary consequences. Minor 
incidents during the operation of a nuclear installation could, moreover, give 
rise to transboundary effects when the reactor site lay close to the national 
border. States operating peaceful nuclear installations therefore had a 
serious international responsibility, especially toward those countries which 
had decided, for whatever reasons, not to build or to discontinue the 
operation of nuclear power plants on their territory. 
66. Clearly, then, international co-operation in the field of nuclear 
energy - with emphasis on the exchange of information, as well as on 
assistance, should the need arise - was more than ever essential. However, 
while the two Conventions that had been drawn up following the Chernobyl 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 21 


accident represented a step in the right direction, the question of 
transboundary effects was still far from resolved, since there remained the 
very serious matter of international liability for damage arising from a 
nuclear accident. Any State in which a nuclear accident involving 
transboundary consequences occurred had a duty to indemnify the people in 
other States who had also suffered from that accident and who had not 
previously enjoyed the economic benefits of the nuclear industry in the 
country where the accident had occurred. In such a case, while operating a 
nuclear power plant could obviously not be regarded as an illegal act, it 
would at the same time be unfair to burden the other States affected by the 
accident with the task of proving negligence on the part of the State in which 


it had occurred. Rather, liability following a nuclear accident should, in 
accordance with a principle generally recognized by most legal systems, rest 
with the party which was engaged in an activity that was hazardous by its very 
nature. That certainly applied to States which utilized nuclear energy, even 
for peaceful purposes. 


67. The Agency, with its leading role in the continuing enhancement of 
nuclear safety, was in a position to provide national authorities with the 
best information available and to assist individual States in solving their 
particular nuclear problems, which need not always be at the level of a 
national catastrophe, such as at Chernobyl; there were also more limited 
incidents like the one in Goiania, Brazil, where the Agency had helped to 
locate and eliminate a small but dangerous radiation source. 
68. Combined international efforts were also required to deal with the 
increasingly serious problem of nuclear waste disposal. It was unacceptable 
to use developing countries, the oceans or other areas of vital concern for 
the future as dumping-grounds for nuclear waste. Nor was it acceptable to 
establish nuclear waste disposal sites without first informing the surrounding 
population. 
69. Finally, it was common knowledge that nuclear power was a dangerous 
form of energy. If, however, the international community believed that it 
should continue to be used, then there was a moral obligation on the part of 
all involved to do all in their power to guarantee its safety. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 22 


70. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) noted that the thirty-second session of the 
General Conference was taking place at a time of internationally and 
historically important events. The past twelve months had witnessed a 
political detente between the two major powers and a general tendency to 
attempt to solve political conflicts by means of negotiations. There were 
great hopes that such a spirit of international understanding and peaceful 
co-operation would prevail for a long time. The progress of talks between the 
two major powers and the signing of an agreement between them to eliminate 
their intermediate-range and shorter-range missiles invited optimism and 
confidence in the future of the human race. The session also coincided with 
the 20th anniversary of NPT to which included 136 States were signatories. 
Furthermore, the Agency, for its part, was playing a role of increasing 
importance in co-ordinating international efforts in the use of nuclear 
technology. 
71. However, despite those encouraging indicators, there were still a 
number of issues which were causing concern to a great number of countries. 
The attitude of Israel towards peace in the Middle East caused particular 
anxiety. Israel continued to practise all forms of suppression in the 
occupied Arab lands and continued to enhance its co-operation with the 
South African apartheid regime in the field of nuclear weapons. Both 
countries continued to ignore the repeated requests and resolutions of 
international organizations and conferences that called upon them to subject 
their nuclear facilities to the Agency's safeguards system. 
72. Israel was attempting to link the application of the safeguards system 
to the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Israel was 
the only State in the Middle East which had the means or the capability to 
develop or deploy nuclear weapons. Consequently, if Israel were to abandon 
its schemes to develop nuclear military facilities, the area would in fact 
become a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Furthermore, all Arab countries of the 
Middle East were signatories to Agency safeguards agreements and NPT and 
therefore none of those countries possessed or had the intention of developing 
nuclear war capabilities. If Israel wished to demonstrate its sincerity and 
the seriousness of its intentions, it should immediately accept the Agency's 
safeguards system and sign NPT. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 23 


73. The Agency and the international community should take measures and 
establish regulations to deal with the transfer of radioactive waste. His 
country believed that an international convention should be established 
prohibiting the export of toxic chemicals and radioactive wastes except in 
cases where a full and clear declaration regarding the nature of those wastes 
and the dangers involved was issued jointly by the importer and exporter and 
signed by the relevant institutions responsible for the environment and 
radiation protection in both countries. The export and import should be 
carried out in accordance with a public contract between the parties involved 
and a copy of the contract should be deposited with the Agency. Shipping, 
transport, handling or burial of such wastes should be performed under the 
supervision of a competent international body such as the Agency having the 
facilities for checking radioactivity levels and so on. 
74. In his statement, the Director General had indicated that the share of 
nuclear power had increased to 16% of total world electricity production, 
although the share of nuclear power in electricity production in developing 
countries was still very small. Technical, financial, political and legal 
obstacles preventing developing countries from making proper use of nuclear 
technology still existed and no substantial progress had been made towards 
overcoming those obstacles. The efforts made to develop simpler reactors with 
inherent safety characteristics were greatly appreciated, but additional 
efforts would have to be made to make such reactors available to developing 
countries without additional economical, technical or contractual burdens. 
75. The Agency's work in developing the scientific and technological 
capabilities of developing countries was much appreciated by Jordan. However, 
there were a number of ways in which those activities could be improved. 
Firstly, technical assistance programmes, experts and training, should be a 
part of a national medium-range plan of the recipient country and the Agency 
should help in preparing such a plan and in defining its local and external 
requirements as well as the means of implementation. Secondly, the Agency 
should emphasize group or team training, instead of individual training. 
Thirdly, technical assistance and training should be directed towards 
comprehensive training with the objective of creating local trainers and 
instructors capable of taking the lead in national nuclear projects. Lastly, 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 


page 24 


regional co-operation, which was highly appreciated by Jordan, should become 
more comprehensive, although such co-operation programmes should not replace 
or duplicate normal country training. In particular, regional co-operation 
should be strengthened in areas such as nuclear safety, radiation protection 
and environmental monitoring. 


76. With regard to the suggestion put forward by some Member States to 
allow those countries which were not represented on the Board of Governors to 
attend the meetings of the Board as observers, his country supported that idea 
and requested the Director General and the Board of Governors to take the 
necessary steps. The General Conference should take decisive measures to 
ensure better representation on the Board for the Middle East and Asian region 
as well as for Africa. 
77. Whilst his delegation approved the Agency's programme for 1989, it was 
concerned about the adoption of the principle of zero growth. Such a 
principle did not allow the Agency to respond to the responsibilites and tasks 
entrusted to it in the light of the Agency's increasing role in nuclear 
safety, radiation protection and the spread of nuclear technology. The 
prevailing international atmosphere of detente and co-operation would perhaps 
help to overcome that obstacle of zero growth. 
78. In conclusion, his delegation was pleased to declare that Jordan was 
committed to paying its contribution to the Agency's Regular Budget and its 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXII)/857) 


79. The PRESIDENT said that, pursuant to Rule 79 of the Rules of 
Procedure, the elections would be conducted by secret ballot. The elective 
places on the Board which had to be filled were indicated in document 
GC(XXXII)/857. Paragraph 2 of that document set forth, for each of the 
geographical areas, the number of Member States to be elected so as to ensure 
that the Board would be constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the 
Statute. Paragraph 4 contained a list of 24 Member States which had been 
either designated by the Board of Governors at its June meetings for 
membership of the Board pursuant to Article VI.A.1 of the Statute, or elected 

GC(XXXII)/OR.309 
page 25 


by the General Conference in 1987 in accordance with Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute, and which would therefore be serving on the Board during the 
year 1988-89. 


80. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members to the Board of 
Governors. 
81. At the invitation of the President, a member of the ERyptian delegation 
and a member of the Hungarian delegation acted as tellers. 
82. The PRESIDENT, noting that the counting of votes would take some 
time, suggested that the meeting be adjourned. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
14 December 1988 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Thursday, 22 September 1988, at 3.15 p.m. 
President: Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 
Election of Members to the Board 
of Governors (resumed) 1-1 7 
General debate and annual report 


for 1987 (resumed) 18 122 
Statements by the delegates of: 
IANEC 18 20 
Philippines 21 30 
Syrian Arab Republic 31 42 
Ecuador 43 47 
Kenya 48 56 
Colombia 57 62 
Yugoslavia 63 71 
Namibia 72 85 
Peru 86 94 
Zambia 95 105 
Cyprus 106 109 
Uruguay 110 115 
Lebanon 116 122 


[*] GC(XXXII)/856. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXII)/INF/262/Rev.2. 
88-4837 (4235e/0448e) 



GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 2 


ELECTION OB' MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXII)/839 and 857) (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of 
the voting. 
2. The result of the election of three Members from the area of 
Latin America was as follows: 


Abstentions:
Valid votes:
Required majority:
Votes obtained: 


Argentina
Mexico
Peru


 13 
25 7 
43 


 88 


 86 


 83 


3. Having obtained the required majority, Argentina, Mexico and Peru were 
elected to the Board. 
4. The result of the election of two Members from the area of 
Western Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 1/7 
Required majority: 45 
Votes obtained: 


Denmark 89 
Netherlands 88 


5. Having obtained the required majority, Denmark and the Netherlands were 
elected to the Board. 
6. The result of the election of one Member from the area of 
Eastern Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 86 
Required majority: 44 
Votes obtained: 


German Democratic Republic 86 



GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 3 


7. Having obtained the required ma.iority, the German Democratic Republic 
was elected to the Board. 
8. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was 
as follows: 


Abstentions: 10 
Valid votes: 170 
Required ma.iority: 43 
Votes obtained: 


Cameroon 29 
Cote d'lvoire 49 
Ghana 48 
Tunisia 44 


9. Three countries had obtained the required majority, but, having 
received 49 and 48 votes respectively, Cote d'lvoire and Ghana were elected to 
the Board. 
10. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the 
Middle East and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 87 
Required ma.iority: 44 
Votes obtained: 


Pakistan 54 
Syrian Arab Republic 33 


11. Having obtained the required majority, Pakistan was elected to the 
Board. 
12. The result of the election of one Member from the area of South East 
Asia and the Pacific was as follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 87 
Required majority 44 
Votes obtained: 


Malaysia 87 



GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 4 


13. Having obtained the required majority, Malaysia was elected to the 
Board 
14. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Africa or of 
the Middle East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific (the 
so-called "floating seat") was as follows: 
Abstentions: 5 
Valid votes: 85 
Required majority: 43 
Votes obtained: 


Algeria: 84 
Cameroon 1 


15. Having obtained the required majority, Algeria was elected to the Board. 
16. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, 
recalled that in accordance with Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold 
office from the end of the current session of the General Conference until the 
end of the thirty-fourth regular session, i.e. for a period of two years. 
17. He thanked the delegations of Egypt and Hungary, which had provided the 
tellers, the tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistants. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1987 (GC(XXXIl)/835) (resumed) 


18. Mr. CONSTELNA (Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC)), 
after conveying the good wishes of the Chairman and the Executive Secretary 
of IANEC to the General Conference, said that, since 1959, IANEC had served as 
a forum where co-operation between national organizations responsible for 
nuclear affairs in Latin America and the Caribbean was discussed. Its 
activities consisted essentially in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy through courses, seminars and round-table discussions, for which 
purposes it drew upon the technical resources of the main centres in the 
region. The use of radioisotopes in agriculture, industry and hydrology had 
received special attention at centres in Argentina, Chile and Colombia. Also 
noteworthy were the results of an evaluation of the uranium-bearing potential 
of the Andes carried out as part of the regional evaluation programme for 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 5 


uraniferous regions by the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute, in collaboration 
with the nuclear energy commissions of Argentina, Colombia, Bolivia, Ecuador 
and Venezuela. In addition, the support given recently to the Brazilian 
Nuclear Information Centre had been a stimulus for scientific and 
technological information programmes in the nuclear field. 


19. After a brief period of retrenchment, the activities of IANKC were 
picking up again. At the 15th regular session of the Commission, which was to 
take place in Washington, D.C. in the United States from 11 to 13 October of 
the current year, it was hoped that solutions would be found to the serious 
financial crisis affecting its co-operation programme. The advisory committee 
to which he belonged had the job of determining the region's specific needs 
with regard to nuclear applications, notably in the following areas: 
agriculture, industry, public health, nuclear safety and radiation protection, 
dissemination of nuclear techniques and training in those techniques, and 
nuclear information. The advisory committee had drawn up technical reports 
identifying the main areas of interest with a view to setting up a ten-year 
action plan. In the light of the importance being attached to studies of the 
nuclear legislation and regulatory activities of countries in the region, 
IANEC's legal committee had resumed its activities. The committee had 
recently met in Santiago, Chile, and had approved resolutions recommending 
that TANEC urge its member States to adhere to the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material. It had also proposed that draft conventions 
on food irradiation and transboundary nuclear damage be drawn up. 
20. The brief description he had given of IANEC'S main activities should 
enable its work to be co-ordinated with that of the Agency, and co-operation 
between the two organizations to be intensified; that co-operation, which had 
been evident on many occasions in the past, had recently been seen in action 
in the joint organization - under the ARCAL programme - of activities such as 
the course on the improvement of cereals by mutation, which had taken place at 
La Molina University in Lima in November 1987. IANEC was firmly committed to 
collaborating closely with organizations active in the nuclear field, and in 
particular with the Agency, not simply because of the experience and wealth of 
knowledge that the latter had accumulated, but also because in Latin America 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 6 


and the Caribbean IANEC's experience could help the Agency provide 
Member States of both organizations with the direct services they required. 


21. Mr. NAVARRO (Philippines) said that his country, like the majority 
of those in the Third World, was trying to increase its economic and 
technological capabilities in order to achieve industrialization. The 
realization of that objective would take a large toll of the country's natural 
resources and would depend in large measure on the conditions imposed by the 
more developed nations from which credit and assistance would be sought. 
However, prosperity should not be pursued at the cost of a firm commitment to 
international peace and security. All countries should be ready to relinquish 
certain advantages temporarily in order that world civilization might continue 
to thrive in the coming century. 
22. As their contribution to world peace, the people of the Philippines had 
enshrined the nuclear-weapon- free principle in the Constitution and had given 
their Government a mandate to pursue an appropriate policy in that respect. 
The Government supported the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
region. It took an active part in Agency initiatives aimed at developing the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the world, and contributed to those 
efforts as far as it was able. 
23. The entry into force of the INF Treaty between the Superpowers was an 
important step towards easing international tension. It was perhaps not too 
early to suggest a further stage, namely the conversion of the fissile 
material in nuclear explosives into fuel which could be used in current and 
future nuclear power plants. Such a step would involve material sacrifices on 
the part of the richer countries, but it would assure the rest of the world 
that those countries were committed to avoiding a nuclear holocaust, free more 
resources to meet energy needs and slow down the rate at which fertile 
material reserves were being used up. 
24. The year 1988 marked the 20th anniversary of the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (NPT), through which the 134 signatory States demonstrated their 
commitment to international peace and security. That Treaty, among others, 
recognized the important role the Agency played in its implementation, namely 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 7 


that of ensuring that nuclear energy was used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes for the benefit of mankind. 


25. His Government attached great importance to the Agency's mandate to 
accelerate and increase the contribution of nuclear energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world, while paying particular attention to 
nuclear safety. That was the reason why it had proposed ten years previously 
that the Agency help set up a regional emergency assistance centre. Although 
the initiative had been received with little enthusiasm at the time, recent 
events had demonstrated the need for such a centre. 
26. His delegation was pleased to note that the Agency had the flexibility 
and capability to adapt to fast-changing situations and problems. The speed 
with which it had elaborated the Early Notification and Emergency Assistance 
Conventions was clear proof of that. The Philippines had decided to accede to 
those two Conventions, and preparations for the deposition of the instruments 
of accession were already under way. 
27. The conclusion and adoption of the Joint Protocol to harmonize the 
Paris and Vienna Conventions was another success of which the Agency could be 
proud. Although those Conventions did not cover all questions of liability 
which might come up in the event of a nuclear accident, they nevertheless 
constituted a major step towards extending protection to the victims of a 
nuclear accident. He hoped that a conference to review the Vienna Convention 
would be convened at an early date in order to ensure that its provisions 
remained in line with developments. 
28. A generation previously, the Philippines had hosted the 
India-Philippines-Agency (1PA) project, which had been the precursor of the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for Asia and the Far East. He noted 
also that the Regional Co-operative Arrangements in Latin America (ARCAL) were 
yielding pleasing results, and expressed the hope that similar arrangements 
would be concluded in other regions of the world. The Philippines continued 
to support the general objectives of the RCA programme and to participate in 
projects established within the region. However, the programme could be made 
more effective if networks were established among RCA Member States with the 
aim of overcoming the obstacles that stood in the way of the development of 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 8 


nuclear applications. The transfer of technologies which were relevant to the 
economic and industrial capabilities of Member States should be speeded up. 
Projects involving Member States where the resources available were not too 
disparate should be identified and given support by the Agency and donor 
countries. Greater assistance could also be given to national institutions 
whose participation in such projects would place a heavy burden on their 
facilities, expertise and financial resources. 


29. He welcomed the introduction of management plans for multi-year 
technical assistance projects, a scheme which would facilitate the evaluation, 
co-ordination and execution of those projects. However, the trend towards 
common activities on a regional basis should not - even assuming zero growth 
in the Agency's budget - create a situation where individual Member States' 
needs for technical assistance could not be accommodated. 
30. With regard to the proposed amendments to Article VI of the Statute, 
his delegation supported the principle of universality in international 
organizations. That principle should be reflected in the equitable 
representation of Member States on the Board of Governors. The Philippines 
had submitted a draft resolution whose objective was to grant official 
observer status at meetings of the Board to Member States which were not 
members of that body - in other words, it would permit them to take part in 
the work of the Board and would place at their disposal the physical 
facilities necessary for them to exercise that right more easily, without, 
however, giving them the right to vote. That proposal would reinforce the 
principle of the sovereign equality of States and the universality of the 
Agency, and would also help bring the latter into line with other 
United Nations organizations which automatically granted observer status to 
their member States. He considered the existing procedure in the Board far 
from satisfactory, a view which was shared by others. Given the noble 
objectives of the proposal, he was confident that the draft resolution 
submitted would be favourably received. 


31. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that each year the Agency's 
General Conference purported to offer Member States the opportunity to express 
their points of view and to put forward proposals on the various activities of 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 9 


the Agency, with a view to taking major decisions about the future development 
of those activities. However, the Conference was often limited to the 
repetition of ideas and opinions which had been expressed many times in the 
past, instead of attempting to reach a consensus on the items under 
consideration, some of which had been on the agenda for matiy years. 
Nevertheless, his delegation could not but note with great satisfaction that, 
since its creation, the Agency had been one of the most active, best 
organized, most serious and most productive of the international 
organizations. He wished to make a number of observations, some of them new, 
that might help the Agency remain a model for others. He hoped those 
suggestions would be favourably received, as they would benefit the Agency and 
all its Member States. 


32. Firstly, despite the efforts made and measures taken to improve the 
representation of developing countries within the Secretariat, progress 
remained slow. It was not the administration that was to blame, but rather 
recruitment methods, which sometimes led to a situation where appointment 
depended on the opinion of one person. 
33. Secondly, the Agency was spending abnormally high sums of money on 
printing services, and procedures for distributing publications were 
wasteful. A committee should be set up to examine ways of rationalizing the 
situation so as to reduce costs in respect of its purchase of paper, printing 
services, staff salaries and the mailing of documents. 
34. Thirdly, there had been a disproportionate reduction in the staff of 
sections dealing with areas such as raw materials. In view of the effective 
and constructive role they played, such sections should be allocated 
additional human resources. 
35. Fourthly, the budget for research contracts should be doubled, since 
those contracts were an effective means of promoting research in developing 
countries and created a propitious climate for the assimilation of the 
technology and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
36. Fifthly, the Agency should consider setting up regional maintenance and 
repair centres for electronic scientific instruments used in laboratories 
concerned with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. An initiative of that 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 10 


kind would allow many equipment purchases to be avoided. The companies which 
received the majority of orders from the Agency could help it to create such 
establishments. 


37. Finally, his country welcomed the conclusion of the INF Treaty, which 
was an important step towards world peace, and expressed the hope that 
understanding between the Soviet Union and the United States would improve 
further as world tension eased. Since the whole of humanity longed for peace, 
any act on the part of a State which accelerated the arms race, either on the 
earth or in space, ran counter to those aspirations. In contrast, any genuine 
attempt to eliminate nuclear weapons and the threat they represented was a 
service to mankind. 
38. The nuclear threat posed by Israel and South Africa, and the 
strengthening of the nuclear capabilities of those two countries, were cause 
for growing concern among the peoples of the Middle East and Africa. The 
racist and aggressive character of the Israeli and South African regimes was 
such that the threat extended well beyond the frontiers of the two regions in 
question and endangered world peace. Moreover, Israel, through its 
expansionist policies, was defying the unanimous wish of the international 
community as expressed in the resolutions of the Security Council and the 
United Nations General Assembly. The Fascist nature of Israel's behaviour which 
his country had long since been aware of - had recently been exposed to 
the world community, with the revelation by the international media of the 
inhuman methods of repression and torture that Israel was using in occupied 
Palestine. Such a regime constituted a danger for its immediate neighbours, 
for other States in the region, and for world peace, particularly if it was in 
possession of such a murderous weapon as nuclear armaments. 
39. It was to be hoped that Norway would continue to monitor the 
application of the agreement on the sale and use of the heavy water which it 
had provided to Israel, given that the latter was supposed to use the heavy 
water in question for peaceful purposes only and that there was serious room 
for doubt whether that obligation had been respected. He trusted that Norway 
would submit to the Agency detailed information on any new facts that came to 
light with regard to that questionable transaction with Israel. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 11 


40. Still on the subject of the threat posed by the military uses of 
nuclear energy, he pointed out that, as with a nuclear explosion, the improper 
disposal of radioactive waste could lead to radioactive contamination. The 
Syrian Atomic Energy Commission had, happily, detected a case of radioactive 
contamination in a shipment of 2000 tonnes of industrial waste on board a 
foreign ship which had anchored at the port of Tartus in the Syrian Arab 
Republic. In one part of that shipment, concentrations of radioactive 
elements had been detected that were one hundred times greater than normal. 
The Syrian Arab Republic had insisted that the shipment be returned 
immediately to the sender. The waste had been transferred to the "Zenobia", 
which had sailed back to the State in whose territory the exporting company 
operated. 
41. An international convention should be drawn up forbidding the improper 
dumping of toxic waste and its transport from one country to another without 
the consent of both States in question. There was a regrettable and 
increasing tendency for companies in some industrialized countries to dump 
their waste in developing countries which lacked the necessary resources and 
technical knowledge to dispose of it properly. Such actions constituted an 
injustice and a threat to the population of developing countries. 
42. In conclusion, his delegation commended the many activities of the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste. Thanks to its 
Director, who was well acquainted with the scientific problems encountered in 
developing countries, the Centre had succeeded in laying down constructive 
foundations and in opening its doors fully to scientists from those 
countries - so much so, in fact, that a visit to it was now virtually 
compulsory for researchers the world over. His country was highly 
appreciative of the financial aid given to the Centre by the Italian 
Government, and hoped that the Agency would allocate more funds to it so that 
it could extend and intensify its activities. 
43. Mr. CORREA PAREDES (Ecuador) said it was the wish of the people of 
Ecuador, who were committed to peace and progress, that energy resources, and 
nuclear energy in particular, should be used exclusively for peaceful ends and 
for development. It was worrying that the gap between industrialized nations 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 12 


and developing countries was widening while, parodoxically, nuclear armaments 
absorbed more and more resources and the human race was threatened by mass 
destruction. His delegation reaffirmed its support for all those 


international instruments which were aimed at promoting the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy, and in particular the Agency's safeguards system, which was an 
effective tool for monitoring the peaceful uses of the atom. 


44. His country endorsed the various programmes being implemented by the 
Agency to the benefit of all peoples of the world, and condemned the 
production of means of destruction that could harm health and render land 
unusable. It was also concerned by the transfer and dumping of nuclear waste 
in developing countries. The management and disposal of such waste was the 
exclusive responsibility of those who had produced it. 
45. Ecuador was playing an active part in the ARCAL programme which it saw 
as being an indispensable regional tool for technical co-operation in the 
nuclear safety area. The assistance that Ecuador had requested from the 
Agency was for projects that would further the economic and social development 
of its people. Special mention should be made of a project concerning 
isotope-aided soil studies aimed at improving the cultivation of the African 
oil palm, which had enabled yields to be increased without disturbing the 
ecological balance. A project on nuclear techniques in animal science would 
make it possible to diagnose livestock diseases at an early stage and to 
improve reproduction. Ecuador had achieved major progress in the area of 
industrial applications, while other applications of ionizing radiation had 
enabled crop yield to be increased. Finally, thanks to the joint efforts of 
several Ecuadorian organizations and the collaboration of the Agency, the 
infrastructure needed for the installation of a 6 MeV neutron accelerator and 
for iodine-131 fractionation had been established, as had that required by the 
Nuclear Medicine Service of the Ecuadorian Social Security Institute. 
46. For 1989 and 1990, Ecuador had submitted a number of specific technical 
assistance projects to the Agency: in the field of health, the aim was to 
perfect anti-cancer therapies; in agriculture, to control insects that 
attacked fruit destined for export; and in hydrology, to study or monitor 
water resources and hydroelectric reservoirs. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 13 


47. The principles and programmes which Ecuador would implement in the 
nuclear energy field would always be aimed at the achievement of peace, health 
and development in a climate of liberty and justice, to which noble ideals the 
Ecuadorian people were firmly committed. His Government therefore appealed 
once more to the international community, and especially to the developed 
countries, to give political support to the Agency's objectives, and to ensure 
that their co-operation led to the elimination of fears and tension and 
benefited mankind as a whole. 
48. Mr. OMWONY (Kenya) expressed great satisfaction at the Agency's 
achievements as presented in the Annual Report for 1987. He particularly 
commended the wide range of services provided to Member States through the 
technical assistance and co-operation programme, and especially the work done 
by radiation protection advisory teams (RAPATs) and technical teams in many 
developing countries. 
49. With the Agency's assistance, and pursuant to a law passed in 1982, 
Kenya had set up a country-wide radiation protection system through which it 
licensed all owners or operators of ionizing radiation sources as well as 
premises housing such sources. It had also introduced a mandatory film badge 
service as part of its thermoluminescence dosimetry system. The Agency's 
assistance in that regard had been valuable, as it had been in other African 
countries which had made use of it to set up radiation protection systems. 
50. During the past year Kenya had hosted two important Agency-sponsored 
activities, namely a radiation protection course for East Africa and a 
regional seminar for Africa. The seminar had shown that the majority of 
African countries did not yet have legislation governing radiation. His 
delegation called upon those Member States which had not yet done so to enact 
the necessary legislation, since the Agency's regulatory recommendations had 
little meaning if the legal machinery necessary to apply them was lacking. 
Kenya continued to appreciate the technical assistance offered by the Agency 
in agriculture, medicine, industry, animal sciences and non-destructive 
testing. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 14 


51. The peaceful utilization of nuclear energy for the benefit of the 
people would continue to have a place in Kenya's plans. His authorities 
intended to initiate a systematic and progressive upgrading of the country's 
capacity with respect to nuclear science and technology, and ultimately to 
explore the possibility of establishing a nuclear power programme, since Kenya 
possessed no fossil fuels and had very little potential for increased 
exploitation of other forms of energy. 
52. Kenya knew from experience that co-operation at the sub-regional, 
regional and international levels was vital to the successful development of a 
nuclear technology programme. He noted with interest the current trends and 
the success of regional co-operation arrangements, and welcomed the Agency's 
efforts to promote seminars in the African region. He also thanked those 
Member States which had helped his country by providing financial support 
through the Agency, thereby enabling it to obtain equipment, expert services 
and fellowships. 
53. The Kenyan Government took a very serious view of wilful pollution and 
contamination of the environment, and called for a concerted effort on the 
part of all Agency Member States to ensure that the companies responsible for 
such acts did not go unpunished. Kenya urged the Agency to prepare 
internationally agreed codes of practice on the disposal of nuclear wastes. 
It further requested the Agency to help developing countries establish 
adequate monitoring facilities for the purpose of carrying out effective 
surveillance. Such measures would contribute to the safe development of 
nuclear technology in those countries and would enhance public acceptance of 
nuclear development programmes. 
54. He wished to reiterate his country's clear position with regard to 
South Africa. Like the majority of Member States, Kenya abhorred the system 
of apartheid imposed by the minority white Government of South Africa. It 
also abhorred the apparent respectability which those who lent their support 
to the regime conferred on that system. Kenya therefore supported the 
resolution before the General Conference, and called for the unconditional 
release of Nelson Mandela and all political detainees in South Africa and the 
subsequent holding of general elections on the basis of universal suffrage. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 15 


Delegates would recall that the South African Government had persistently 


ignored their appeals for co-operation on various issues. He urged all 
Member States to impose economic sanctions against the South African regime, 
that being the only way to demonstrate peacefully against that country's 
system of government. 


55. Time and again, both the United Nations General Assembly and the Agency 
had adopted resolutions urging the South African regime to accede to NPT and 
to submit its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards - but with no success. 
That regime now appeared to be attempting to buy time, and his delegation felt 
that the General Conference should adopt the Board's recommendation that 
South Africa be suspended from the exercise of the privileges and rights of 
membership. Moreover, his delegation was deeply concerned at the contempt 
with which South Africa had continued to treat the views of the Agency and the 
world community since the adoption of a similar resolution the previous year. 
His Government doubted whether South Africa would respond to document 
GC(XXXII)/855, submitted by the Governments of the United States, the 
United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. The Agency's Member States might have to 
decide the following year on how to deal with one Member State which 
continually violated the Agency's directives and resolutions. 
56. Total disarmament was the corner-stone of world peace. The recent 
talks between the United States and the Soviet Union and the subsequent 
agreement on the reduction of their intermediate nuclear forces were of 
particular interest. The key to disarmament was mutual respect, based on 
mutual trust among all States. If that basic principle could be implemented, 
the world would be able to live in peace and to concentrate on the economic 
and social development of its peoples. 
57. Mr. De La MORA (Colombia) said that, at meetings held in parallel 
with the General Conference, specialists from Member States were considering 
the question of nuclear safety and radiation protection and their 
representatives were examining current and planned technical co-operation 
activities at the regional and national levels. With regard to those two 
aspects of the Agency's work, the Group of 77 had already pointed out that the 
budget laid more emphasis on nuclear safety than on promotional activities, 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 16 


and had made known its position in relation to a possible redistribution of 
the scarce resources available. 


58. The United Nations General Assembly had expressed its views on the 
problems of the environment and development the previous February. The Board 
of Governors had subsequently proposed that the General Conference authorize 
the inclusion in the Agency's programme of activities that would contribute to 
sustainable development. The turn taken by the current debate on the Agency's 
functions raised the question whether its promotional activities should not be 
intensified once the experts had determined the conditions under which nuclear 
energy could be exploited without significant risk. In the present situation, 
the Agency must also give urgent attention to the question of how to meet 
existing needs while avoiding the irreversible destruction of non-renewable 
natural resources, which should be seen as the heritage of future 
generations. His delegation commended the Director General's objective 
explanation of that highly complex situation in his opening statement. 
59. The Agency provided assistance to Colombia in the application of 
nuclear techniques. However, since that assistance fell far short of what the 
country needed and what it expected from the Agency, Colombia participated 
directly in the ARCAL programme and gave it its continuous support. His 
Government intended to encourage more active regional co-operation in the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. He wished in that connection to 
mention the financial assistance provided by the Federal Republic of Germany, 
the United States, Canada, Argentina, the European Economic Community and 
others, which served to boost the resources allocated by the Agency to the 
ARCAL programme. 
60. As to the assistance it received directly from the Agency, Colombia was 
concerned at the fact that certain projects that had traditionally been 
approved by the Agency were now being affected by budgetary cuts. It refused 
to entertain the idea that technical assistance should be increased or reduced 
in proportion to States' voluntary contributions. He wished to express his 
country's gratitude to the United States for supporting a project on the 
upgrading of a research reactor and to the United Kingdom for supporting a 
project on radiation protection. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 17 


61. Colombia operated a small research reactor and wished to receive 
assistance from the Agency in modernizing it and improving its safety. 
Without such assistance, it would be obliged to shut down the reactor, thereby 
nullifying the results obtained thus far and necessitating an increase in 
imported radioactive materials for nuclear applications, particularly in the 
fields of health and agriculture. 
62. Finally, Colombia had pledged a contribution of US $49 400 for 1989 to 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF), thereby reaffirming its 
confidence in the activities financed by the Agency through that Fund. His 
Government had also set in motion the necessary legal and administrative 
procedures for accession to the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material and to the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency 
Assistance. 
63. Mr. J0VAN0VIC (Yugoslavia) said he was confident that the General 
Conference would complete all its tasks successfully and would contribute to 
the further advancement of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. The Agency had an important role to play in accelerating 
socio-economic development, particularly in developing countries. 
64. His delegation was satisfied with the Annual Report for 1987, which 
showed that particular attention had been given to areas such as safeguards, 
nuclear safety and radiation protection, nuclear power and radioactive waste 
management. The strong emphasis placed on waste management was very welcome, 
since that was an issue of crucial importance for the nuclear power industry. 
The considerable efforts made to strengthen nuclear safety and radiation 
protection and the significant results achieved also deserved praise. In that 
connection, his Government attached great importance to the implementation of 
the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency Assistance. It had 
already signed the former and was considering signing the latter. 
65. In 1987, co-operation between Yugoslavia and the Agency had been very 
extensive and had produced some tangible results. Numerous seminars had been 
held and various projects had been executed, mainly under the technical 
assistance programme. Substantial resources had been made available to 
complete projects started in previous years. That gave Yugoslavia reason to 

GC(XXX1I)/OR.310 
page 18 


hope that there were real possibilities for broadening its co-operation with 
the Agency. He wished to announce in that connection that his country had 
already pledged its full share of the target set for the TACF. 


66. As was well known, developing countries were making every effort to 
accelerate their economic development and to co-operate with others on an 
equitable basis, particularly in the field of nuclear power and nuclear 
applications. However, those efforts were not always fully understood, even 
within the Agency. The situation within the Committee on Assurances of 
Supply (CAS) was a prime example of that. It was precisely because of the 
lack of truly equitable co-operation on a global scale that developing 
countries were unable to benefit from scientific and technical progress in the 
nuclear field and that the effect of the technical assistance provided was 
perhaps not as great as expected. Another contributing factor might be the 
inadequacy of infrastructures in developing countries. The Agency and other 
United Nations bodies should help those countries to overcome their 
difficulties and to speed up their development, including development in the 
nuclear field. 
67. The suppliers of nuclear material should ensure a greater and freer 
transfer of technology, since that would certainly increase the volume of 
nuclear applications in developing countries. Yugoslavia had not yet taken a 
decision regarding the construction of new nuclear power plants, as the output 
of existing plants and of those under construction would meet the country's 
electricity requirements for some time. It had not entirely rejected the 
nuclear option, but public opinion within the country was very sensitive to 
the imposition of conditions and restrictions, particularly where the transfer 
of technology was concerned. That was one of the main factors hindering the 
expansion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing countries. 
68. His delegation supported the Agency's programme and budget for 1989 
and 1990 contained in document GC(XXXII)/837. The document was realistic and 
in line with the approved priorities, and the necessary balance had been 
struck between available resources and planned activities. The Agency's 
budget had shown zero real growth for several years. Some increase in real 
terms would certainly be welcome from the point of view of facilitating the 
implementation of programme activities, but other United Nations organizations 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 19 


also applied the zero-growth principle. His delegation was convinced that the 
Secretariat could make additional savings by further rationalizing its 
activities. Notwithstanding those remarks, it felt that the financial outlook 
was not too bleak. 


69. Yugoslavia's position on disarmament was well known. As was 
demonstrated by its acceptance of NPT, it attached great importance to the 
continuation of the nuclear disarmament process between the Superpowers. The 
current climate of growing confidence would have a positive influence on the 
transfer of peaceful nuclear technology. 
70. With regard to the report of the World Commission on Environment and 
Development, his delegation felt that, instead of focusing on which form of 
energy was the cleanest, it would be more appropriate to ensure the safe 
operation of nuclear power plants: when operated safely, nuclear power plants 
had a minimal impact on the environment, but they could have disastrous 
consequences in the case of an accident. It was therefore essential to 
provide freer access to the latest technical developments in that area and to 
strengthen the Agency's role in that regard. The selection of energy options 
must remain the sovereign decision of each Member State. 
71. In his opening statement, the Director General had given a 
comprehensive description of the Agency's current activities and of the 
problems which the use of nuclear energy posed for modern society. His 
delegation fully shared the Director General's view that the new basic safety 
principles for nuclear power plants were extremely important. 
72. Mr. 0LUM0K0 (United Nations Council for Namibia) recalled that, 
although the General Assembly had first considered the question of Namibia 
more than 40 years previously and although it was now almost 22 years since 
the United Nations had terminated South Africa's mandate over that territory, 
Namibia remained a nation-in-waiting. Men and women continued, both in 
Namibia and in South Africa, to sacrifice their lives in the struggle for 
freedom and dignity. 
73. For its part, the United Nations Council for Namibia had spared no 
effort to ensure that the question of Namibia remained in the forefront of 
international concern and would continue to do so. It would intensify its 

GC(XXXII)/0R.310 
page 20 


campaign to mobilize international public opinion in support of selfdetermination 
and independence of a united Namibia, and would redouble its 
efforts to denounce the duplicity and intransigence of the Pretoria regime and 
its systematic flouting of United Nations resolutions and decisions on 
Namibia, as well as the collaboration of those western States which continued 
to defend that regime. Those efforts were, of course, only supplementary to 
those of the Namibian people themselves, who, under the leadership of the 
South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) and its President, were waging 
a heroic and determined struggle for their liberation. 


74. In his message to a formal meeting held four weeks previously to mark 
the 15th anniversary of the proclamation of Namibia Day, the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations had - inter alia - again urged all concerned to make a 
concerted effort to satisfy the aspirations of the Namibian people and to 
enable the United Nations to proceed with the implementation of Security 
Council resolution 435 (1978). His delegation considered that the continued 
illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa constituted an act of 
aggression, as defined in General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 
14 December 1974. Over the years there had been many decisions and 
developments relating to Namibia within the United Nations, and those bore 
witness to the intransigence of the South African regime and to its contempt 
for the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people. 
75. The United Nations Council for Namibia was gravely concerned at the 
systematic plundering of Namibia's natural resources, and particularly of its 
uranium deposits, to which South Africa, together with certain western and 
other economic interests, were helping themselves in violation of the 
United Nations Charter, the relevant General Assembly and Security Council 
resolutions, and Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of 
Namibia, and in disregard of the advisory opinion of the International Court 
of Justice of 21 June 1971. 
76. It was common knowledge that Namibia possessed approximately 5% of the 
world's exploitable uranium reserves and that the only active uranium mine in 
Namibia was operated by Rossing Uranium Limited, the largest producer of 
uranium in the world. South Africa's uranium resources contributed in large 

GC(XXX11)/OR.310 
page 21 


measure to its nuclear capability; the fact that it also controlled Namibia's 
uranium resources increased its total share of the world market and, 


consequently, its ability to influence that market. Apart from enabling it to 
earn additional foreign currency, South Africa's position as a major producer 
of uranium - a substantial part of which was mined in Namibia - had given it a 
useful lever for securing extensive support from western countries for its own 
nuclear programme. It was therefore not surprising that South Africa was 


linking its possible accession to NPT to the future of the uranium which it 
was illegally exploiting. 


77. The illegal exploitation of Namibia's uranium represented a serious 
health hazard for the Namibian people. The lack of surveillance measures and 
standards to protect workers and local inhabitants against radioactive 
contamination from the Rossing mine made the uranium mining, processing and 
transport operations highly dangerous for those people. The ore tailings 
contained dust particles which remained highly toxic for many years and, 
unless special and very expensive precautions were taken, those tailings were 
slowly dispersed by wind and rain over a wide area. Thus, the plundering of 
Namibia's uranium by Rossing could pose a serious threat to the health and 
environment of several generations of Namibians. 
78. The General Assembly had declared that all activities of foreign 
economic interests in Namibia were illegal under international law and had 
called upon the United Nations Council for Namibia, in accordance with the 
relevant provisions of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural 
Resources of Namibia, to continue to take the necessary steps to compile 
statistical information on the wealth illegally extracted from Namibia, with a 
view to assessing the extent of the compensation that those interests would 
have to pay to Namibia after it had gained independence. 
79. It had also called upon the governments of all States, and especially 
those whose corporations were involved in the mining and processing of 
Namibian uranium, to take all appropriate measures to comply with the 
United Nations resolutions and decisions and with Decree No. 1: those 
measures included requiring negative certificates of origin and prohibiting 
State-owned and other corporations, together with their subsidiaries, from 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 22 


undertaking any kind of transaction involving Namibian uranium and from 
engaging in uranium prospecting activities in Namibia. 


80. Furthermore, as part of its efforts to give effect to Decree No. 1, the 
General Assembly had authorized the United Nations Council for Namibia to 
initiate legal proceedings in national courts against corporations or 
individuals involved in the exploitation, transport, processing or purchase of 
Namibian natural resources, and had urged it to consider the promulgation of 
additional legislation aimed at protecting the interests of the Namibian 
people and at ensuring the effective implementation of such legislation. 
81. The Special Committee on Decolonization had given further consideration 
to the question of Namibia at its meetings in August 1988 and had appealed to 
the Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Netherlands and the 
United Kingdom, which operated the URENCO uranium enrichment plant, 
specifically to exclude Namibian uranium from the field of application of the 
Treaty of Almeno, which governed the activities of URENCO. The Special 
Committee had also expressed its deep concern over reports that a nuclear 
waste repository was being planned in the Namib Desert, on the west coast of 
Namibia, and had demanded that no such plans, which would endanger the health 
and well-being of the Namibian people and of their neighbours, be implemented. 
82. The continued bondage of the Namibian people was a challenge both to 
the credibility and effectiveness of the United Nations, which had been 
directly responsible for the territory for 22 years, and to the specialized 
agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including 
the Agency. A few weeks previously, the Special Committee had adopted a 
resolution requesting all specialized agencies and other organizations and 
bodies of the United Nations system, in accordance with the relevant 
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, to take all necessary 
measures to withhold from the racist regime of South Africa any form of 
co-operation and assistance in the financial, economic, technical and other 
fields and to discontinue all support to that regime until the people of 
Namibia had exercised fully their inalienable right to self-determination, 
freedom and national independence in a united Namibia, and until the inhuman 
system of apartheid had been totally eradicated. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.310 
page 23 


83. In view of the persistent refusal by the racist regime of South Africa 
to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations on the 
question of Namibia, and particularly with Security Council resolutions 385 
(1976) and 435 (1978), the General Assembly had repeatedly urged the Security 
Council to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa, 
as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter. In that connection, he 
wished to recall operative paragraph 1 of resolution GC(XXXI)/RES/485 
of 24 September 1987 in which the General Conference resolved "to consider and 
take a decision on the recommendation of the Board of Governors contained in 
its report GC(XXXI)/807 to suspend South Africa from the exercise of the 
privileges and rights of membership in accordance with Article XIX.B of the 
Statute, at the thirty-second regular session of the General Conference". To 
date, South Africa had refused to submit ail its nuclear facilities to Agency 
safeguards or to act in accordance with the aims and principles of the 
United Nations Charter. When international agreements became distorted, the 
options left open to the international community became perilously few. When 
the trust and goodwill generated by political foresight and maturity were 
sacrificed to narrow domestic ends, those options diminished still further. 
He therefore called upon the General Conference to implement the Board's 
recommendation that South Africa be suspended from the exercise of its 
privileges and rights of membership of the Agency. 
84. The United Nations Council for Namibia wished to thank the Agency and 
those of its Members which had helped the Council to discharge its 
responsibilities, and called upon them to take all necessary measures to 
implement the relevant General Assembly resolutions, which offered a solid 
basis for increased co-operation between the Agency and the Namibian people. 
The Agency had a very important role to play in providing technical assistance 
before and after Namibia gained independence, as well as during the transition 
period. In particular, the Agency should make a greater contribution to 
training, by implementing a consolidated programme of such assistance 
specifically designed to meet the needs of the Namibian people. The United 
Nations Council for Namibia commended the Agency on the efforts it had 
deployed through the Council's Nationhood Programme, and hoped that assistance 
would be substantially increased in order to meet the growing needs of the 

GC(XXXIl)/OR.310 
page 24 


Namibian people. In so doing, the Agency would be acting in full accordance 
with the objective of accelerating and enlarging the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world set forth in 
Article II of its Statute. 


85. He thanked the Director General for his efforts over the previous few 
years to increase the representation of developing countries within the 
Secretariat. The United Nations Council for Namibia would like to see 
Namibians being recruited by the Agency and would in due course put forward 
the names of suitably qualified candidates. Finally, he asked the Agency, in 
the light of the request made by the General Assembly to all the specialized 
agencies, to continue to grant a waiver of assessment to Namibia during the 
period in which it was represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia. 
86. Mr. SAN MARTIN CARP (Peru) said that nuclear energy, which had 
initially been associated with destruction and war, had taken on a new 
dimension worthy of contemporary scientific and technological civilization, 
thanks to the Agency, its system of safeguards and its commitment to using the 
atom for development. 
87. His country believed that peace was synonymous with development and 
that security, in the real meaning of the word, was inconceivable without 
comprehensive, self-sustaining development ensuring decent standards of 
living. Nuclear energy was essential for development and a modern and 
effective instrument with which to fight disease, increase food production, 
improve crops and generally improve the living conditions of large groups of 
the population which still lacked basic necessities. 
88. For the same reasons, his country had a clear policy of support for 
disarmament and had warmly welcomed the fact that President Reagan and 
General Secretary Gorbachev had exchanged instruments of ratification of the 
INF Treaty, which was the first treaty actually to reduce the arsenals of the 
United States and the Soviet Union and not just limit them. 
89. For his country, 1988 was of particular importance since it marked the 
startup of its first research reactor at the new Huarangal Nuclear Centre. 
The effort put into constructing that Centre demonstrated his country's 
confidence in nuclear energy as a means of stimulating development. The 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 25 


support received from the Agency had enabled Peru to increase its general 
level of nuclear competence and, in particular, its ability to exploit the new 
nuclear Centre. It had also benefited from Argentinian assistance in 
establishing the Centre. 


90. In 1988, major discussions had taken place at the national level on the 
country's economy and its energy resources in the years to come. It had 
emerged from those discussions that a detailed assessment of the feasibility 
of nuclear power in Peru was needed. Moreover, the urgent need to improve 
food production, which had become acute during the past year owing to 
unfavourable economic factors, made it necessary to expand nuclear 
applications in agriculture and, specifically, to improve the yield of cereals 
and to bring new areas under cultivation using ground-water. His country 
hoped to receive advice and assistance from the Agency for that purpose. 
91. Peru was planning to devote a major proportion of the activities of the 
new Huarangal Nuclear Centre to the training of nuclear scientists and 
technicians from the region and hoped in that connection to be able to count 
on the experience and the assistance which more developed countries could make 
available to it through the Agency. Also on the subject of training, his 
country wished to express its gratitude to the Agency for the work the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste was doing not only in 
theoretical physics but also in the physical sciences in general. That work 
had a major impact on the scientific development of Latin America. 
92. At the regional level, his delegation recognized the importance of the 
ARCAL programme for intraregional co-operation as well as its major influence 
on Peru's nuclear development. At the global level, the expansion of nuclear 
energy was only possible if the public were convinced of the effectiveness of 
efforts to prevent the non-peaceful utilization of nuclear energy and to avoid 
nuclear accidents, or at least limit their consequences. 
93. The Agency's reaction to the unfortunate accidents which had occurred 
in recent years had been rapid and effective. As had been stated on previous 
occasions, one of the best ways of ensuring safety was to gather collective 
experience and to incorporate it effectively into existing regulations. In 
that context, the Director General's comment that the world was becoming more 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 26 


aware of the relative consequences of using different sources of energy was 
very encouraging. 


94. In conclusion, he commended the Secretariat on the smooth running of 
the Agency and thanked those countries which had demonstrated their confidence 
in Peru by electing it to the Board of Governors. 
95. Mr. SILANGWA (Zambia) reaffirmed his country's firm commitment to 
the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, which could and should play an 
important role in improving the quality of life. As a young developing 
country, Zambia was gradually setting up the necessary technological 
infrastructure for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and was indebted to the 
Agency for the assistance it had provided in the application of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, health, natural resources and industry. 
96. Although Zambia itself did not have any nuclear power plants, his 
Government had welcomed the Nuclear Safety Review for 1987 and had noted with 
satisfaction the steps taken by the Agency to implement the Conventions on 
Early Notification and on Emergency Assistance. It was looking forward to the 
Agency's emergency response system becoming fully operational and to the 
publication of the emergency notification and assistance technical operations 
manual. His Government had taken steps to accede to both Conventions. 
97. His delegation welcomed the statement that nuclear materials under 
Agency safeguards in 1987 had remained in peaceful nuclear activities or had 
been otherwise adequately accounted for, and paid tribute to the Director 
General and his staff for their untiring efforts in that area. 
98. The sharing of information was an important aspect of nuclear safety, 
and his delegation appreciated the Agency's role in that sphere. His country 
would continue to give priority to the strengthening of its radiation safety 
and protection capability and to participate in the Agency's programmes and 
activities in that area. 
99. His Government was grateful to the Agency for fellowships which had 
provided it with trained radiation protection specialists and continued to 
attach great importance to the technical assistance and co-operation 
programme. The previous year Zambia had, with the help of the Agency, 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 2 7 


finished setting up a national nuclear analytical laboratory and a multipurpose 
Co irradiation facility, which augured well for the future of 
peaceful nuclear applications in that country. As had been stressed by the 
President of Zambia when opening the laboratory, the Agency's assistance would 
continue to be needed in the future. A programme aimed at achieving full 
utilization of those facilities was already under way. 


100. Although the Board had allocated increased resources to technical 
assistance and co-operation through the system of indicative planning figures, 
that mechanism remained unpredictable; his Government was therefore 
disappointed that the Board had once again failed to recommend a permanent 
solution that would satisfy resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388. For that reason, his 
delegation urged the Board to recommend a system of firm commitments to the 
General Conference as soon as possible. For its part, his Government pledged 
to pay its share of the target set by the Board for the TACF for 1989. 
101. With regard to the need to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, he 
wished to point out that the application of the statutory principle of 
equitable geographical representation to the Middle East and South Asia and to 
Africa remained as valid an objective now as it had been ten years 
previously. His delegation was again disappointed to see that the Board had 
failed to find a solution to that problem. However, it wished to reiterate 
its view that the question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 should be kept 
separate from discussions on the revision of Article VI as a whole. 
102. His Government was deeply concerned about the dumping of toxic chemical 
wastes in developing countries. The behaviour of certain multinational 
companies in industrialized countries in that connection was alarming and 
posed a threat to the environment. The,Organization of African Unity (OAU) 
had rightly referred to those acts as a crime against Africa. The Agency had 
a role to play in that area, particularly where radioactive wastes were 
concerned, and should help developing countries to establish or strengthen 
infrastructures and mechanisms to monitor, manage and control the movement and 
disposal of nuclear waste. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 28 


103. Since the previous session of the General Conference, the situation in 
southern Africa had remained very volatile. The Pretoria regime continued to 
maintain a highly militarized political climate. The state of emergency 
remained in force in South Africa. Hundreds of black people were being 
murdered by the military forces of the Pretoria regime and the ban on popular 
organizations opposed to the inhuman apartheid regime had not been lifted. 
Furthermore, the exploitation and sale of Namibia's uranium and other 
resources by the apartheid regime was continuing, in complete disregard of the 
demands of the United Nations General Assembly and the Agency's General 
Conference. 
104. His delegation had warned the previous year that the Pretoria regime 
was, as usual, making false promises to the international community regarding 
the action it intended to take to respond positively to the Board's resolution 
of 12 June 1987. It came as no surprise, therefore, that the situation had 
not changed. The Zambian authorities were convinced that the Pretoria regime 
would not voluntarily abandon its policy of apartheid or its military 
ambitions in southern Africa. It was thus essential - before it was too 
late - to exert pressure on the Pretoria regime to submit all its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. 
105. In view of Pretoria's military ambitions and its existing nuclearweapon 
capability, his delegation was in no doubt that, even if South Africa 
became a party to NPT, that racist regime would continue to strengthen its 
nuclear-weapon capability if certain major nuclear facilities were not placed 
under Agency safeguards; the situation in southern Africa therefore required 
rapid international intervention in the form of mandatory, comprehensive 
sanctions against the racist regime and the suspension of South Africa from 
the Agency through the adoption of the recommendation made by the Board 
on 12 June 1987. Rather than wait until international opinion was again 
betrayed or disregarded, all delegations should support the resolution 
submitted by the African Group, which demonstrated that Group's desire to find 
a solution to the problems posed by the Pretoria regime in the interests of 
international peace and security. 



GC(XXXL1)/OR.310 
page 29 


106. Mr. PAPADEMAS (Cyprus) reaffirmed his country's commitment to the 
principles of the Agency, to which the Government and people of Cyprus would 
continue to give their full support. It was worth noting in that connection 
that the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency Assistance had 
been submitted to the Cypriot Parliament for approval and it was likely that 
they would be signed and ratified by the Government in the near future. 
107. Small countries which did not have nuclear reactors limited their 
nuclear activities mainly to medicine and agriculture and were grateful for 
the technical assistance they received from the Agency. His country hoped to 
be able to co-operate actively with the Agency in the near future by making 
available qualified scientists. 
108. In a world that had become safer with the recent reduction in nuclear 
weapons, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be increasing and the 
Agency's role expanding as a result. However, nuclear energy posed a number 
of worrying problems, including the disposal of wastes which were a potential 
threat to human health. His delegation condemned all dumping or criminal 
handling of toxic wastes - and particularly radioactive wastes - which 
contravened internationally agreed regulations, and commended the efforts made 
by OAU countries in that connection. The problem was a worldwide one, and his 
country would support all efforts to inform the public of the dangers of the 
unlawful dumping of wastes, to control and regulate such practices and, 
provided the means to do so could be established, to suppress and punish such 
criminal acts. 
109. With regard to the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat, his delegation 
could support the draft resolution submitted by Egypt and hoped that the 
Director General would continue his efforts to recruit staff from Third World 
countries, particularly those which already had a skilled scientific community 
ready to offer its services. 
110. Mr. CIBILS (Uruguay) commended those responsible for the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities on the manner in which they were carrying 
out their work. It was somewhat worrying, however, that the Agency was 
favouring certain sectors at the expense of promotional activities, and 
especially technical assistance to less advanced countries. His delegation 

GC(XXX11)/OR.310 
page 30 


did not doubt the importance of safeguards and shared the concerns of all 
those who rightly wished to maintain full control over the use of nuclear 
fuel. However, like other delegations it felt that the safeguards system 
should be re-examined with a view to effecting economies and improving 
efficiency. 


111. His delegation welcomed the increased attention given by the Agency to 
the strengthening of radiation protection and nuclear safety in Member States, 
and in particular its efforts to make information available on that subject to 
all countries and at all levels. His country had taken the necessary steps to 
update its radiation protection regulations and would soon have an up-to-date 
national inventory of ionizing radiation sources. 
112. On the question of measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
the field of nuclear safety and radiation protection, his delegation welcomed 
the preparation of the Joint Protocol linking the Paris and Vienna Conventions, 
which it hoped would strengthen the existing international regime concerning 
liability for nuclear damage. 
113. His Government had recently embarked on the construction of a nuclear 
technology development centre, which, after a modest beginning, would become 
the main vehicle for the promotion of the medical, industrial, agricultural, 
veterinary and other applications of nuclear techniques and enable the 
country's people - its most valuable resource - to press forward with the 
nation's development. Uruguay's efforts would be in vain without the support 
of the Agency and friendly countries, particularly Argentina. His country had 
high hopes for its nuclear technology development centre, which should 
stimulate a new influx of technical assistance resources for national 
development projects in the nuclear field. 
114. His country was a strong supporter of the ARCAL programme, which was 
very important not only because it enabled Latin American countries to benefit 
from effective technical co-operation, but - more importantly - because it 
demonstrated the ability of those nations to work together. Thanks were due 
to those countries whose extrabudgetary contributions made possible the 
implementation of many projects and financed Agency programmes for the 
promotion of nuclear technology in Uruguay. 

GC(XXX11)/0R.310 
page 31 


115. His country had concluded a nuclear co-operation agreement with Canada, 
which constituted a step forward in the strengthening of its relations with 
other nations. Although Uruguay was a small country, its level of nuclear 
development was relatively high, as evidenced by the fact that one of its 
nuclear medicine programmes was among the most advanced in the developing 
world. Nuclear technology was not limited to electricity production, but 
extended to many scientific and technical fields. All developing countries 
should continue their efforts to achieve full nuclear development through 
frank and open co-operation. 
116. Mr. MAHMASSANI (Lebanon) said that his country strongly supported 
the Agency and continued to believe that its objectives and principles were 
essential to the creation of a better, safer world. The results achieved by 
the Agency as described in the Annual Report for 198 7 were extremely 
satisfactory. 
117. The safeguards system was essential for the development of nuclear 
power, which was an indispensable source of energy. The effectiveness of 
safeguards depended largely on the co-operation of the world community. The 
Safeguards Implementation Report testified to the Agency's success in that 
area, but it seemed that the Director General's efforts to adopt new 
safeguards approaches to cope with the increase in activities had run up 
against financial obstacles. Steps should therefore be taken to remove those 
obstacles. 
118. His country endorsed both the Agency's technical co-operation programme 
and its safety activities. In view of the importance of applications in 
health, industry and food for developing countries in particular, that 
programme ought to be expanded. 
119. There was an urgent need to establish a nuclear liability regime which 
would ensure compensation for any nuclear damage caused by any nuclear reactor 
anywhere in the world. Without such a regime, nuclear power would always be 
vulnerable and open to criticism. 
120. Lebanon was especially concerned by the dumping of radioactive waste in 
developing countries, since it had itself recently been a victim of such 
practices. It condemned the multinational corporations and companies which 

GC(XXXII)/OR.310 
page 32 


dumped such waste in developing countries and demanded an immediate halt to 
such illegal activities. All parties concerned should ensure that 
transactions involving nuclear waste were subject to strict licensing 
requirements. 


121. His delegation deeply regretted Israel's refusal to comply with General 
Conference resolution GC(XXXl)/RES/470 calling on it to submit all its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. The Israeli nuclear capability and threat 
constituted a serious danger for the Middle East and his country was alarmed 
by the information on Israel's possession of nuclear weapons. The report by 
the United Nations Secretary-General referred to in document GC(XXXlI)/849 
stated that, although the United Nations did not have conclusive proof that 
Israel possessed nuclear weapons, circumstantial evidence seemed to indicate 
that Israel had developed the necessary technology and had the means to 
manufacture such weapons if it so decided. Furthermore, Israel refused to 
accede to NPT and to renounce the possession of nuclear weapons. It was 
therefore essential for Israel's nuclear facilities to be placed under Agency 
safeguards. 
122. It was the responsibility of all to pass on to future generations a 
safe environment in a peaceful world free from the fear of contamination. It 
was the Agency's role to help achieve that goal, and his delegation called on 
others to support and respect the Agency and to enhance its credibility. 
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.311 
10 November 1988 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Friday, 23 September 1988, at 10.20 a.m. 
President: Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


Oral report of the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole on the 
following items: 1-13 
The Agency's accounts for 1987 14 
Measures to strengthen 
international co-operation in 
nuclear safety and radiological 
protection 15 - 19 
Status and implementation of 
conventions for which the Agency 
is depositary 20 
(a) Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear 
Material 

[*] GC(XXXII)/856. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIl)INF/262/Rev.2. 
88-4842 (3917e/454e) 



GC(XXXII)/OR.311 
page 2 


Item of the 
agenda* 


7 


Paragraphs 


(b) 
Convention on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident 
(c) 
Convention on Assistance 
in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological 
Emergency 
(d) 
Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear 
Damage 
The Agency's contribution to 
sustainable development 21 


The Agency's programme and budget 
for 1989 and 1990 22 


Scale of assessment of Members' 
contributions for 1989 23 


The financing of technical 
assistance 24 - 26 


Staffing of the Agency's 
Secretariat 27 


Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of 
the Statute 28 


Revision of Article VI of the 
Statute as a whole 29 


Representation of IAEA 
Member States not members of 
the Board at meetings of the 
Board as observers 30 - 53 


Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat 54 - 97 



GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 3 


ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


1. Mr. LAVlSA (Philippines), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the report by the Committee on items 9 to 19 of the agenda. 
2. Under item 9, "The Agency's accounts for 1987", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution appearing 
on page III of document GC(XXXII)/836. 
3. Under item 10, "Measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
nuclear safety and radiological protection", the Committee recommended that 
the General Conference adopt the draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/867 
concerning the revised NUSS Codes, the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXlI)/868 entitled "Dumping of nuclear wastes", and the draft resolution 
in document GC(XXXII)/869 entitled "Liability for nuclear damage". 
A. In addition, the Committee of the Whole recommended that the General 
Conference request the Director General to place on the provisional agenda for 
its following regular session an item entitled "Prohibition of all armed 
attacks against nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes whether 
under construction or in operation", with a view to its being considered 
in 1989 in conjunction with the item entitled "Measures to strengthen 
international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological protection". 
5. Under item 11, "Status and implementation of conventions for which the 
Agency is depositary", the Committee recommended that the General Conference 
adopt the draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/864 relating to the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXII)/865 relating to the Convention on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the 
Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. 
6. Under item 12, "The Agency's contribution to sustainable development", 
the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXII)/863. 
7. Under item 13, "The Agency's programme and budget for 1989 and 1990", 
the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt draft 
resolutions A, B and C set forth in Annex III to Part I of 
document GC(XXXII)/837. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 4 


8. Under item 14, "Scale of assessment of Members' contributions 
for 1989", the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the 
draft resolution set forth in document GC(XXXII)/843. 
9. Under item 15, "The financing of technical assistance", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXII)/859. It further recommended that the General Conference request the 
Director General to arrange for the summary records of the Committee's 
discussion under that item to be transmitted to the Board of Governors. 
10. Under item 16, "Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution set out in 
document GC(XXXII)/860. 
11. Under item 17, "Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute", the 
Committee recommended the adoption of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXII)/861. 
12. Under item 18, "Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole", the 
Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXII)/862. 
13. Under item 19, "Representation of IAEA Member States not members of the 
Board at meetings of the Board as observers", he reported that the Committee 
had been unable to reach a consensus on the draft resolution appearing in 
document GC(XXXII)/838/Add.1/Rev.1. 
The Agency's accounts for 1987 


14. The draft resolution on page III of document GC(XXXII)/836 was adopted. 
Measures to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear safety and 
radiological protection 


15. The draft resolutions in documents GC(XXXII)/867, GC(XXXII)/868 and 
GC(XXXII)/869 were adopted. 
16. Ms. SCHWAB (United States of America), noting that her country had 
joined in the consensus on the resolution on liability for nuclear damage 
(GC(XXXII)/869), said that the aspects of that issue which should be studied 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 5 


on a priority basis were those which followed logically from the recent 
adoption of the Joint Protocol harmonizing the Vienna and Paris Conventions, 
namely the revision and enhancement of the existing civil liability regime. 


17. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to request the Director General to 
include on the provisional agenda for the following regular session an item 
entitled "Prohibition of all armed attacks against nuclear installations 
devoted to peaceful purposes whether under construction or in operation", with 
a view to its being considered in 1989 in conjunction with the item entitled 
"Measures to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear safety and 
radiological protection". 
18. It was so decided. 
19. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his delegation 
had not blocked the consensus in favour of the inclusion of an item on armed 
attacks against civil nuclear installations in the provisional agenda for the 
thirty-third session of the General Conference, but that its views on the 
subject remained unchanged: the issue was not appropriate for consideration 
by the IAEA. The considerable military, technical and legal problems that 
would have to be resolved in formulating a multilateral approach went well 
beyond the Agency's competence and authority. His Government's strong 
preference would have been to remove the item entirely from the Conference's 
agenda. The Agency's continued discussion of issues that were extraneous to 
its responsibilities and on which there was no prospect of consensus could 
only be damaging, for it clearly detracted from its ability to fulfil its 
basic responsibilities. 
Status and implementation of conventions for which the Agency is depositary 


20. The draft resolutions in documents GC(XXXII)/864 and GC(XXXII)/865 were 
adopted. 
The Agency's contribution to sustainable development 


21. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/863 was adopted. 
The Agency's programme and budget for 1989 and 1990 


22. Draft resolutions A. B and C contained in Annex III to Part I of 
document GC(XXXII)/837 were adopted. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 6 


Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1989 
23


 The draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/843 was adopted. 


The financing of technical assistance 


24 


 The draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/859 was adopted. 


25. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to request the Director General to 
arrange for the summary records of the discussion in the Committee of the 
Whole on the financing of technical assistance (item 15) to be transmitted to 
the Board of Governors. 
26


 It was so decided. 


Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
27


 The draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/860 was adopted. 


Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


28. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/861 was adopted. 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole 


29. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/862 was adopted. 
Representation of IAEA Member States not members of the Board at meetings 
of the Board as observers 


30. Mr. LAVINA (Philippines), speaking as the delegate of the 
Philippines and not as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, said that in 
the long and fruitful debate on the item in the Committee, a slight majority 
of members had spoken in favour of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXII)/838/Add.1/Rev.l, but it was impossible to state that a clear 
consensus had emerged. As it was highly desirable for the General Conference 
to resolve the issue by consensus, he requested that consideration of the 
draft resolution be postponed pending the outcome of ongoing consultations. 
31. Mr. AGRELL (United Kingdom) said the discussion in the Committee 
of the Whole had revealed that there was general sympathy for the idea that 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 7 


non-Board members should be able to attend Board meetings and express their 


views on matters of interest. Many of the participants in the discussion had 


favoured a solution to the problem being found by the Board itself, however, 


since - as the Director of the Legal Division had stressed - the Board was 
master of its own proceedings. He therefore suggested that the General 
Conference seek a way, other than the adoption of a resolution, of conveying 


its wish that the Board continue consideration of the matter in the coming 


year. 


32. Mr. YBAfiEZ (Spain) said that, although his delegation had no 
objection to the spirit behind the Philippine initiative, it believed that a 
decision should be reached through consensus, not through statistical 
majorities. The achievement of consensus was often a time-consuming task, but 
in the present case a solution was already within reach. He therefore 
supported the suggestion just made by the United Kingdom representative. 
33. Mr. BEETS (Belgium) said that the question could not be resolved 
through a vote; a solution by consensus should continue to be sought. 
34. Mr. TALIANI (Italy) supported the request of the Philippine 
delegate for a postponement of consideration of the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXII)/838/Add.1/Rev.1. 
35. Mr. KANIEWSKI (Poland) said he fully endorsed the United Kingdom 
representative's suggestion. 
36. Mr. PROEHCA ROSA (Brazil) said that the question of the 
representation of non-Board members at Board meetings should be given further 
consideration by the Board, particularly in view of its legal, financial and 
political implications. 
37. Mr. GUYER (Argentina) said the question was an important one and 
had implications, including implications of a financial nature, that merited 
careful consideration. He therefore felt that the Board should continue 
examining the question, with a view to reaching a solution satisfactory to all. 
38. Mr. MESLOUB (Algeria) said that the Philippine initiative was 
aimed at making the deliberations of the Board more democratic and hence more 
effective, and he supported the Philippine delegate's request for a 
postponement of consideration of the draft resolution in question. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 8 


39. Mr. PRZEDBORSKY (Costa Rica), supporting the suggestion made by 
the United Kingdom representative, said that he appreciated the desire 
underlying the Philippines initiative that as many Member States as possible 
should be able to keep abreast of the Board's deliberations. 
40. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said he wished to associate 
himself with those speakers who had stressed the importance of the issue and 
the need for further consideration of it by the Board of Governors during the 
coming year. 
41. Mr. BARBOSA FERREIRA (Portugal) said he welcomed the Philippine 
initiative, which was in line with the broader objective - endorsed by his 
delegation - of expanding the Board of Governors. Nevertheless, he felt that 
the matter should be considered within a different framework and therefore 
supported the United Kingdom representative's suggestion. 
42. The PRESIDENT suggested that the summary records of the 
discussions of the matter both in the Committee of the Whole and at the 
Conference's current meeting be transmitted to the Board. 
43. Mr. TALIANI (Italy), supported by Mr. YBANEZ (Spain), said it 
might be advisable to make clear to the Board the General Conference's strong 
wish that it should study the issue actively, and not confine itself to 
reading the summary records. 
44. The PRESIDENT, recalling that his country - Malaysia - had been 
elected to the Board on the previous day, said that he, as a member of the 
Board, could convey to the Board the wish of the General Conference. 
45. He suggested that he report to the Board on the following lines: that 
the Conference appreciated the spirit underlying the draft resolution on the 
representation of IAEA Member States not members of the Board at meetings of 
the Board as observers and shared the belief that every opportunity should be 
given to non-Board members to attend meetings of the Board of Governors and to 
express their views on matters of interest; that the Conference felt, 
however, that the question warranted further consideration by the Board; and 
that, while expressing its appreciation of the efforts already made by the 
Board, it recommended that the Board continue its consideration of the matter. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 9 


46. Mr. LAVINA (Philippines) said that, although there had been no 
consensus on the draft resolution in the Committee of the Whole, a majority of 
Committee members had spoken in favour of it. However, the supporters of the 
draft resolution were not seeking confrontation with those who did not share 
their views. Accordingly, he could go along with the President's suggestion, 
on condition that the Board was requested to report to the Conference at its 
next session on progress made in its further consideration of the matter. At 
the same time, depending on the contents of the Board's report, he reserved 
the right to submit a proposal at the next session of the General Conference. 
47. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegate of the Philippines for going 
along with his suggestion on condition that the Board was requested to report 
to the Conference in 1989. 
48. Mr. LOOSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) said he could go along 
with the President's suggestion, but not with the idea of requesting the Board 
to report back to the General Conference. Of course, the General Conference 
would expect the Board to continue its consideration of this matter with all 
due sensitivity. 
49. The PRESIDENT asked the Conference whether it could go along with 
his suggestion and with the idea of a report by the Board to the Conference 
in 1989. 
50. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico) said that, while he could go along 
with the President's suggestion, he could not go along with the idea of a 
request to the Board that it report back; the Agency's two governing bodies 
were independent of one another. 
51. Mr LOOSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) associated himself with 
the statement made by the delegate of Mexico. 
52. The PRESIDENT, noting that there was no intention of directing the 
Board to report to the General Conference, asked whether his suggestion was 
acceptable to the General Conference, it being borne in mind that the 
Philippine delegate had reserved the right to submit a proposal to the General 
Conference at its next regular session, at which time the Conference would be 
aware of the progress which had been made in the Board. 
53. It was so agreed. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 10 


ISRAELI NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES AND THREAT (GC(XXXlI)/849 and 853/Rev.l) 


54. The PRESIDENT stated that the item had been included in the agenda 
pursuant to resolution GC(XXXI)/RES/470. In response to paragraph 3 of that 
resolution, the Director General had submitted a report which had been 
discussed by the Board at its recent session. Document GC(XXXII)/849 
contained both the report and a summary of the Board's discussion. The draft 
resolutions submitted in documents GC(XXXII)/852 and GC(XXXII)/853 had been 
withdrawn following consultations between their sponsors, and a revised single 
draft resolution was now before the Conference in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 
55. Mr. AL-AWADHI (Kuwait), introducing the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l, noted that it expressed the concern of his 
region over Israeli's nuclear capabilities and the threat they posed. 
According to the Director General's report (GC(XXXII)/849), Israel could not 
be compelled to put all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards and the 
Agency had no information on Israel's nuclear activities. In fact, however, 
the Agency's powers were far wider than suggested. The draft resolution had 
been submitted because of Israel's non-recognition of international law and 
world opinion. The sponsors called upon Israel to place all its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards in order to provide assurance that they 
were intended for peaceful purposes only. The resolution would be important 
in helping prevent Israel from continuing to flout international safeguards 
and conventions. The current instability in the region was the result of 
Israel's failure to respect international law, its attempt to disperse the 
Palestinian people, and its non-recognition of their rights. 
56. His delegation requested a roll-call vote on the draft resolution under 
discussion and on any other draft resolutions that might be submitted under 
the present agenda item. 
57. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) confirmed that her delegation had withdrawn 
its draft resolution in (GC(XXXII)/852), which was concerned with the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, and supported 
the revised draft resolution set forth in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 
58. Egypt would continue to call upon Israel to place all its nuclear 
installations under Agency safeguards. Contrary to what was stated in 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 11 


Israel's reply to the Director General's letter of 17 November 1987, that 
could be achieved by means other than direct negotiations on the establishment 
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. That and the reply from Israel were the 
reasons for the request in paragraph 1 of her delegation's draft resolution now 
contained in paragraph 6 of the revised draft resolution - for a technical 
study on the application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East region. 


59. Mr. BAEYENS (France), speaking on behalf of the West European 
countries, requested that the meeting be suspended for a short period so as to 
enable delegates to consider the revised draft resolution more carefully and 
to allow time for the text to be distributed in the other working languages. 
The meeting was suspended at 11.30 a.m. and resumed at 12.10 p.m. 


60. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) expressed his delegation's regret at having 
to speak on the redundant issue now before the Conference. The irrelevance of 
the item and of the draft resolution was evident from the statements of the 
sponsors and their supporters, which consistently disregarded the declared 
policy of successive Governments of Israel, namely that Israel would not be 
the first to introduce nuclear weapons into the Middle East, and that Israel 
supported the principle of non-proliferation and affirmed the need to 
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East along the lines of the 
Treaties of Tlatelolco and Rarotonga covering Latin America and the South 
Pacific respectively. Israel's policy had been repeatedly expressed at the 
previous session of the General Conference. The Prime Minister of Israel had 
reiterated Israel's position on non-proliferation at the special session of 
the United Nations General Assembly on 7 June of the current year. Its 
position was also set forth in its reply to the Director General's letter 
reproduced in document GC(XXXII)/849. 
61. As a result of a continuing and narrow partisan effort by Iraq, the 
United Nations General Assembly had been dealing with an identical issue 
since 1979. Despite three inconclusive reports published by the 
Secretary-General, the item remained on the agenda of the forty-third session 
of the General Assembly, and on that of the present session of the General 
Conference. In his report to the Board of Governors reproduced in document 
GC(XXXII)/849, the Director General indicated that statements in the General 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 12 


Conference the previous year had made it clear that the term "nuclear 
capabilities" as used in resolution GC(XXXI)/RES/470 was intended to mean 
"nuclear weapon capabilities" and that the IAEA Secretariat had not concerned 
itself with studies of nuclear weapon capabilities in any Member State. 
Nonetheless, the General Conference had once again been called upon to 
consider the issue, which was political and did not pertain to the Agency's 
statutory functions. To compel the Agency to deal with such issues would 
further compromise its essentially non-political nature. 


62. The Agency had been founded as an autonomous international technical 
body, governed solely by its Board and General Conference, and not bound by 
resolutions of the General Assembly. That working relationship was recognized 
in Articles II and III of the Agency's Statute and by Article I of the 
agreement governing the relationship between the United Nations and the Agency 
(INFCIRC/11). The draft resolution was an attempt to turn the Agency and its 
Secretariat into instruments for implementation of United Nations resolutions 
that were extraneous to its mandate, thus jeopardizing the Agency's 
independent authority. 
63. It was clear from Article III.A.5 of the Statute that the conclusion of 
safeguards agreements was the statutory right of a State. Also, the voluntary 
nature of safeguards had been recognized by the Board in 1976 in decision (11) 
contained in document GOV/DEC/88 (XIX). As was recognized in the Director 
General's letter to Israel reproduced in document GC(XXXII)/849, every 
Member State had the sovereign right to decide for itself whether or not to 
invite Agency safeguards. In its reply, Israel had stated, inter alia, that 
it remained committed to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
the Middle East, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the 
States of the region, and that the issue of full-scope safeguards could be 
satisfactorily settled within a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
64. A call addressed to Israel alone would be an act of singling out. Many 
States were not party to NPT and not subject to full-scope safeguards, among 
them some of proven scientific and technological capability. They were 
somehow immune from having similar requests addressed to them, yet presumed to 
sit in judgement of Israel. India and Pakistan, which were not parties to 
NPT, were not subject to full-scope safeguards, while Libya - a party to NPT 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 13 


was the only country to have shopped for nuclear weapons. Colonel Qadhafi had 
been quoted by the Libyan News Agency on 2 September 1987 as calLing upon the 
Arab nations to take serious steps to acquire nuclear weapons. 


65. The sponsors of agenda item 7 under discussion had attempted to justify 
it by arguing that Israel's activities constituted a nuclear threat and 
endangered international peace and security. They had also abused the 
platform afforded them by the Conference to deliver hostile political attacks 
on Israel which had nothing to do with the Agency's work. Israel had never 
threatened the existence of any country. The real and immediate threat was 
what the countries in his region were spending on arms. Iraq, Iran, Syria, 
Libya and Saudi Arabia were among the world's biggest arms importers, each of 
them buying more arms than Israel. The production and use of chemical weapons 
constituted a real threat to the peace of the region and of the entire world 
and was strongly condemned by Israel. Iraq, by its own admission, had used 
that vicious means of indiscriminate killing in its war with Iran and in its 
attacks on civilian Kurds, in gross and blatant violation of the Geneva 
Protocol which Iraq had signed. The United Nations Secretary-General had also 
established that chemical weapons were being used in the Iran-Iraq war, albeit 
without identifying the culprit. Such defiance of control measures designed 
by the international community was not reassuring in a region of instability 
such as the Middle East. 
66. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), speaking on a point of order, said that the 
General Conference was discussing the nuclear capabilities of Israel, not 
chemical weapons. The speaker should keep to the item under discussion. 
67. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said that mutual reassurances and direct 
negotiations among all States in the region culminating in the establishment 
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone were the only constructive way of creating a 
measure of confidence in the Middle East. It was to be regretted that a draft 
resolution which showed signs of being a constructive attempt to achieve an 
accord in the region based on a principle long advocated by Israel had had to 
be withdrawn by its sponsor because of partisan political considerations. In 
any case, his delegation rejected the attempt to promote that issue, which was 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 14 


of great significance for an effective non-proliferation regime in the 
Middle East, under the item entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and 
threat". That could only undermine the constructive approach that such an 
important and sensitive issue needed. 


68. The proposal to involve the Agency, when direct and free negotiations 
between the States of the region had not yet started, was a further departure 
from internationally sanctioned principles and procedures governing agreements 
covering other regional areas. It prejudged the outcome of negotiations and 
should therefore be resisted. Any role envisaged for the Agency, either in 
the context of the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone or involving 
safeguards procedures, was a matter for the negotiating States to decide. The 
issue had already been dealt with and guidelines had been established by an 
ad hoc group of governmental experts under the auspices of the Conference of 
the Committee on Disarmament, which had prepared a study entitled 
"Comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its 
aspects". Paragraph 136 of that document stated that the exact mandate of the 
Agency would be determined essentially by two factors: the precise provisions 
of the agreements establishing zones and the tasks given to the Agency 
therein; and the Agency's Statute prescribing what duties the Agency could 
assume, Article III.A.5 of which permitted the Agency "to apply safeguards, at 
the request of the parties, to any bilateral or multilateral arrangement, or 
at the request of a State, to any of that State's activities in the field of 
atomic energy." A constructive course of action would be to establish a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, and all States of the region 
should be persuaded to accept Israel's offer to begin negotiations to that 
end, in the manner in which that offer had been conceived. 
69. A majority of Member States had in the past made possible the adoption 
of anti-Israeli resolutions, tailored to the sponsor's desire to apply to 
Israel different criteria from those that obtained generally. It was 
inconceivable that Israel should be discriminated against in the Agency, and 
at the same time be invited to trust international sponsorship to reach an 
equitable settlement in the Middle East. The General Conference should decide 
not to repeat a useless and potentially damaging debate on the current 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 15 


extraneous issue but to stay within the framework of its Statute. The Agency 
must be allowed to concentrate on its statutory professional responsibilities 
and should not be abused or subverted in perpetuity. 


70. The Israeli delegation therefore urged all responsible delegations to 
reject the draft resolution. 
71. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said it was well known that Israel did in fact 
possess nuclear weapons, thanks to certain countries which had been helping it 
to enhance its nuclear capability over a period of years. The problem was 
made all the more serious by the aggressive, expansionist policies of the 
Israeli Government, which continued to defy the international community by 
occupying Arab territories and, in particular, by oppressing the Palestinian 
people and denying them their inalienable right to self-determination. 
72. All the States of the region were committed to a policy of 
non-proliferation, and many had signed NPT and placed their nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. The only States that had still not done so were 
those that had no activities in the nuclear field, the exception being Israel 
which was thus the only State in the region with significant nuclear 
installations which were not under safeguards and were being used to produce 
nuclear weapons. That situation created constant tension and constituted a 
threat to peace and security, with the result that the region was being drawn 
into the arms race. 
73. Israel continued to reject resolutions adopted by United Nations bodies 
calling upon it to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards and to 
renounce its nuclear weapons. Its support for the concept of a nuclearweapon-
free zone in the Middle East was a mere political manoeuvre designed to 
deflect the pressure being put on it by the international community. Israel's 
letter of reply to the Director General was part of that manoeuvre and had no 
credibility. If Israel was serious in its wish to establish such a zone, it 
should agree to place its nuclear facilities under Agency guarantees, to sign 
NPT, and to renounce its expansionist and aggressive policies. The chief 
reason for Israel's continued attitude of defiance was that United Nations 
bodies had failed to take sanctions against it. Although the draft resolution 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 16 


now being submitted to the Conference was inadequate in that respect, the 


least the Conference could do was to adopt it, in view of the fact that Israel 
had defied all previous resolutions on the subject. 


74. While the Israeli delegate had repeatedly stated that his country would 
never be the first to use nuclear weapons in the region, he had not denied 
that his country did in fact possess such weapons. Had not the Israeli 
engineer Vanunu been imprisoned for 18 years for having revealed the secret 
that nuclear weapons were being produced in Israel? 
75. In conclusion, his delegation supported the request by the delegate of 
Kuwait that a roll-call vote be taken on the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXlI)/853/Rev.1, as well as on any other resolutions that might 
be submitted under agenda item 7. 
76. Mr. SALGADO (United States of America) said his delegation 
strongly opposed the resolution contained in document GC(XXXlI)/853/Rev.1, 
which was essentially no different from the long series of resolutions on the 
same issue which had burdened the Conference's agenda in the past. The United 
States had voted against all those resolutions and would continue to do so 
until the sponsors thereof came to recognize that it was highly inappropriate 
to seek to include such matters in the Conference's deliberations. 
77. The resolution was obviously a politically motivated effort to 
criticize the nuclear programme of a single nation: it was blatantly 
discriminatory because it did not refer to the nuclear programmes of any other 
similarly situated States. In addition, the resolution implied that the 
voluntary acceptance of safeguards measures was in some sense a sanction or 
penalty, which they had never been intended to be. On the contrary, 
safeguards were entirely voluntary commitments, and no provision in the IAEA 
Statute gave the General Conference the right to demand that any particular 
State adopt them. Any action, in that direction would run counter to the 
fundamental character of the safeguards system. 
78. The draft resolution was unacceptable for a number of reasons. The 
preamble expressed concern about nuclear weapons in Israel, whereas the 
existence of such weapons had not been reliably confirmed. In addition, it 
referred to an Israeli "threat", whereas a formal communication from the 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 17 


Government of Israel to the Agency, accepted by the General Conference in 
1986, had confirmed that no such threat was being made by Israel either 
towards its neighbours in the region or towards any other State. 


79. Particularly objectionable was preambular paragraph (i), which referred 
to the occupied territories, an issue totally irrelevant to the IAEA as a 
scientific and technical Agency. Nothing in the Statute empowered the General 
Conference to make judgements in respect of international law or to interpret 
the Charter of the United Nations, and his Government did not in any way 
recognize preambular paragraph (i) as establishing any valid interpretation of 
either international law or the Charter with respect to activities within the 
occupied territories. 
80. His delegation found the operative part of the resolution even more 
unacceptable than the preamble. Operative paragraph 1 was discriminatory, in 
that it made demands of Israel that were not made of other similarly situated 
States. Operative paragraph 2 contained a judgement about peace and security 
in the region which only the United Nations Security Council was qualified to 
make: it was not within the province of the Agency to make such judgements. 
While avoiding any suspension of the rights and privileges of Israel's 
membership in the Agency, operative paragraph 3 placed the Director General in 
the unacceptable position of having to consider implementing General Assembly 
resolutions which could impose burdens on Israel that others did not share. 
Operative paragraph 4 was objectionable for the same reasons. 
81. Operative paragraphs 5, 7 and 8 would have the effect of perpetuating 
the issue on the agenda of the Board of Govenors, the General Conference, and 
the United Nations General Assembly. The time had come to take that issue off 
the agenda, since repeated ritualistic consideration of it could not in any 
way further the attainment of peace and security in the region. Rather, it 
introduced a political element into the work of a scientific and technical 
Agency, and diverted attention from issues on which real progress was being 
made. 
82. It was apparent from operative paragraph 6 of the resolution, which 
was based in part on an earlier resolution calling for a study on a Middle 
East nuclear-weapon-free zone (GC(XXXII)/852), that no progress had been made 

GG(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 18 


towards abandoning the negative and unproductive approach to the question of 
Israel which had burdened the Agency for a number of years. He was greatly 
disappointed to see that, in its revised form, the provision contained in 
operative paragraph 6 did not even mention the key concept of a nuclearweapon-
free zone in the Middle East which had motivated the sponsors of the 
original resolution and was the subject of various General Assembly 
resolutions; rather, it called for a technical study of the modalities of 
application of safeguards in the region. His delegation doubted the 
usefulness and appropriateness of making such a study in a single geographical 
region, without reference to any underlying arrangement such as a treaty for a 
nuclear-free zone. Such a study would not provide any useful information 
about safeguards in the Middle East, because it could not be based on 
information relating to the territory covered by such an arrangement, its 
legal character or the obligations of parties thereto. Moreover, such a study 
would not be a wise use of the Agency's limited funds at a time of scarce 
budgetary resources. Finally, operative paragraph 6 would not help to achieve 
the desired end of removing the item from the agenda of future conferences, 
but would merely add a further difficult and complex element to the annual 
debate. 


83. He urged all delegations to vote against the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.1. 
84. Mr. MGBOKWERE (Nigeria) expressed his delegation's deep concern 
over Israel's growing military nuclear capabilities, which rendered the 
situation in the Middle East dangerously explosive. African countries such as 
his own were particularly uneasy over Israel's collaboration with South Africa 
in nuclear matters. Israel's refusal to comply with General Assembly and 
Agency resolutions did not augur well for the peace and security of the 
region. His delegation called on Israel to place all its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards, since only such a course of action could allay the 
fears of Israel's neighbours. 
85. His delegation joined earlier speakers in supporting the draft 
resolution. 
86. Mr. OLUMOKO (United Nations Council for Namibia), said he 
supported the draft resolution for three reasons: first, because of Namibia's 

GC(XXXII)/0R.3U 
page 19 


solidarity with the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the 
Palestinian People; secondly, because Namibia condemned the close 
collaboration in the nuclear field between Israel and South Africa; and 
thirdly, because it also condemned the destabilization campaigns being carried 
out by Israel against her neighbours. 


87. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece), speaking on behalf of the Member States of 
the European Communities, said he could not support the draft resolution. The 
question of Israel had been resolved by a resolution adopted by the General 
Conference in 1985. The resolution now under consideration unfairly singled 
out the nuclear policies of one country, a move which was divisive and tended 
to politicize the Agency. 
88. Although it was desirable that safeguards be applied as widely as 
possible in order to further the cause of non-proliferation, the Agency's 
Statute stated that acceptance of safeguards was a matter for decision by the 
country concerned. Hence, the non-submission to Agency safeguards of the 
nuclear facilities of any Member State could not justify the action called for 
in the resolution. 
89. Mr. Al NUWAISER (Saudi Arabia) said the draft resolution under 
consideration was related to earlier resolutions both of the General Assembly 
and of the General Conference. The object of those resolutions had been to 
respond to public concern that the Agency should fulfil its statutory 
responsibilities of furthering the peaceful uses of nuclear energy worldwide 
and of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The sole objective of 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.1 was to ensure that Israel 
should not continue to use its nuclear facilities for non-peaceful purposes. 
90. Israel's claim to support the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
the Middle East was hypocritical, since it was the only country in the region 
to have developed a nuclear potential. Its claim that other countries in the 
region, including Saudi Arabia, had been buying weapons for purposes of 
aggression was also unjustified: those weapons had been purchased purely for 
defence against Israeli expansion and aggression. 
91. In conclusion, he requested that a roll-call vote be taken on the draft 
resolution. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.311 
page 20 


92. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said the argument that the 
Agency should not concern itself with the matter under discussion ran counter 
not only to the organization's Statute, but also to its motto "Atoms for 
Peace". Since the Agency's inception, no Member State had objected to its 
role in promoting nuclear safety and furthering the implementation of 
safeguards agreements. 
93. It had been stated that Israel's nuclear capability should not be 
singled out for particular attention. In fact, it was Israel itself, by its 
policies of aggression and refusal to respect international law, which had 
singled itself out as a threat to peace in the region. 
94. His delegation fully supported the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in the Middle East. However, Isreal's call for direct negotiations to 
establish such a zone was a mere political manoeuvre, designed to avoid a real 
solution to the problem. Israel had also claimed that many Arab States in the 
region were piling up weapons: the fact was that Israel had amassed more arms 
than all the Arab States put together. Similarly, Israel's claim that it 
would not be the first to introduce nuclear weapons to the region was contrary 
to the facts: a report by a United Nations expert group had already provided 
evidence of the Israeli military nuclear potential. 
95. It was the duty of the Conference to take preventive action and to 
forestall the catastrophe of a possible nuclear war. The possession by Israel 
of nuclear weapons constituted a genuine threat to peace, and he trusted that 
the Conference would recognize that threat and adopt the draft resolution. 
96. Mr. ZANNAD (Tunisia) said his country supported the draft 
resolution, which was moderate in tone and in full conformity with the Statute 
of the Agency. Israel's acts of aggression had on more than one occasion gone 
beyond the bounds of the Middle East and had affected North Africa, notably 
Tunisia, where attempts had been made to assassinate a Palestinian leader. 
97. He thanked the delegation of Egypt for its understanding in withdrawing 
its initial draft resolution, and appealed to all Member States to give their 
support to the revised version contained in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m. 



GC(XXX11)/0R.312 
6 December 1988 


GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-SECOND (1988) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 23 September 1988, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. HAL1M (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 
7 Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat 


(continued) 1 - 55 
20 South Africa's nuclear capabilities 56 - 126 
21 Examination of delegates' credentials 127 - 139 
22 Elections to the Agency's Staff 


Pension Committee 140 - 141 


23 Report on voluntary contributions 
pledged to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1989 142 


Closing of the session 143 - 150 


[*] GC(XXXIl)/856. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXII)/lNF/262/Rev.2. 


88-04863 
4088e/0496e 



GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 2 


ISRAELI NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES AND THREAT (GC(XXXII)/849, 852 and 853/Rev.l) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. CONSTENLA (Costa Rica) said that his delegation could not 
endorse the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXLI)/853/Rev.l because 
it related to a problem which was outside the Agency's purview and unconnected 
with its scientific and technical purpose, and because it called in question 
the solidarity of nations in the nuclear field. The Agency's mandate was to 
search for a solution to the problems of nuclear development, while 
reconciling the interests of all Member States concerned, with a view to 
achieving satisfactory and lasting agreement which would permanently guarantee 
the nuclear quietude so longed for, without the Agency becoming involved in 
regional problems which were not within its sphere of competence. 
2. Costa Rica deplored the fact that the General Conference had to 
consider the question year after year; such a state of affairs could only 
contribute to eroding the atmosphere of co-operation so necessary to the work 
of the Agency. Interested countries should profit from the fact that Israel 
was willing to negotiate directly with them on achieving the nuclear quietude 
which everyone was aiming at. For that reason, he urged other States to vote 
against the draft resolution under consideration. 
3. Mr. GHAZALI (Malaysia) said that his delegation's position on the 
subject was already well known. Scientists could not abdicate the 
responsibility to others when what was at stake was the survival of mankind 
and the world in which he lived. Man had always had to face mortal dangers, 
and he succumbed to one or another of them at some time. However, there was a 
fundamental difference between a danger which menaced the life of one 
individual, or even major groups of individuals, and a danger which placed 
life itself in jeopardy. It would be naive to ignore the fact that society 
was steeped in politics. Although the scientists still took part in the 
nuclear debate, the latter was no longer a controversial subject on the 
scientific plane, but it continued to cause controversy on the sociological 
and political planes. For that reason, Malaysia endorsed the ideas put 
forward by the delegate of Kuwait and the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 3 


4. Mr. CLARK (United Kingdom), adding to the statement made by the 
delegate of Greece on behalf of the Member States of the European Community, 
said that his country regarded non-proliferation as a key element of its 
foreign policy and viewed the acceptance of full-scope safeguards by States as 
highly desirable, since it was the most convincing measure of assurance that 
States could give to the international community with regard to the peaceful 
nature of their nuclear programmes. For that reason, the United Kingdom, like 
the Syrian Arab Republic, was entirely in favour of the extension of Agency 
safeguards, and it had therefore voted in favour of Security Council 
resolution 487 (1981), which called upon Israel to place all its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. His country had also strongly urged 
Israel, and all the other States in the region, to accede to the Treaty on the 
Non~Proliferation of Nuclear weapons (NPT). He welcomed the recent decision 
of Saudi Arabia to take that step. 
5. Nevertheless, the United Kingdom was opposed to the draft resolution 
under consideration, because it was not appropriate for the General Conference 
to condemn a Member State for its refusal to accept full-scope safeguards. 
Other Agency Member States were showing themselves equally unwilling to take 
that step, to the great regret of the United Kingdom, which declined to 
condemn unjustly only one of those States. 
6. He doubted the usefulness of discussing the question repeatedly within 
the Agency, and urged that it should not appear again on the agenda of future 
sessions of the General Conference. The Agency was a technical organization, 
and it was unrealistic to suppose that it could solve political problems 
without damage to the harmony and efficiency of its operation. Moreover, he 
doubted whether it was proper for the Agency to examine allegations about 
nuclear-weapons programmes in Agency Member States. The draft resolution 
under consideration requested the Director General to continue to report, as 
appropriate, to the Board of Governors and General Conference on Israel's 
nuclear capabilities and threat. The United Kingdom was of the view that such 
an activity was more appropriate to the United Nations General Assembly. 
7. In conclusion, he welcomed the constructive effort of the Egyptian 
delegation to turn the debate in a more promising direction. The United 
Kingdom, since it supported the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 4 


Middle East, could have voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXII)/852 if it had been put forward separately. 


8. Mr. SASTROHANDOYO (Indonesia) shared the concern of the Kuwaiti 
delegation with regard to Israel's expansionist policies vis-a-vis its 
neighbours. Given the constant danger of an escalation of the violence and a 
spreading of the Middle East conflict, the continual refusal of Israel to 
renounce the possession of nuclear weapons and to place all of its 
installations under Agency safeguards in accordance with Security Council 
resolution 487 (1981) not only posed a serious danger to peace and security 
within the region, but also endangered the non-proliferation policy which the 
other countries in the region were following. For that reason, the Indonesian 
delegation supported the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 
9. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan), having listened carefully to the statements 
by the delegates of Israel and the United States, wished to clarify some 
points. 
10. Firstly, with regard to the repetitious character of the draft 
resolution in hand, he noted that it was only to be expected that an item 
should recur systematically in the agenda when no decisive action was ever 
taken on it. 
11. Secondly, it would be false and incorrect to link the creation of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone with the signing of NPT or the application of 
safeguards, since the application of safeguards in itself constituted a real 
contribution to the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Moreover, by 
signing NPT and accepting the application of safeguards, the signatory State 
made a concrete commitment not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weapons which 
worked directly in favour of the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones. One 
might ask whether one was not witnessing the arrival of a new era where the 
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone would become the precondition for any 
application of safeguards and for the signing of NPT, and where States would 
have to abstain henceforth from signing NPT or accepting safeguards until such 
a zone existed. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 5 


12. Thirdly, countering the argument that the draft resolution was 
political in nature and discriminated against Israel, he noted that the same 
request had been addressed to another Member State, South Africa. In document 
GC(XXXlI)/855, which had been distributed at the request of the Soviet Union, 
the United Kingdom and the United States, one could read the following: "The 
Depositary governments are resolved to press South Africa further to accede to 
the NPT. Such accession we strongly believe is in the best interest of all 
countries of the region, and of the world as a whole." Thus, a State could 
become a source of concern and danger to the other States in a region, and 
indeed to the whole world. How was it that something that was political in 
the Middle East was not political in Africa? 
13. Mr. MBODJ (Senegal) declared his country's solidarity with the 
countries of the Middle East in their struggle against the expansionist and 
oppressive policies of Israel, which constituted a flagrant violation of 
international law and the United Nations Charter. Agency Member States should 
use all their influence to counter the threat to the whole international 
community posed by the nuclear capability of Israel, which maintained close 
relations in that area with the racist regime of South Africa. 
14. The recent information on Israel's possession of nuclear weapons was 
very worrying. For that reason, in the interests of international peace and 
security, Israel should place all its nuclear installations under Agency 
safeguards. His delegation urged those Member States which had not as yet 
done so to suspend all co-operation with Israel which might contribute towards 
strengthening its nuclear capabilities, particularly since Israel continued to 
oppress the Palestinian people and to violate systematically the territorial 
integrity of Arab countries which were simply fulfilling their duty of 
solidarity with the Palestinian fighters. 
15. In conclusion, his delegation, desiring the preservation of peace and 
security, particularly in the Middle East, would vote in favour of the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 
16. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) recalled that his delegation had always 
believed that the Agency's Statute did not allow for the application of 
safeguards to a State except on its sovereign request. His delegation 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 6 


therefore considered the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXlI)/853/Rev.l to be incompatible with the Agency's Statute and was 
therefore opposed to it. 


17. Mr. MILAD (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) wished to recall the 
circumstances under which the Zionist entity had built up its nuclear 
arsenal. That entity, since its creation, had always been interested in 
scientific research and in particular atomic research. Thus, in 1941, before 
the proclamation of the State of Israel, when Jewish terrorist organizations 
were fully active and the war between the Jews and the Palestinians was 
raging, two men, Ernest Bergmann and Israel Dubrovsky, had gone to the Negev 
desert to study its mineral resources, notably phosphates. Subsequently, they 
had made their discoveries known to Chaim Weizmann. Thus, after the creation 
of the so-called State of Israel, Weizmann, its first President, had been able 
to announce to those running the new "State" that uranium had been discovered 
in the phosphate deposits of the Negev. Speaking to David Ben-Gurion, 
Moshe Sharett, Yigal Allon, Moshe Dayan, Menahem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir, and 
to other heads of armed terrorist organizations, that aged man, who had played 
a large part in convincing the British to lend their support to the creation 
of the new "State" in Palestine, had said that if the Zionist entity wished to 
achieve its objectives, it would have to apply itself to the development of 
scientific research, and in particular atomic research. He had, of course, 
been referring to the atomic bomb. Moreover, he had thought that the Zionist 
entity should avail itself of the atom to confront the Arab world. He had 
told Bergmann and Dubrovsky that the road was long and they were only at the 
beginning. A few months later, he had asked a group of research workers to 
sketch out a nuclear programme which was to be started up in 1949 in the 
Atomic Research Department of the Weizmann Institute. That department had 
achieved major results in the space of three years, and one of its research 
workers had succeeded in producing heavy water. There had been two 
consequences of that achievement: on the one hand, it had enabled the Zionist 
entity to compete with Norway in the production of heavy water and, on the 
other hand, it had marked the beginning of co-operation between the Zionist 
entity and France. Indeed, those two countries had concluded a co-operation 
agreement in the nuclear area, during the first half of 1953 and France had 
bought Dubrovsky's patent. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 7 


18. The Libyan delegation was drawing attention to the aforementioned facts 
in order to show that the Zionist entity had all along, from the outset of its 
rampage in Palestine, been committed to the acquisition of nuclear weapons and 
the building up of a considerable nuclear arsenal for the purposes of 
aggression against the Arab nation. On the other hand, that entity could 
never have manufactured or acquired the atomic bomb without the unlimited help 
it had received from imperialist States which were well known to everyone. 
Thus, before installing the Dimona reactor, it had bought a nuclear research 
reactor from the United States. Ben-Gurion had received ample encouragement 
to do so, since President Eisenhower had declared, in an address to the 
General Assembly of the United Nations on 8 December 1953, that his country 
was prepared to make scientific information and nuclear facilities in its 
possession available to other States wishing to conduct peaceful nuclear 
research. From that moment the Zionist entity and the United States had begun 
to co-operate closely. The journal of the Institute for Palestine Studies had 
reported, in an article on science and technology in Israel, that Uzi Elam, 
the Director General of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, had stated that 
President Reagan had not only encouraged the construction of a new nuclear 
power plant, but had also said that he would support the construction of 
advanced reactors such as fast breeders, making it clear that the United 
States intended to regain its place at the head of those countries which 
exported nuclear technology. 
19. Not content with concluding agreements, the Zionist entity had also 
resorted to other methods, such as theft and piracy, in order to acquire 
uranium and other nuclear materials. Thus, between 1963 and 1965, the Jewish 
director of a nuclear materials and equipment firm in Pennsylvania in the 
United States had helped smuggle 3600 kg of plutonium and highly enriched 
uranium, a quantity sufficient to manufacture dozens of nuclear bombs. 
Moreover, during the administration of President Johnson, the Zionist entity 
had been able to obtain 90 kg of uranium which had been delivered to it by a 
factory in Pennsylvania. It had also managed to acquire 200 tonnes of uranium 
which had been declared lost at sea on 17 November 1967 and had been 
subsequently discovered to have been smuggled to the so-called State of Israel. 
20. Moreover, certain States had given that entity access to their best 
nuclear research and experience, and it had thus been able in a short time to 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 8 


acquire and manufacture nuclear weapons, which had brought a serious threat to 


the peace and security not only of the Middle Kast but also of the entire 
world. The Zionist entity had always insisted that all of its nuclear 


facilities remain outside the international safeguards regime, and it had 
always refused to sign NPT for fear that the true nature of its activities 
would be discovered. In addition, in blatant contravention of the principles 
of the United Nations Charter and international law, it had attacked the Iraqi 
nuclear reactor which had been built for peaceful purposes and placed under 
Agency safeguards. The General Assembly, the Security Council and the General 
Conference had adopted a series of resolutions condemning the Zionist entity 
for its refusal to place its nuclear facilities under international 
safeguards, and urging other States to suspend all co-operation which might 
allow it to produce nuclear weapons. Far from paying the slightest attention 
to those resolutions, that entity had, on the contrary, committed itself to 
defying the international community. 


21. He wished also to draw attention to the close links of co-operation 
uniting the regimes in Tel Aviv and Pretoria, to which numerous reports bore 
witness. Moreover, he rejected categorically the allegations of the delegate 
of the Zionist entity that a number of countries, including the Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, were among the principal purveyors of arms, and he emphasized that 
the Zionist entity alone held an arsenal which was greatly superior to that of 
all the States in the region. Recalling that his country was a signatory 
to NPT and that all of its nuclear installations were subject to Agency 
safeguards, he appealed to the international community, and in particular 
Agency Member States, to take the necessary measures to put an end to a danger 
which threatened the peace and security of the Middle East in particular, and 
of the world in general, and he urged Member States to approve the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 


22. Mr. WILSON (Australia) said that his delegation would oppose the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l because it dealt 
with a question which would be more appropriately discussed in other forums, 
and because it was discriminatory in the sense that it was directed against a 
single country. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 9 


23. His delegation was, of course, concerned by the absence of full-scope 
safeguards, not only in Israel, but also in other States. It had urged those 
States to accede to NPT or at least to accept full-scope safeguards. It 
therefore welcomed the intended accession of Saudi Arabia to NPT. Although it 
was opposed to the draft resolution, the Australian delegation sympathized 
with the ideas reflected in operative paragraph 6 and applauded the efforts of 
the Egyptian delegation in that area. He stressed, however, that the solution 
to the problem rested on the sovereign will of the States which were primarily 
involved. 
24. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) expressed his full agreement with the 
statements made by those delegates who had supported the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXIl)/853/Rev.l, which was notable for its flexibility, its 
realism and its moderation. He was amazed that certain delegates had declared 
that they intended to vote against the text. 
25. In its preamble, the draft recalled the resolutions which had been 
adopted previously on that question, warned against the threat which the 
accumulation of nuclear weapons by the Israeli entity constituted, and took 
stock of the concern caused by Israel's refusal to place its nuclear 
installations under Agency safeguards as the resolutions of the General 
Conference and the General Assembly had requested it to do. In its operative 
part, the draft requested the Director General to take those measures which he 
was empowered to take in conformity with the Agency's Statute and the 
resolutions adopted by the General Conference. The reason for the draft being 
submitted was Israel's attitude, with which everyone was well acquainted. The 
argument that the question did not fall within the sphere of competence of the 
Agency and its policy-making organs was totally fallacious. In fact, all the 
points included in it were entirely in line with the objectives of the Agency 
as stated in the Statute, those being, in essence, to promote the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, to strengthen the non-proliferation regime and to 
maintain nuclear security and safety in the world. 
26. With the exception of Israel, all the States in the Middle East had 
placed their nuclear installations under Agency safeguards. Israel, on the 
other hand, was pursuing both inside and outside the region its policy of 
aggression, expansion, repression and terror. It continued to occupy Arab 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 10 


territories and to attack a people who were claiming their legitimate rights. 
It was Israel that continued to stockpile arms of all kinds including nuclear 
weapons. All those actions constituted a grave danger to peace and security 
not only in the Middle East but in the whole world. In addition, Israel had 
just launched its first artificial satellite, which was undoubtedly intended 
for military purposes. For those reasons, among many others, he appealed to 
all Member States of the Agency to support the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 


27. Mr. MESLOUB (Algeria) said he was deeply concerned at the 
strengthening of Israel's nuclear capabilities, which constituted a grave 
threat to international peace and security, notably in the Middle East. The 
highly aggressive stance of Israel made that threat ever more certain and 
clear; Israel had adopted a policy of aggression, and was occupying the 
territory of neighbouring States in contravention of the aims and principles 
of the United Nations Charter. The Tel Aviv regime practised a policy of 
terror and oppression against the Palestinian people, thus rebutting their 
legitimate right to the establishment of an independent State in Palestine. 
In a desperate attempt to stifle the aspirations of that people, which had 
risen up to demand justice, Israel had resorted to barbarous repression, 
manifesting itself in murders and practices which had been reported on and 
castigated by the media in many places in the world. Israel had never 
hesitated to have recourse to State terrorism in its attempts to impose its 
hegemony, and had twice violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
Tunisia, a neighbouring and sister State of Algeria known for its peaceful 
policies. 
28. The close co-operation carried on by the Tel Aviv regime with the 
Pretoria one in the nuclear area was a normal and natural extension of such 
behaviour and actions. For that reason, Africa had always sided with those 
States which were the victims of Israel's constant aggression in their joint 
fight against a common enemy. He was convinced that the African States would 
be persuaded by that shared interest to show their solidarity once more and to 
support the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. In 
addition, there could be no doubt about the true nature of the recent Israeli 
experiments in space. Those experiments constituted a very grave and real 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 11 


danger for neighbouring States, and posed a serious threat to international 
peace and security extending well beyond the limits of the region. 


29. The draft resolution under consideration endeavoured to draw attention 
to that danger and that threat, and called upon the international community to 
counter them; it also reflected the worry and concern of Israel's neighbours, 
which feared for their security. It was a moderate draft, the content of 
which lay clearly within the Agency's sphere of competence. For that reason, 
the Algerian delegation hoped that there would be general consensus on it. He 
joined with other delegations in requesting that there be a roll-call vote 
on it. 
30. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said he was opposed to the draft resolution 
in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. The majority vote had in the past led to the 
adoption of a series of resolutions hostile to Israel which had been inspired 
by the desire of certain circles to apply different criteria to that country 
from those normally used for other States. His delegation wanted Israel to be 
guaranteed the same treatment as all other Member States of the Agency. 
Moreover, he objected to the item's appearing systematically in the agenda of 
the General Conference. The principles of universality and non-interference 
in the internal affairs of States should be observed. The text under 
consideration demanded a sanction of a political nature which only the United 
Nations was competent to apply. The Agency had its own Statute, which should 
be applied to all Member States in the same way. All countries should be 
treated equally in accordance with the same criteria. In conclusion, he 
expressed his support for the statement made by the delegate of the United 
States and, underlining the fact that Paraguay was a country which lived in 
peace, he urged other Member States of the Agency to do the same. 
31. Mr. ZHOU (China) recalled that Israel had been occupying Palestine 
and other Arab territories for a long time, and had reinforced its military 
oppression in those territories by denying the Palestinian people its 
fundamental rights. The Chinese Government was firmly opposed to Israel's 
policy of aggression and expansion and supported the Palestinian and Arab 
peoples in their just fight. 
32. He called upon Israel to accept a global ruling on the Palestinian 
problem. Israel should abandon its policy of aggression and expansion, 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 12 


retreat from the Arab territories occupied since 196 7, and adopt a practical 
attitude aimed at finding a solution to the problems, by negotiation with its 
Arab neighbours and with the Palestine Liberation Organization, in order that 
all countries in the region might enjoy their right to exist, their 


independence and real peace. He was concerned over the threat which Israel's 
nuclear capabilities represented for the region, and supported the demand that 
Israel place its nuclear installations under Agency safeguards. For that 
reason, he endorsed the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l. 


33. Mr. MAHMASSANI (Lebanon) said he wished to make a few comments on 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXlI)/853/Rev.l, of which his 
delegation was a co-sponsor. 
34. Firstly, he recalled that the representative of Israel, in a letter 
addressed to the Director General as well as in previous statements, had 
invited States in the Middle East to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
the region on the basis of arrangements similar to the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Tlatelolco Treaty) and the 
South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty (Rarotonga Treaty). However, the 
situation in the Middle East was very different from that in Latin America or 
the South Pacific, where there was no State occupying territory that did not 
belong to it and stockpiling nuclear weapons to defend that occupation. If 
Israel were situated in the South Pacific or in Latin America, the Rarotonga 
or the Tlatelolco Treaty would not exist. 
35. Secondly, some delegations had asserted that the demand that Israel 
should submit its nuclear facilities to safeguards constituted a violation of 
the Agency's Statute. Those claims made his delegation wonder since when the 
Agency's main function was to promote the manufacture and production of 
nuclear weapons. The objectives and mandate of the Agency, as defined in 
Articles II and III of the Statute, were to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, and that was exactly what the sponsors of the draft resolution 
under consideration were demanding when they called for the application of 
safeguards. 
36. The delegate of Israel and others claimed that the draft resolution 
discriminated against Israel. That accusation was unjust. In 1981, following 

GC(XXXJ.l)/OR.312 
page 13 


the destruction by Israel of the Iraqi nuclear reactor, the Security Council 
had unanimously adopted a resolution calling upon Israel to submit all its 
nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. His delegation believed it to be the 
Agency's practice to take account of United Nations resolutions, particularly 
when they were approved by all the members of the Security Council. 


37. With regard to the claim that there were no nuclear weapons in Israel, 
the Sunday Times had published an article on 5 October 1986 containing the 
following statements: "Hidden beneath the Negev desert, the factory has been 
producing atomic warheads for the last 20 years. Now it has almost certainly 
begun manufacturing thermonuclear weapons, with yields big enough to destroy 
entire cities", and: "Vanunu's evidence has surprised nuclear weapons experts 
who were approached by [the Sunday Times] Insight [team] to verify its 
accuracy because it shows that Israel does not just have the atom bomb - which 
has been long suspected - but that it has become a major nuclear power." The 
Israeli Government had responded to Vanunu's accusations by accusing him of 
high treason and sentencing him to a heavy prison sentence. 
38. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) reaffirmed her country's position on the 
matter under discussion, which it had already expressed on several occasions 
including the last meetings of the Board of Governors. She also wished to 
clarify a misunderstanding. Some delegations had said that the draft 
resolution submitted by Egypt altered the focus of the item on Israel's 
nuclear capabilities. In fact, however, that draft resolution in no way 
contradicted the one prepared by the other Arab delegations, indeed it 
complemented the ideas contained in that draft. Egypt and the other Arab 
countries had the same policy on that subject. Concerned about Israel's 
nuclear capabilities, they all urged Israel to accede to NPT and to submit all 
its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. 
39. Egypt had not insisted that its draft resolution be put to the vote 
because the Arab draft resolution, with some slight changes, incorporated its 
main idea, namely the proposal to prepare a technical study which would be 
submitted the following year and would take into account the Agency's 
experience with the application of safeguards, whether under NPT or under 
voluntary agreements, regional treaties or bilateral agreements. Contrary to 
what the Israeli delegate had claimed, the merging of the two drafts was not 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 14 


the result of political pressures. It was well known that Egypt did not give 
in to political pressure, whatever the source. Egypt had always pursued an 
independent policy based on the defence of its own interests and those of Arab 
countries, African countries and Islamic countries, in other words, the three 
groups to which it belonged. Some delegations had exressed regret that the 
draft submitted by Egypt had been withdrawn. However, information which her 
delegation had received suggested that if it had been put to the vote, those 
same delegations would have abstained or voted against it. 


40. Some delegates had asked why Israel had been singled out for special 
treatment with regard to the application of full-scope safeguards. The reply 
to that question could be found in the relevant documentation of the Security 
Council and in the 1981 resolution which it had adopted unanimously, in other 
words with the support of the United States. It was not the General 
Conference that was according special treatment. As to the Israeli idea that 
the issue of full-scope safeguards could be settled satisfactorily within the 
framework of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, all the Arab countries were ready to 
negotiate directly with Israel on the establishment of such a zone, provided 
that Israel accepted the participation in the negotiations of the 
representative of the independent State of Palestine. 
41. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no more speakers, invited 
the General Conference to vote on the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXLI)/853/Rev.l. As had been requested, the vote would be taken by 
roll-call. 
42. Liechtenstein, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called 
upon to vote first. 
43. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, 
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Afghanistan, Algeria, 
Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, 
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, Egypt, German Democratic Republic, 
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, 
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 



GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 15 


Against: Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, 
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, 
Denmark, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, 
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan. 


Abstaining: Mexico, Venezuela, Argentina, Brazil, Cameroon, Chile, 
Colombia, Cote d'lvoire, Ecuador, Guatemala, Republic of 
Korea. 


44. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l was 
adopted by 44 votes to 29, with 11 abstentions[1]. 
45. Mr. PABON (Venezuela) explained that his delegation had abstained 
from voting, as it had done in 1987 during the vote on resolution 
GC(XXXl)/RES/470, for two reasons. Firstly, the draft had related to a 
question which the competent political organs of the United Nations had 
already been examining for some time, and his delegation believed that the 
Agency's technical nature should be maintained as far as possible. Secondly, 
the draft resolution made reference to resolutions of the United Nations 
General Assembly on which Venezuela had abstained or on which it had voted in 
favour while expressing serious reservations. Lastly, his delegation would 
have voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXII)/852 submitted by the Egyptian delegation, if that had been put to 
the vote. 
46. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that his delegation had voted against 
the draft resolution because it was convinced that political questions should 
be considered by the United Nations itself and not by the technical 
organizations in the United Nations system. His country supported any 
initiatives in favour of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It would 
always show understanding for the concerns of any country or group of 
countries in that respect. However, it was worth stressing once again that 
the appropriate forum for examining matters of international security and the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was the United Nations. 
[1] 
Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh informed the Secretariat that 
it had intended to vote in favour of the draft resolution. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 16 


47. Mr. PEREIRA (Brazil) said that his delegation had abstained 
because, While supporting various aspects of the draft in question, it could 
not approve several passages related to safeguards, notably preambular 
paragraphs (c) and (d) and operative paragraph 1. His delegation wished to 
reiterate its opposition to certain assumptions underlying the draft 
resolution and other similar resolutions, namely that unsafeguarded nuclear 
activities were not for peaceful purposes and that international organizations 
had the right to demand that Member States submit their nuclear activities to 
safeguards, which was contrary to the Agency's Statute. 
48. Mr. HIREMATH (India) said that his country had always been 
concerned by the threat to peace and security in the Middle East. It was 
essential that Israel should withdraw from all the Arab and Palestinian 
territories which it occupied, including Jerusalem, and that it restore the 
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to 
self-determination. Although that was a matter for the United Nations General 
Assembly, India had voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXII)/853/Rev.l because it related to the Agency's activities and 
in order to indicate its support for the course of peace in the Middle East. 
49. However, his delegation was a little confused about the proposal in 
operative paragraph 6 concerning the preparation of a technical study. He did 
not think a technical study on different modalities of application of Agency 
safeguards in the region, taking into account the Agency's experience in 
applying its safeguards, could in any way contribute to the objectives desired 
by the sponsors of the draft resolution. 
50. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico) expressed his delegation's 
reservations about several paragraphs of the draft resolution. The Director 
General's report in document GC(XXXII)/849 did not contain enough evidence to 
substantiate the claims made in preambular paragraph (g). Moreover, it was 
the Security Council, rather than the General Conference, that was competent 
to decide whether the situation was a threat to the region. 
51. Furthermore, his delegation had difficulties in approving operative 
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, for several reasons. Firstly, it 
referred to a wholly hypothetical situation, and the General Conference ought 
not to adopt resolutions based on hypotheses. Secondly, safeguards were a 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 17 


technical instrument which should have a political basis, and such a basis did 
not exist in the present case. In addition, the draft resolution submitted by 
Egypt in document GC(XXXII)/852, which Mexico would have supported if it had 
been put to the vote, spolce of "safeguards requirements", whereas the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXlI)/853/Rev.l envisaged the direct 
application of safeguards, even though no country in the region had explicitly 
requested such safeguards. Lastly, if a nuclear-weapon-free zone were to be 
established in the Middle East, the decision to accept the application of 


safeguards could only be taken by each of the States involved, in all 


sovereignty. 


52. His Government attached the greatest importance to observance of 
Security Council resolution 487 (1981), which called upon Israel to submit all 
its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. The non-observance of that 
resolution constituted a serious obstacle to the implementation of a 
generalized non-proliferation regime in the region. It was well known that 
Israel had developed its nuclear technology to the point where it could serve 
military purposes. Since that matter was vital for peace, not only in the 
Middle East but throughout the world, Mexico urged Israel to implement the 
Security Council resolution unconditionally. 
53. Mr. SHENSTOKE (Canada) said that he had voted against the draft 
resolution because it dealt with a military issue, and thus did not fall 
within the Agency's province. Furthermore, political issues threatened to 
undermine an institution which had a technical mandate. His country urged all 
States to accede to NPT and to submit all their nuclear facilities to 
full-scope Agency safeguards, but it could not support a resolution which 
singled out one country even though several others were in the same 
situation. Finally, there had been several positive elements in the draft 
resolution submitted by Egypt in document GC(XXXIl)/852, and it was 
regrettable that those elements had not been adequately reflected in the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXIl)/853/Rev.l. 
54. Mr. KAZUHARA (Japan) said that his Government's basic position on 
the matter remained unchanged: it urged Israel, as well as the other 
countries which had not yet done so, to accede to NPT as soon as possible and 
to agree to submit all their nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.3l2 
page 18 


However, the Agency was a technical organization with well-defined functions 
and objectives, and its mission was to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world. 
To introduce into the discussions of the General Conference elements which 
were irrelevant to those functions would not yield any constructive results, 
but on the contrary would be likely to divert the Agency from its real goals 
and mandate. His country therefore regretted that the item was reappearing 
systematically in the General Conference's agenda, 


55. Mr. GUYER (Argentina) said that his country's position with regard 
to safeguards was well known, whatever the arguments put forward, his 
delegation had always clearly expressed its disagreement with any attempt to 
impose on a Member State, against its sovereign will, the obligation to accept 
Agency safeguards. Furthermore, it was firmly convinced that confidence in 
the Agency's safeguards system could be maintained only if that system were 
applied in complete conformity with the Statute. Therefore, any attempt to 
impose that system on a compulsory basis and against the sovereign will of a 
Member State would radically change the nature of the system and ultimately 
detract from its credibility. Even if it took a decision by consensus, the 
General Conference could not alter the principle that the submission of a 
Member State's facilities to safeguards must be voluntary. There was even 
less foundation for such a decision to make submission to full-scope 
safeguards compulsory, since that was not provided for in the Agency's 
Statute. The principle of such submission could be binding only if a State 
acceded freely to an international instrument whose provisions created such an 
obligation. Argentina considered that any decision by a policy-making organ 
aiming to impose such an obligation on a Member State was invalid. 
SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXXII)/844, 848, 855 and 858; 
INFC1RC/356) 


56. The PRESIDENT noted that the item on South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities had been included in the agenda pursuant to resolution 
GC(XXXI)/RES/483. The Director General's report was contained in document 
GC(XXXII)/844. 
57. The Conference also had before it, in document GC(XXXlI)/858, a draft 
resolution submitted by Egypt on behalf of the African Member States, as well 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 19 


as documents lNb"ClRC/356 and GC(XXXl.l)/855, distributed at the request of the 
Resident Representatives of the USSR, the United Kingdom and the United 
States, the NPT depositary countries, and document GC(XXXIl)/848, distributed 
at the request of the Resident Representative of South Africa. 


58. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt), introducing the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXIl)/858, recalled that the matter had been on the agenda for 
meetings of the Agency's policy-making organs for several years and that the 
Board of Governors, in its report in document GC(XXXi)/807, had recommended 
that South Africa be suspended from the exercise of the privileges and rights 
of membership. 
59. South Africa's nuclear capabilities had for a long time been, and 
continued to be, a source of grave concern to all African countries, not only 
because of the permanent violation by the South African regime of all the 
principles of international law and the United Nations Charter, but also 
because of its persistent refusal to submit all its nuclear facilities to 
Agency safeguards. South Africa's intransigence and its refusal to observe 
General Assembly and General Conference resolutions showed very clearly that 
the Pretoria Government was trying to gain time to avoid implementation of 
those resolutions - as was illustrated by its latest manoeuvres, which had 
continued until just before the current session. The African delegations 
condemned South Africa for not having complied with those successive 
resolutions and for refusing to abide by the principles and objectives of the 
United Nations Charter and the Agency's Statute. 
60. Despite the great importance which it attached to implementing the 
recommendation to deprive South Africa of its privileges and rights of 
membership under Article XIX of the Statute, the African Group would agree to 
give South Africa time once more to enable it to comply with those 
resolutions, but then the Board's recommendation would have to be followed. 
In doing so, it hoped that the racist regime of South Africa would at last bow 
to the rules of international law and respect world public opinion, which 
consistently condemned its racist practices and the threats it posed to peace 
and security in the African continent and the whole world. 
61. That was why the African Group was submitting to the General Conference 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXlI)/858, which also requested 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 20 


the Director General to continue to take all possible measures to ensure the 
full implementation of resolution GC(XXX)/RES/468 and to report on the matter 
to the thirty-third regular session of the General Conference. On behalf of 
the African Group, her delegation appealed to the General Conference to give 
its full support to the draft resolution before it, and urged all Governments 
to exert every possible political, moral and economic pressure on the 
Pretoria regime to force it to abide by international standards. It hoped 
that the draft resolution would be accepted by consensus, but if that were not 
the case it would request a roll-call vote. 


62. Mr. MGBOKWERE (Nigeria) supported the draft resolution on South 
Africa's nuclear capabilities. The African Group regretted, however, that it 
had been necessary to postpone the decision regarding the suspension of South 
Africa from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership until the 
thirty-third regular session of the General Conference. Some Member States 
felt that South Africa should be given more time to decide on accession 
to NPT, with the unfortunate result that various excuses had to be found to 
save the racist regime from suspension. In view of its record, he very much 
doubted that South Africa would eventually accede to NPT. South Africa's 
tactics and posturing should not be misconstrued, and the latest of the 
statements by the apartheid regime deserved careful consideration: "it is 
South Africa's objective and desire to accede to the NPT if South Africa could 
be satisfied that its concerns would be met". 
63. Those concerns were well known to all, and even better to the 
depositary States, which seemed to have given firm replies to South Africa on 
that subject. The direct and unequivocal reply by the NPT depositaries to 
South Africa was encouraging, but it would be still more satisfying if those 
three States, with the members of their respective groups, were to join those 
voting in favour of the draft resolution in document GC(XXXIl)/858, thus 
demonstrating to South Africa the strength of their will to obtain 
satisfaction. 
64. His delegation was convinced that no Member State would wish to condone 
the evil and mindless system of apartheid. It urged all Member States to 
translate into action their firm belief in the dignity and equality of all 
men, without distinction of race. Pressure to achieve meaningful and enduring 
change in South Africa should continue in all areas. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 21 


65. He was aware that some Member States invoked the principle of 
universality for the Agency, but he believed that a regime which denied its 
citizens their innate rights and established inhuman segregation on the basis 
of skin colour had no right to any privilege based on that principle. To 
accept, knowing the social and political structure of that country, that South 
Africa, meaning exclusively white South Africa, should be a member of common 
forums seemed incompatible with the principle of universality and made a 
mockery of the resolutions of the General Conference and the very principles 
of the United Nations Charter. 
66. If the draft resolution could not be adopted by consensus, he would 
join the Egyptian delegation in asking for a roll-call vote. He did not want 
South Africa to think that the African Group's draft resolution expressed a 
position of weakness, since that was not the case: the draft was based on 
common sense, and time would be on its side. 
67. Mr. OLUMOKO (United Nations Council for Namibia) expressed his 
delegation's full support for the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXIl)/858. The United Nations had put an end to the mandate of the racist 
regime of South Africa in Namibia 22 years previously, but that regime 
continued to occupy Namibian territory illegally, ignoring the legitimate 
aspirations of the Namibian people to self-determination, freedom and 
independence in a sovereign Namibia. 
68. Furthermore, South Africa continued its illegal exploitation of 
Namibian uranium in violation of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the 
Natural Resources of Namibia. That exploitation had helped to enhance South 
Africa's nuclear-weapons capability, which threatened not only the security of 
African States but also international security in general. In addition, South 
Africa was in the process of establishing a nuclear waste repository on the 
Namibian coast which posed a severe threat to the health of the population. 
For ail those reasons, Namibia supported the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXII)/858, which called upon that country to place all its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards within the coming year and to conduct 
itself in accordance with the principles and objectives of the United Nations 
Charter and the Agency's Statute. All Member States were therefore urged to 
support that draft resolution. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 22 


69. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) recalled that, when the matter had 
been considered the previous year, a statement by the South African Government 
concerning possible accession to NPT had been put forward as a new element, 
and that the General Conference had not reached any conclusion on the 
suspension of South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of 
membership - partly as a result of that statement - and had not implemented 
the recommendation which had been made to it by the Board of Governors. A 
year later, the South African Government had done nothing to carry out its 
declared intentions or to meet the repeated demands of the General Conference 
to submit all its nuclear facilities to safeguards. 
70. South Africa's delaying tactics enabled it to continue to ignore the 
admonishments of the international community. Everyone knew that Cuba had 
always shown a firm attitude to that problem and, as had been pointed out on 
several occasions, the current attempts to find a negotiated solution to the 
question of southern Africa did not mean that Cuba had changed its position, 
since it condemned and rejected the apartheid regime. His delegation was 
strongly opposed to any dilatory manoeuvres by the South African Government 
which would enable it to go on ignoring the demands of the General Conference 
and awaited specific actions which would genuinely meet the legitimate demands 
of the international community. 
71. Mr. MBODJ (Senegal) reaffirmed that South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities were a serious concern to African countries and to all that 
believed in peace and justice. His country therefore continued to think that 
everything should be done to suspend South Africa from the exercise of its 
privileges and rights of membership until it acceded to NPT and renounced its 
policy of apartheid. That position reflected the desire of the African 
countries to isolate South Africa, which was the only country in the world 
where racism was constitutional. South Africa was a State which defended the 
interests of a minority forced to assert itself through the use of violence by 
its police and military apparatus and to maintain itself by means of a 
permanent state of emergency. 
72. The South African regime threatened peace and stability in the African 
continent. It should therefore still be condemned, even if, regrettably, the 
support given to it by some countries to enable it to maintain the privileges 

GC(XXXIl)/0R.312 
page 23 


and rights of membership of the Agency only encouraged it in its policy of 
non-respect for human rights and violation of the purposes and principles of 
the United Nations, on which the Agency's activities were based according to 
Articles II1.B.1 and IV.B of the Statute. 


73. The international community should assist the African States in 
politically and diplomatically isolating that diseased regime, which stood in 
the way of all efforts to establish a democratic and multiracial system in the 
southern part of the continent. That goal would have to be achieved by 
strengthening, diversifying and deepening the links and types of support for 
all forms of South African resistance. His delegation, in its turn, appealed 
to all Member States to adopt the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXiI)/858 by consensus. 
74. Mr. SIL.ANGWA (Zambia) said that his delegation supported the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXlI)/858, which was an expression of good will 
aimed at solving the problem posed by the racist regime of South Africa in the 
interest of international peace and security. That draft should therefore 
receive overwhelming support from all the delegations present. A similar 
resolution submitted by the African Group and adopted by the General 
Conference during its thirty-first session had given the South African regime 
the time to take concrete steps to implement the relevant resolutions of the 
General Assembly and the General Conference. Nothing had come of it but an 
unequivocal demonstration of the tactics of the South African regime, which 
were to disregard those resolutions. 
75. The events of the past twelve months proved beyond doubt that the South 
African regime remained determined to achieve its military ambitions in the 
region. It had openly increased its nuclear-weapons capability. Clearly, it 
would not voluntarily abandon its policy of apartheid or its military 
ambitions in southern Africa. For those reasons his Government had in various 
forums urged the international community to apply comprehensive and mandatory 
economic and military sanctions against the racist regime; for sanctions were 
the only peaceful means of compelling that regime to place all its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards and to bring back peace and stability in 
the region. If South Africa would not accede to that demand, then 
comprehensive sanctions and suspension from exercising its privileges and 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 24 


rights of membership would become the only logical and peaceful means of 
putting pressure on it to heed the objurgations of the international community. 


76. The previous year, the Board of Governors had reached the logical 
conclusion of suspending South Africa from exercising its privileges and 
rights of membership. The General Conference should not pass by that 
opportunity for applying peaceful pressure: delaying implementation of the 
Board's recommendation was tantamount to according international legitimacy to 
the military ambitions of the racist regime in southern Africa. Those 
ambitions were not only sources of tension in the sub-region, but also 
threatened international peace and security. That was why Zambia exhorted the 
three NPT depositary States to make the South African regime place all its 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards in the coming year. He reminded 
the Conference that the draft resolution before it was aimed at resolving the 
South African problem by peaceful means, and hoped that all delegations would 
support it. 
77. Mr. GORDON (United Kingdom) recalled that his Government had 
frequently declared that it abhorred apartheid, and that its attitude had not 
changed. His delegation's difficulty and inability to accept the draft 
resolution under consideration in no way implied that the United Kingdom 
approved of the South African regime, but derived from the position which his 
country had consistently taken since the question had been examined in the 
Board of Governors in June 1987, as well as from more general principles. 
While some of the arguments put forward were certainly eloquent, his 
Government could not but warn against establishing a link between the internal 
policies of a country and its membership of the Agency, as suggested in the 
draft resolution. It also did not seem reasonable that a country should be 
deprived of its privileges and rights of membership entirely or partly on the 
grounds that there had been insufficient progress in the negotiation of 
safeguards agreements or towards accession to NPT. The danger of creating an 
unfortunate precedent was obvious. 
78. The United Kingdom, convinced that all countries should accede to NPT, 
had pressed South Africa to do so. As could be seen from document 
GC(XXXLI)/855, the depositary Governments would continue to press South Africa 
on that point. His delegation also strongly believed that the chances of a 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 25 


positive outcome would be greater if South Africa remained a Member of the 
Agency. His delegation therefore welcomed the mutual understanding which 
appeared to be emerging on that difficult issue. He appreciated the sincerity 
of the previous statements. His country's objectives were the same as those 
of other Member States, and his delegation's sensitivity was just as great; 
the only difference was the appreciation of how best to achieve what all 
desired. 


79. Mr. GHAZALI (Malaysia) said that nothing condemned a country or a 
system of government as irretrievably as resorting to methods which grossly 
violated universal norms. Arrogance and the deliberate disregard of 
regulations were the crimes of which the South African regime was guilty. 
Malaysia had never weakened in its opposition to South Africa's policy of 
apartheid. The acquisition by the South African regime of a nuclear-weapons 
capability seriously threatened international peace and security. No effort 
should be spared in compelling that regime to comply with the relevant 
resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly. Malaysia therefore 
supported the draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/858. 
80. Mr. Al NUWAISKR (Saudi Arabia) pointed out that the policies and 
nuclear ambitions pursued by the South African regime on the African continent 
were the same as those of its Israeli ally, with which it collaborated in 
developing military nuclear capabilities intended to intimidate and to 
threaten neighbouring countries. Furthermore, South Africa was violating the 
principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations, denying 
sovereignty to Namibia, plundering that country's wealth, ignoring all the 
appeals made to it by the international community and having recourse to all 
sorts of conderanable practices. His delegation fully shared the point of view 
of the African group, as expressed by the delegate of Egypt and the 
representative of Nigeria, and supported the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXlI)/858, in the hope that it would be adopted unanimously. 
81. Mr. GUEVAS CANGINQ (Mexico) noted that there had been much 
discussion about the presence of South Africa among the Members of the Agency, 
about the appropriateness of applying sanctions - including suspension from 
the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership - and about whether 
such suspension would infringe on the principle of universality. The 
Group of 7 7 had therefore, through the President of the General Conference, 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 26 


requested the opinion of the Legal Adviser on the significance and 
consequences of such suspension. The Legal Adviser had given his opinion, and 
he (Mr. Cuevas Cancino) had asked the President, on behalf of the Group of 77, 
to have it published as a General Conference document. For the sake of 
brevity, he would limit himself to quoting three extracts from that opinion. 


82. "Article XIX.B [...] deals only with suspension from the exercise of 
privileges and rights of membership and does not purport to affect the 
obligations of a State as a Member State of the Agency. It therefore implies 
the continuation of the bond of membership. The suspended State would 
continue to be a Member State of the Agency. As such it would continue to be 
bound by the obligations assumed under the Statute by Member States." 
83. "Bilateral and multilateral agreements which have been concluded by the 
Agency or under its auspices with a suspended Member State would continue to 
remain in force." 
84. "Suspension could be viewed as a means of applying additional pressure 
to a State in order to induce it to comply with the provisions of the 
Statute. It would not close the door for subsequent reconciliation and 
restoration of the privileges and rights of membership. It is thus by 
definition of a temporary character and could be lifted once the reasons 
underlying it no longer existed." 
85. With regard to the draft resolution under consideration, which foresaw 
the inclusion of the item in the agenda for the following session of the 
General Conference, he appealed to all States that upheld the equality of all 
races, a key principle of the United Nations Charter and of all international 
organizations, to take due account of that legal opinion. His delegation 
would be very pleased if such a measure should prove to be unnecessary because 
South Africa had taken prompt action and seized the opportunity which it was 
being offered. He hoped that it would not be necessary to have a vote on a 
resolution of suspension the following year, and that the Member State 
concerned would make good use of the time so as to avoid such a weakening of 
the Agency's universality. 
86. The PRESIDENT indicated that the text from which the delegate of 
Mexico had quoted would be issued as a General Conference document.[2] 
[2] See document GC(XXXII)/INF/265. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 27 


87. Mr. QIN (China) supported the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXiI)/858 and the inclusion in the agenda for the thirty-third session of 
the General Conference of the item related to South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities. The draft resolution was realistic and in line with the 
interests of the African peoples and countries. It was well known that 
South Africa had long persisted in its policy of oppression and apartheid, 
which constituted a serious threat to peace and security in the region. 
Recently, the South African Minister for Foreign Affairs had admitted that his 
country had the means of manufacturing nuclear weapons. That was why South 
Africa's nuclear capabilities caused serious concern to the international 
community in general and to the African countries in particular. His 
Government was firmly opposed to South Africa's policies and actions, and to 
all its activities relating to the manufacture of nuclear weapons, whose only 
goal was to maintain the system of apartheid and to jeopardize peace in the 
region. China would firmly support, as always, the countries of southern 
Africa in their justified struggle to re-establish peace and security in the 
region, and endorsed their proposal to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
Africa. It urged South Africa to comply with the resolutions of the General 
Assembly and the General Conference and to place all its nuclear activites 
under Agency safeguards. 
88. Mr. ZANMAD (Tunisia) recalled that during the general debate his 
delegation had strongly condemned South Africa's racist policies and clearly 
expressed its views on the danger represented by South African nuclear 
installations for the countries in the region and for all of Africa. That 
danger was all the greater because of the policy of apartheid pursued by 
Pretoria towards the black majority and because of the illegal occupation of 
Namibian territory. 
89. Although it seemed that relatively favourable developments were 
emerging, that should not dull the vigilance of the General Conference nor 
inhibit its attempts to make South Africa place its nuclear installations 
under Agency safeguards. On the contrary, concerted efforts should be 
continued with a view to reconsidering, at the following session, the need to 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 28 


suspend South Africa from exercising its privileges and rights of membership 
under Article XIX.B of the Statute. The charm campaign and dilatory 
manoeuvres carried out recently by the Pretoria authorities should not be 
allowed to divert the General Conference from its objective, unless there were 
radical and positive changes in the policies of Pretoria on apartheid, on 
Namibia, on relations with neighbouring countries and on Agency safeguards. 
In conclusion, he hoped the draft resolution presented by Egypt on behalf of 


the African group would enjoy the support of all delegations. 


90. Mr. SRINIVASAN (India) noted that the African States, once again 
demonstrating their moderation, their statesmanship and their proverbial 
patience, had abandoned their initial draft resolution, which more than one 
third of those voting would probably have opposed, and had agreed to defer 
consideration of the suspension of South Africa from the exercise of its 
privileges and rights as a member of the Agency. 
91. Nonetheless, he had taken the floor because he could not remain silent 
in the face of injustice, racism and discrimination against a population on 
the land of its own ancestors. Against such injustice the only means of 
exerting pressure which a peace-loving international community had at its 
disposal were the pressure of public opinion and the application of various 
sanctions or ostracism from important meetings so as to make known that there 
were wrongs to be righted and rights to be restored. Unfortunately, it had 
been the African States and not South Africa which had had to yield to 
geopolitical pressures once again. He concluded by quoting Uole Soyinka, the 
Nigerian writer and Nobel laureate: "The man dies in all who keep silent in 
the face of tyranny ... The balance sheet is very often on the side of 
outrage!". 
92. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his delegation 
was opposed to the draft resolution in document GC(XXXlI)/858. In June 1987, 
the Board of Governors had adopted an unfortunate resolution recommending that 
the General Conference suspend South Africa from exercising its privileges and 
rights of membership. Showing great wisdom, the General Conference had not 
implemented that recommendation. He pointed out that the sponsors of the 
draft resolution under consideration were not asking the General Conference to 
suspend South Africa from its privileges and rights of membership; such 

GC(XXXJ.l)/OR.312 
page 29 


moderation showed a growing realization that such a measure would not serve 
the interests of any Member State, and especially not those of the African 
Member States. 


93. His country was nevertheless opposed to the draft resolution, above all 
because it considered it to be a purely political exercise bearing no 
connection to the Agency's responsibilities and role. His country had always 
argued in the past that initiatives to suspend any country from exercising its 
privileges and rights of membership for political reasons were contrary to 
several basic principles which were essential for preserving and strengthening 
the Agency. 
94. The first principle was that of universality of international 
organizations. If nuclear energy was to be used for peaceful purposes only, 
in a safe and environmentally sound manner, it was necessary for all countries 
with nuclear programmes to participate in the Agency's activities and 
deliberations. To exclude a country or to limit its participation for 
political reasons would run counter to that principle. Secondly, a Member 
State could be disciplined only within the framework defined by the Statute, 
which protected Members against any arbitrary action based on political 
considerations. There was absolutely no justification for suspending 
South Africa from its privileges and rights of membership under Article XIX.B 
of the Statute, since that country had not persistently violated the 
provisions of the Statute or of any agreement entered into by it pursuant to 
the Statute. Thirdly, the peaceful nature of Member States' nuclear 
programmes was best ensured when safeguards were applied to the greatest 
possible number of installations. In the case of South Africa, suspension of 
the exercise of its privileges and rights would call in question the continued 
application of safeguards in that country and the extension of safeguards 
agreements to new installations, some of which could produce sensitive nuclear 
materials. Fourthly, safeguards should continue to be regarded by all Member 
States as measures accepted voluntarily and intended to confirm a country's 
peaceful nuclear intentions, and not as sanctions or penalties imposed from 
outside in response to alleged transgressions or misconduct. If Agency 
safeguards were to come to be seen as sanctions, their fundamental role in 
support of non-proliferation would be seriously undermined. 



GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 30 


95. The draft resolution under consideration was clearly in conflict with 
those four principles because, though it did not call for an immediate 
suspension of South Africa from exercising its privileges and rights of 
membership, it nevertheless contained the seeds for such a decision the 
following year. It was because his delegation could not subscribe to the 
premises of the draft resolution that it could not support it. More 
specifically, his delegation objected to preambular paragraph (c), which 
seemed to arrogate to the Agency the right to state that South Africa had 
violated international law and the United Nations Charter. However, the 
Agency's Statute did not give it any mandate to make such statements of major 
legal significance. Such matters were exclusively the province of the 
Security Council. Operative paragraph 2, which committed the General 
Conference to taking a decision the following year on the suspension of 
South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership, was 
also a problem. It was not within the Agency's competence to resolve 
political issues arising from the South African Government's attitude towards 
its citizens and the international community; the Agency should focus on 
scientific and technical questions which fell within its sphere of competence. 
96. Moreover, his Government considered that the participation of South 
Africa in the Agency's activities should not depend on a possible accession 
to NPT. His country strongly supported NPT and urged all Member States to 
accede to it. As stated in the letter of the three depositary Governments, 
the United States would continue to press South Africa to accede to the Treaty 
and to place all its nuclear facilities under safeguards. However, for the 
reasons already stated, his country considered that South Africa should remain 
a Member of the Agency even if, like several other Member States, it had not 
yet acceded to NPT. 
97. Finally, he emphasized that his country's position derived from its 
interpretation of the Agency's Statute and had nothing to do with the 
character of the South African Government. The United States fully understood 
and shared the aversion of the sponsors of the draft resolution to the racist 
system of apartheid in South Africa. His country was among those which had 
applied the strictest sanctions against South Africa. It also shared the 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 31 


frustration of the draft resolution's sponsors at the delay in South Africa's 


consideration of a possible accession to NPT. It wished neither to defend nor 


to excuse South Africa when it said that it would be a mistake to exclude that 


country from the Agency. On the contrary, it was because his country was 


concerned at the size and level of complexity of the South African nuclear 
programme, from the point of view not only of non-proliferation, but also of 
health, safety and the environment, that it wanted South Africa to remain a 
Member of the Agency. It was absolutely necessary that the Agency should 
maintain contact with South Africa's nuclear programme, in the interests of 
the citizens of that country, of Africa and of the whole world. He appealed 
to other Member States also to oppose the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXiI)/858. 


98. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) regretted that the General Conference had been 
incapable on two occasions of reaching a decision on the Board of Governors' 
recommendation to suspend South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and 
rights of membership. The Pretoria regime was condemned and rejected by the 
international community for its policy of apartheid, which was an attack on 
human dignity and a negation of all humanitarian principles. 
99. He had been surprised by the information regarding discussions 
between the Pretoria regime and the NPT depositary Governments. The fact that 
those talks had been announced just before the opening of the General 
Conference indicated that that had been an obvious attempt to influence the 
work of the General Conference and to delay the adoption of the measure 
recommended by the Board of Governors. In any case, it was difficult to 
understand why there should have been discussions between a State and the NPT 
depositary Governments. Any State could freely accede to NPT and deposit its 
instruments of ratification with the depositary Governments, without any need 
for negotiations. Furthermore, he did not see under what Article of NPT the 
depositary Governments had taken upon themselves such a responsibility. 
100. The link established between the accession of South Africa to NPT, on 
the one hand, and the Board's recommendation to suspend it from its privileges 
and rights of membership on the other, seemed unclear and inconsistent. The 
Board's recommendation bore witness to the aversion which the world felt 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 32 


towards the racist regime in Pretoria, its aggressive policies, the permanent 
threat it posed for the African States, and its persistent violation of the 
United Nations Charter. His delegation would have supported a draft 
resolution demanding that the Pretoria regime be suspended from the exercise 
of its privileges and rights of membership because such a measure would not 
only have been a victory for the African States and other countries, but would 
also and above all have marked the triumph of human values and constituted a 
success for the Agency. However, given the circumstances which had led the 
African Group to submit the draft resolution in document GC(XXXil)/858, his 
delegation would vote for it. 


101. Mr. AL-MINAYES (Kuwait) said that since the South African regime 
practised racial discrimination, pursued a policy of aggression and 
collaborated with Israel to acquire nuclear weapons, his delegation fully 
supported the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXJ.I)/858. By 
refusing to comply with the resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly 
and the General Conference, South Africa had clearly shown its disdain of the 
international community. The manoeuvres to which it had resorted in order to 
mislead international opinion with regard to NPT were aimed at diminishing the 
importance of the Agency and at sowing confusion in the debates of the General 
Conference. His delegation considered that the adoption of the draft 
resolution under consideration would constitute a deterrent and would enable 
justice to be done to the peace-loving peoples of Africa. His delegation 
therefore urged all others to support the draft. 
102. Mr. EL-TAHIR (Sudan) said that South Africa continued to violate 
all international rules and customs by refusing to grant the African people 
the most basic human rights. After a year's debate on that country's nuclear 
capabilities, the situation remained unchanged. The Pretoria regime 
disregarded the principles and purposes of the international community by 
deliberately and persistently ignoring the United Nations Charter, the 
Agency's Statute and the various resolutions adopted by the General 
Conference. Any State which wished to enjoy the privileges and rights 
conferred upon it through its membership of the Agency was obliged to respect 
the principles on which the United Nations system was based. South Africa, 
however, far from showing the least wish to implement forthwith certain 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 33 


decisions adopted by the international community, had, shortly before the 


opening of the session of the General Conference, stepped up its manoeuvres 


and given rise to all sorts of suppositions which had done nothing but 
maintain the status quo. The acquisition, by the Pretoria regime, of a 
nuclear capability represented a danger not only for African States, but also 


for international peace and security. Sudan therefore called on all 
Member States to support the draft resolution set forth in document 
GC(XXXlI)/858. 


103. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the discussions on 
South Africa's nuclear capabilities were similar in many ways to the debate 
concerning Israel. The two regimes were racist in nature, both practised a 
form of colonization and both collaborated in the nuclear field by giving each 
other assistance and aid. South Africa's nuclear capability was a danger to 
Africa and to world peace. His delegation would have wished the draft 
resolution under consideration to demand that South Africa be suspended 
immediately from its privileges and rights of membership. The adoption of 
such a measure would have allowed pressure to be put on that country and on 
other States of the same kind, to induce them to modify their behaviour. His 
country approved, despite its weaknesses, the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXII)/858. 
104. Ms. OLEMBO (Kenya) said that her country abhorred South Africa's 
attempts to acquire a nuclear-weapons capability and feared that the acts of 
aggression perpetrated by South Africa against its neighbours would extend to 
other countries. The obstinacy with which South Africa refused to accede 
to NPT and to place its nuclear installations under safeguards clearly 
indicated that it wanted to keep a free hand to develop nuclear weapons. The 
draft resolution in document GC(XXXlI)/858 was a gesture of good will towards 
South Africa and gave it time to decide to accede to NPT. However, that did 
not mean that the African States' determination to safeguard peace on the 
continent had weakened. If South Africa continued in its refusal to comply 
with the resolutions of the General Conference, Member States would have to 
take a definite decision on the matter. Her delegation therefore approved the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXII)/858. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 34 


105. Mr. ABDELBARI (Algeria) said that the General Conference was once 
again considering the issue of South Africa's nuclear capabilities because of 
the negative attitude of the South African racist regime which refused to 
comply with the resolutions of the General Conference and to act in accordance 
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. The regime 
persisted in applying the despicable and shameful policy of apartheid, and 
continued to threaten the sovereignty and security of neighbouring States 
through its warmongering policies, which it was backing up through the 
acquisition of a nuclear capability. 
106. The Agency's Statute made membership conditional on two criteria: 
Members should act in accordance with the purposes and principles of the 
United Nations Charter and they should fulfil, in good faith, the obligations 
they had assumed under the Statute. Clearly, South Africa was far from 
meeting those conditions, preferring to use delaying tactics to evade its 
international obligations. The African Group had shown great patience towards 
the South African regime, as well as showing a spirit of co-operation and 
goodwill towards those who continued to believe that the position of that 
regime was likely to change. His delegation appealed to all Member States to 
exert all possible pressure to induce South Africa to comply with the 
resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly and the General Conference, 
and hoped that the draft resolution submitted by Egypt on behalf of the 
African Group would be supported by all. 
107. Mr. WILSON (Australia) recalled that his Government had repeatedly 
requested South Africa to accede to NPT or at least to accept full-scope 
safeguards. It was concerned to see that South Africa was delaying conclusion 
of a safeguards agreement for the Valindaba enrichment plant. His country 
also regretted to note that one year after having announced its intention to 
accede to NPT, South Africa had not yet done so. Representatives of his 
Government had conducted discussions with South Africa on that subject, both 
in Pretoria and in Vienna. 
108. Nevertheless, while it deplored the fact that South Africa refused to 
accede to NPT and to submit all its nuclear facilities to safeguards, his 
delegation could not accept the draft resolution under examination. There was 
no point in reconsidering the suspension of South Africa from the exercise of 

GC(XXXH)/OR.312 
page 35 


its privileges and rights of membership under Article XIX.B of the Statute the 
following year, because there were insufficient grounds for such a 
suspension. Moreover, the decision whether or not to accede to an 
international treaty was a sovereign State's prerogative, and failure to 
accede should not restrict its privileges and rights of membership of the 
Agency. To prevent South Africa from participating in the following sessions 
of the General Conference because it would not accede to NPT or accept the 
application of full-scope safeguards would be tantamount to selective 
application of the principle of non-proliferation, since several other Member 
States of the Agency had not taken such measures either, and would be contrary 
to the principle of universality of international organizations. Since 
Australia had adopted extremely severe sanctions against South Africa, his 
delegation trusted that its opposition to the draft resolution would not be 
interpreted as a weakening of its abhorrence of apartheid. 


109. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) fully supported the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXII)/858, because it condemned the inhuman and racist policy 
pursued by South Africa, which consistently flouted the principles of the 
United Nations Charter and the Agency's Statute and completely ignored the 
various resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly. The 
sponsors of the draft resolution had shown restraint and political sense. The 
South African people had suffered too much for too long; it deserved the 
compassion and respect of the international community. His country would 
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution in document GC(XXXIl)/858. 
110. Mr. CLADAKIS (Greece), speaking on behalf of the twelve 
Member States of the European Community, noted that they fully shared the 
abhorrence of apartheid expressed by the sponsors of the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXlI)/858. Nevertheless, they believed that 
suspension of South Africa or any other State from the exercise of its 
privileges and rights of membership would run counter to the basic principle 
of universality of the United Nations and its related international 
organizations. Such a step would weaken the safeguards system, would be 
likely to reduce nuclear safety and would create a precedent which could 
jeopardize the participation of other countries in the Agency. The 
member states of the European Community were therefore opposed to any steps 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 36 


which could lead to the suspension of South Africa from the exercise of its 


privileges and rights of membership of the Agency - a possibility clearly 


envisaged in operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution in document 


GC(XXXII)/858, which they could not therefore support. 


111. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no more speakers, invited 
the General Conference to vote on the draft resolution contained in document 


GC(XXXIl)/858. As requested, there would be a roll-call vote. 


112. Ireland, having, been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


113. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Jordan, Kenya, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, 
Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, 
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, 
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Afghanistan, 
Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, China, 
Cote d'lvoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, German 
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq. 


Against: Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, 
Paraguay, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
States of America, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, 
Denmark, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, 
Greece, Iceland. 


Abstaining Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala. 


114. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXII)/858 was adopted 
by 58 votes to 27, with 4 abstentions. 


115. Mr. GUYER (Argentina) said that his delegation had voted in favour 
of the draft resolution priraarily in order to condemn the continued violations 


of the principles of the United Nations Charter by the South African regime. 


At the same time, it reaffirmed its opposition to any attempt to force any 


Member State to accept the application of safeguards. 



GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 3 7 


116. Mr. KAZUHARA (Japan) said that his Government's attitude towards 
South Africa remained unchanged. The South African Government's policy of 
apartheid was wholly contrary to the dignity of human beings and was totally 
intolerable. Furthermore, his delegation regretted that the negotiations 
between the Agency and the South African Government regarding the application 
of safeguards had not yet produced any significant results. However, his 
delegation had followed with great interest and attention the steps taken 
recently by South Africa to begin consultations with NPT depositary 
Governments and with some other countries, including Japan. His delegation 
urged the South African Government to decide to accede to the Treaty as soon 
as possible. 
117. The Japanese delegation firmly believed that the principle of 
universality and the technical nature of the Agency must be maintained and 
that any politicization of the Agency's activities should be avoided in order 
to ensure its effective functioning in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and in achieving effective world-wide non-proliferation. Thus, it 
would not be politically wise, legally appropriate, or technically effective 
to suspend South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of 
membership, because such a measure would in practice exclude all possibility 
of progress in negotiations relating to the application of safeguards. 
118. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that his country had always supported 
the principle of universality of international organizations. In defending 
that principle, his country did not judge the policies of Member States in 
general or of the apartheid regime in particular. His country's position on 
that specific question had been clearly expressed on several occasions, in the 
United Nations General Assembly and elsewhere. Austria firmly supported the 
principle of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It therefore hoped that 
States which were not party to NPT would decide to accede to it in their own 
interests as well as for the sake of the stability and security of the 
international community. 
119. Mr. GRAHAM (New Zealand) recalled that his country strongly 
condemned South Africa's apartheid policy, as it had made clear in the 
appropriate forums of the United Nations. As far as the Agency was concerned, 
it was South Africa's nuclear programme which was particularly relevant, for 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 38 


important elements of the nuclear fuel cycle in that country were not covered 
by the safeguards system. His delegation saw that as a cause for grave 
concern, and for that specific reason was opposed to any suspension of 
South Africa from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership, 
which would be likely to be counter-productive and might impede negotiations 
on extending Agency safeguards to South Africa's nuclear facilities and 
perhaps jeopardize existing agreements. Such a step would therefore be likely 
from the outset to preclude appropriate control of South Africa's nuclear 
development. In addition, his delegation believed that a more general 
question of principle was at stake. To suspend South Africa from the exercise 
of its privileges and rights of membership would be contrary to the principle 
of universality prevailing in all the United Nations organizations. 


120. That being said, his country's abhorrence of apartheid and its 
insistence that the South African nuclear development programme be devoted to 
peaceful applications were in no way diminished. The previous year, his 
delegation had urged South Africa to carry out quickly its stated intention to 
accede to NPT. It now appealed to South Africa to do so before the 
thirty-third regular session of the General Conference. 
121. Mr. SUEDI (United Republic of Tanzania) said that the statements 
made by several speakers on the principle of universality in the Agency called 
for some comments. That principle would not be contradicted by the suspension 
of South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership, 
since South Africa itself did not respect that principle within its frontiers, 
where blacks were persecuted because of the colour of their skin. South 
Africa must accept the principle of universality in its territory before that 
principle could be invoked in support of a decision not to suspend it. Any 
other approach would lead to illogicality and contradiction. 
122. His country regretted that several countries were against adopting a 
resolution which constituted not only a warning by the international community 
to the South African Government, but also an encouragement to the victims of 
apartheid. Some Member States had also argued that to suspend South Africa 
from the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership would jeopardize 
the safeguards system. But there could, in any case be no certainty that 
South Africa would submit its facilities to Agency safeguards. In that 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 39 


connection his delegation wished to stress that NPT-related matters should not 
be mixed up with the problems in South Africa. In conclusion, he hoped that 
the countries which had opposed the draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/858 
would show a better understanding of the problems at the thirty-third regular 
session of the General Conference. The events which would have taken place in 
the intervening period would perhaps have shown that the sponsors of the draft 
resolution were right. 


123. Mr. MAROM (Israel) said that his country had consistently 
denounced racism and apartheid in all international forums. On 18 March 1987, 
the Israeli Cabinet had decided, inter alia, "to reiterate Israel's total 
condemnation of the apartheid policy". Moreover, his delegation had been 
obliged to vote against the draft resolution in document GC(XXXII)/858 because 
of its overriding belief in the principles of universality and 
constitutionality of the Agency and other international organizations. The 
issue at stake in the resolution which had just been adopted was not 
South Africa, but the maintaining of the Agency's integrity. The breakdown of 
those principles would be more damaging to the Agency than any act against 
South Africa. 
124. Mr. OMWONY (Kenya) thanked the Member States which had supported 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXlI)/858. Recalling that the 
Agency had been set up to promote the principle of atoms for peace, he noted 
that the question which arose in the event of a violation by a Member State 
was whether that State conformed to the peaceful intentions which had attended 
the Agency's establishment. The General Conference was meeting because the 
world was at peace, and a Member State could not be allowed to threaten that 
peace and keep its place in the Agency in the name of the principle of 
universality. Kenya voted systematically in favour of resolutions condemning 
South Africa and called for that country to be suspended from the exercise of 
its privileges and rights of membership because South Africa continued to defy 
the resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly. 
125. Mr. PECCI (Paraguay) said that his country had always supported 
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, 
particularly in the area of nuclear energy. All the same, it condemned 
apartheid, as it had stated in the United Nations. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 40 


126. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) said that, as in previous years, his country 
supported unreservedly the draft resolution on South Africa's nuclear 
capabilities. With regard to the principle of universality invoked by a 
number of delegates, he noted that any Member State which upheld that 
principle should also accept the underlying principle of equality of States. 
However, since the South African regime did not respect that principle at the 
national or regional level, it did not seem justified to apply the principle 
of universality to it. Against the argument that the matter had nothing to do 
with the Agency's Statute, he pointed out that it was now universally agreed 
that South Africa constituted a threat to peace in Africa and in the world, 
and thus in blatant violation of the Statute. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GG(XXXII)/866 and Add.1) 


127. The PRESIDENT asked the General Conference to examine document 
GG(XXXII)/866, containing the report by the General Committee which had met to 
examine the credentials of all delegates in accordance with Rule 28 of the 
Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. Paragraphs 2 to 15 of the 
report described the manner in which the Committee had approached its task and 
the opinions expressed during the discussion. The Committee had decided to 
recommend the adoption of the draft resolution contained in paragraph 16. 
128. The credentials of the delegate of Tunisia, which for technical reasons 
had not been submitted before the Committee met to examine credentials, had 
been received by the Secretariat earlier that day, and an addendum to the 
Committee's report (GC(XXXlI)/866/Add.1) had been issued accordingly. 
129. Mr. AL-MINAYES (Kuwait), speaking on behalf of the Arab 
delegations members of the League of Arab States and participating in the 
General Conference, recalled those delegations' reservations regarding the 
credentials of the Israeli delegate, set forth in the Attachment to document 
GC(XXXII)/854. 
130. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) associated himself with the reservations 
contained in document GC(XXXIl)/854. He also expressed reservations regarding 
the representation of Afghanistan, because the current regime in Afghanistan 
was not fully representative. 
131. Mr. ABDEL-MONEIM (Egypt) reaffirmed the position of his delegation 
with regard to the credentials of the Israeli delegate. 

GC(XXXII)/0R.312 
page 41 


132. Mr. GHAZALI (Malaysia) expressed his delegation's reservations 
with respect to the credentials of the Israeli delegate. 
133. Mr. TIMERBAEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that his 
delegation was surprised and shocked at the statement made by the delegate of 
Pakistan on the subject of Afghanistan. The Soviet delegation regarded that 
as an attempt to divert the General Conference from the tasks of the Agency, 
which were to foster international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and to strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime. He was 
all the more surprised because Pakistan was a party to the Geneva agreement, 
but was not applying the provisions of that agreement as it should be doing, 
at a time when a political settlement appeared to be emerging in Afghanistan. 
134. Mr. MOOSAVI (Islamic Republic of Iran) expressed reservations 
regarding the credentials of the Israeli delegate. 
135. Mr. MOHSENZAPA (Afghanistan) strongly rejected the statement made 
by the delegate of Pakistan which denied Afghanistan's legimate right to be 
represented at the General Conference. He shared the surprise expressed by 
the representative of the Soviet Union and considered that he had the 
legitimate right to represent Afghanistan and that Pakistan had no right to 
interfere in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. His country had signed the 
Geneva agreements, and the "Afghan problem" was being settled. 
136. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) regretted that unfounded 
reservations had been made regarding the Israeli delegate's credentials. All 
technically valid credentials conforming to the provisions of the Rules of 
Procedure should be accepted, as had been recommended by the General Committee. 
137. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan), exercising his right of reply, rejected the 
allegations that Pakistan was not applying the provisions of the Geneva 
agreement on Afghanistan. His Government was respecting the letter and spirit 
of that agreement. 
138. The PRESIDENT said that, since there were no more speakers, he 
took it that the General Conference was ready to adopt the draft resolution 
contained in document GG(XXXII)/866. The observations and reservations made 
by delegates regarding certain credentials, as well as the reservations 
expressed by the members of the Arab Group, would all be reflected in the 
official records. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 42 


139. The draft resolution contained in paragraph 16 of document 
GC(XXXII)/866 was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


140. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was currently 
represented on the Agency's Staff Pension Committee by two members, 
Mr. Morales Pedraza (Cuba) and Mr. Loedel (Uruguay), and two alternates, 
namely Mr. Itoh (Japan) and Mr. von Preuschen zu Liebenstein (E'ederal Republic 
of Germany). Since Mr. Itoh and Mr. von Preuschen zu Liebenstein were no 
longer available to serve on the Committee, he proposed that Ms. Bhaduri 
(India) and Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands) be elected as alternates. 
141. Ms. Bhaduri (India) and Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands) were elected as 
alternates, Mr. Morales Pedraza (Cuba) and Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) continuing to 
serve on the Committee as members. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1989 


142. The PRESIDENT said that, on 22 September 1988 at 6 p.m., the total 
of voluntary contributions pledged by Member States to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund had amounted to US $19 044 229. Since then, 
Sudan had announced a voluntary contribution of $4200. The total amount of 
contributions pledged was thus US $19 048 429. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


143. Mr. BAEYENS (France), speaking on behalf of the Western Europe and 
Others Group, congratulated the President on the masterly way in which he had 
directed the work of the General Conference, paid tribute to his relentless 
search for understanding, compromise and consensus, and hoped that the future 
activities of all the Agency's organs would be inspired by that example. 
144. Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland), speaking on behalf of the eastern European 
socialist countries, commended the President on the talented and competent way 
in which he had guided the session of the General Conference, thereby enabling 
many of the complex international problems examined during the session to be 
resolved in a constructive manner. He also thanked the Director and his staff 
as well as all delegates for their co-operation, which had contributed to the 
smooth running of the session. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 43 


145. Mr. CUEVAS CANCINO (Mexico), speaking on behalf of the Group 
of 77, congratulated the President on his skill in handling the work of the 
thirty-second regular session of the General Conference and on the success 
achieved on all items of the agenda. He also thanked the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole for his customary energy, the Director General for his 
extraordinary command of the problems facing the Agency, the Secretariat for 
its excellent work, and all those who had participated so actively in the 
smooth running of the session. Lastly, he thanked the Austrian Government for 
the facilities provided at the Austria Center. 
146. The General Conference could be satisfied with the results of the 
session. It had begun to be concerned about the problems of pollution, the 
role of conventional energy sources in such pollution and the need for the 
Agency to make a greater contribution to environmental protection. The Agency 
should launch a major information campaign to convince the whole world that 
nuclear energy had ecological advantages and was without doubt one of the 
energy sources which would best meet future energy needs. Moreover, it seemed 
that the doubts which had arisen following certain recent accidents were 
beginning to be dispelled. The Group of 7 7 countries hoped that their needs 
in the nuclear field would be met through contributions by the industrialized 
countries. In conclusion, he warned against the dangers associated with zero 
growth of the Regular Budget for Third World countries, and stressed the 
importance of the issues of waste storage, both toxic and radioactive. 
14 7. The PRESIDENT thanked all the delegates for their kind words. It 
had been an honour and a privilege for him to serve as President of the 
thirty-second regular session of the General Conference. He particularly 
wished to thank the members of the General Committee and the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole for their help in the conduct of the Conference's work. 
148. On behalf of the General Conference, he thanked the Austrian 
authorities and the City of Vienna for their hospitality and for the 
facilities provided for the second time at the Austria Center. Likewise, he 
thanked the Director General and his staff, the Secretariat of the 
Policy-making Organs, and all those who had contributed to the smooth running 
of the General Conference. 

GC(XXXII)/OR.312 
page 44 


149. Before closing the session, he invited the delegates to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation, in accordance with 
Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


150. The PRESIDENT declared the thirty-second regular session of the 
General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 7.5 p.m. 



