GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 


10 October 1989 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


ENGLISH 


THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna, 
on Monday, 25 September 1989, at 10.25 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. ALI (Malaysia) 


President: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paraaraphs 


agenda* 


Opening of the session 1 -6 


Election of the President 7-1 9 


1 Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 20 - 23 
2 Message from the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations 24 - 29 
3 Statement by the Director General 30 - 78 


5 Voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1990 79 - 81 


7 General debate and annual report 
for 1988 82 - 128 


- Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 82 - 92 
Japan 93 - 100 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 101 - 115 
Chile 116 - 128 


[*] GC(XXXIII)/871 and Add.1-3. 


89-4655 
5440e/564e 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirty-third regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT said that the General Conference was 
meeting at a time when the international political climate had greatly 
improved and thus provided an opportunity for Member States not'only to review 
the Agency's past performance, but also to engage in constructive dialogue 
aimed at further strengthening international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. 
4. The year since the thirty-second session of the General Conference had 
been on the whole another successful year for the Agency, which had carried 
out the decisions of the Board of Governors and the Conference in a 
satisfactory manner. The increased delivery of technical co-operation 
projects, the efforts undertaken to establish better and more effective safety 
standards, the successful conduct of numerous scientific and technical 
meetings and the drafting of a code of practice to prevent indiscriminate 
dumping of nuclear wastes were only some of the Agency's achievements during 
the year. He wished, therefore, to pay special tribute to the Director 
General, Dr. Blix, under whose able leadership and guidance the Secretariat 
had been able to carry out its tasks with admirable efficiency. He hoped that 
the Conference would take the appropriate decision in accordance with the 
Board's recommendation to enable Dr. Blix to continue to direct the Agency 
during the coming term. 
5. Of the many enormous challenges facing the Agency, he wished to mention 
two in particular, the first being the technical co-operation programme. The 
value of that programme, which had benefited a large number of developing 
countries over the years, was evident. However, even more should be done to 
extend the benefits of nuclear applications to those countries. In that 
regard the developed and industrialized Member States had a special 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.313 
page 3 


responsibility to provide greater financial support so as to enable the Agency 
to step up its technical co-operation activities in order to meet the 
increasing needs of the developing countries. At the same time, the latter 
should in equal measure fulfil their own responsibility of ensuring that the 
assistance provided was efficiently used and managed. 


6. Secondly, practical action was necessary to instil public confidence in 
nuclear power. Such action should not only include an effective public 
information programme but should also be aimed at winning the early acceptance 
by all members of the international community of common standards for nuclear 
safety and the establishment and universal acceptance of civil and State 
liability regimes. Those aims were by no means easy to achieve, but were 
vital in order to retain public confidence in nuclear energy and to counter 
effectively the pressure from quarters opposed to it. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


7. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. He reminded members that, in accordance with 
established practice, the President that year should be elected from a 
Member State in the Far East Group. He had been informed by the Chairman of 
that Group that it had decided to transmit to the General Conference the 
candidatures of Ambassador Choi Gi Choi of the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea and Professor Kunmo Chung of the Republic of Korea, as consultations 
within the Group had failed to produce a single nomination. He therefore 
suggested that the Conference proceed to vote on the matter. 
8. Mr. CHOI (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that despite 
the efforts of his delegation and the Far East Group it had not been possible 
to reach a consensus on the nomination of a candidate for the office of 
President. Therefore, in order to avoid the necessity of a ballot, which was 
against most Member States' wishes and would waste valuable time while also 
undermining a 30-year-old tradition of consensus and thus creating an 
undesirable precedent, his delegation had decided to withdraw its own 
candidature. He wished to thank those Member States which had done their best 
to find a reasonable solution to the problem. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 4 


9. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT thanked the delegation of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea for its understanding and co-operation, which would 
enable the Conference to proceed without delay. 
10. Mr. Chung (Republic of Korea) was elected President of the General 
Conference for its thirty-third regular session by acclamation. 
11. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT congratulated Mr. Chung on his election. 
Mr. Chung (Republic of Korea) took the Chair. 
12. The PRESIDENT expressed his deep gratitude to all delegations for 

their support and conveyed his sincere compliments to Ambassador Abdul Halim 
bin Ali for the skill and wisdom he had shown as President of the 
thirty-second regular session of the Conference. 


13. Today's world was one of rapid technological change. The number of 
creative scientific findings had been accelerating exponentially. In 1987 
alone, there had been more than 830 000 basic research papers published in 
reputable international journals. Those scientific findings were converted 
directly into technological innovations, which were in turn translated into 
new services and improved products and facilities. There were very good 
grounds for hoping that scientific and technological advances would resolve 
the hardships suffered by so many people throughout the world. More than 75% 
of factors contributing to economic and societal activities were dependent on 
science and technology. Thus, only advances in those two areas of endeavour 
could offer solutions to the problems facing the world, including starvation, 
disease and threats to the environment. Breakthroughs in information 
technology, genetic engineering, new materials and advanced energy systems 
were awaited with high hopes and were essential in promoting economic and 
social development. 
14. The reconciliation of science and technology with society's needs 
should be pursued diligently and more aggressively. The problem of energy was 
the most serious one facing the technological society and should be tackled 
squarely. How could civilization be sustained without the adverse 
consequences of its high energy consumption, namely acid rain, the greenhouse 
effect and the excessive burning of valuable raw materials which represented 
resources for other industries? A week previously many participants at the 

GC(XXXiII)/OR.313 
page 5 


Fourteenth World Energy Congress in Montreal had agreed that world energy 
consumption would double within 30 years and that the demand for electricity 
would grow at double the growth rate of the total energy demand. Economists 
and engineers agreed that only nuclear energy could promise an ultimate 
solution for a cleaner, more economical, central-station electric power 
supply. More and more people were beginning to grasp that truth and it was to 
be hoped that the public could be educated more widely on the subject of 
nuclear power and that the world's nuclear generating capability could be 
developed in a more conciliatory way, in developing as well as developed 
countries. Nuclear energy was an invaluable resource which could supply the 
demand for electricity both now and in the foreseeable future. 


15. Nuclear technology also provided an instrument for pioneering work in 
new scientific and technological fields. Radioisotope applications, for 
example in medicine, agriculture and industry, were already an integral part 
of daily life. The Agency was proud to have been responsible for organizing 
and directing such exciting special scientific programmes. 
16. Notwithstanding the Agency's good record to date, there was still much 
to be done. It had to maintain the complete integrity of its safeguards 
regime and to continue helping the operators of nuclear power plants to 
improve their safety records. Furthermore, the nuclear power option had to be 
revitalized as soon as possible. In that regard there were two problems which 
the Agency was uniquely qualified to handle and which called for the 
co-operation of all Member States. 
17. The first of those problems was public acceptance of nuclear power. 
The Agency had by now become the internationally recognized authority on 
nuclear safety and safeguards. Agency documents such as "Basic Safety 
Principles for Nuclear Power Plants" had become the standard works of 
reference on the subject. The Agency's safeguards system was highly respected 
by the public. If the Agency became involved in actively disseminating 
correct information on nuclear energy and provided Member States with services 
designed to increase public understanding of nuclear technology, it would 
eliminate groundless anxieties on the part of the public and help create an 
environment conducive to more rational energy policies. During the present 
session, the Agency's Member States should, either formally or informally, 

GG(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 6 


consider its enhanced role in promoting public acceptance of nuclear energy 
and each country should also look into ways and means of assisting the 
Secretariat in its efforts to win such acceptance. 


18. The second issue was closely related to that year's special scientific 
programme, entitled "The New Generation of Nuclear Power", at which highly 
qualified experts would review and discuss the needs of and development 
strategies for the new generation of nuclear power plants. Member States 
should seriously consider ways of co-operating internationally to introduce 
the technology for such plants. Speaking as an engineer who had worked on 
nuclear power plant design and nuclear safety, he was convinced that a much 
better, safer and more economical plant could be designed once the appropriate 
institutional framework had been established. The next generation of nuclear 
power would be the result of intensive international co-operation, and the 
Agency could provide the leadership necessary for sharing resources and 
co-ordinating development activities in a synergetic way. An international 
research and development effort of that kind was necessary for the sake of 
future generations. 
19. Finally, he appealed to all delegations to work together harmoniously 
to consolidate the Agency as a truly significant international co-operative 
body in the field of science and technology and to promote peace and welfare 
throughout the world. The future belonged to those who had a vision and 
worked towards it. Today's work should therefore be directed towards and 
reconciled with tomorrow's vision, the spirit of reconciliation being one 
which he hoped would distinguish the entire Conference. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


20. The PRESIDENT said that from the consultations that had taken 
place a consensus seemed to have emerged that the General Conference should 
elect eight Vice-Presidents, a Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and, 
exceptionally suspending part of Rule 40 of its Rules of Procedure, six 
instead of the usual five additional members of the General Committee, which 
would then have 16 members instead of the usual 15. While two regional groups 
had yet to agree on their nominations of candidates to serve on the General 
Committee, the remaining groups had already put forward nominations. On the 

GC(XXKLII)/OR.313 
page 7 


basis of those nominations he proposed that the delegates of the following 
Member States be elected as Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: Egypt, 
Indonesia, Lebanon, Philippines, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United 
Kingdom, United States of America and Uruguay. He further proposed that the 
delegates of the following Member States be elected as additional, members of 
the General Committee: Czechoslovakia, German Democratic Republic, 
Luxembourg, Nigeria and Switzerland. 


21. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
22. The PRESIDENT suggested that further consideration of the matter 
be deferred until the informal consultations had been completed. 
23. It was so agreed. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


24. Ms. ANSTEE (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations) said that she had pleasure in conveying to the General Conference a 
message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
25. The General Conference was meeting at a specially important time for 
the Agency and for its contribution to international relations. The past few 
years had seen unprecedented changes in the international political climate, 
with a renewal of confidence in multilateralism, collective approaches to 
solving world problems, and encouraging progress towards resolving some 
long-standing conflicts. In the field of disarmament, arms limitation and 
confidence-building, some important agreements had been reached and others 
appeared to be on their way to conclusion. The international community was 
now seriously concerned over such emerging critical problems as the need to 
preserve the environment while sustaining and expanding economic development. 
The General Conference would deal with many aspects of that issue, especially 
the search for safe, clean and affordable energy. 
26. The Agency played a vital part in providing technical assistance to 
developing countries; its indispensable contribution to creating sustainable 
economic development included over one thousand technical co-operation 
projects in, for example, food production, medicine, mining and hydrology. 
The Agency's promotion of nuclear safety in the design, construction and 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 8 


operation of nuclear facilities and in the management of radioactive wastes 
was essential for improving the benefits of nuclear energy and minimizing its 
dangers. Its experience in elaborating procedures for accident notification 
and assistance, in co-operation with other organizations of the United Nations 
system, had been invaluable. 


27. The Agency's safeguards system and its verification role under the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) were essential to 
that important aspect of arms limitation. So far, no anomaly had been 
detected that would indicate the diversion of a significant amount of 
safeguarded material to the manufacture of nuclear weapons, and the Agency's 
application of safeguards had thus created confidence among the Parties to the 
Treaty that it was functioning as intended to prevent any one of them from 
acquiring nuclear weapons. However, as the number of safeguards agreements 
with the Agency increased, the safeguards system must be expanded and 
strengthened. 
28. That and other aspects of the Treaty would be examined at the Fourth 
NPT Review Conference in August-September 1990, which would be especially 
important because its outcome was expected to have a profound impact on the 
1995 Review Conference, when the Parties would have to decide on the future of 
the Treaty. It now remained to strengthen the NPT regime further by still 
wider adherence to it, by early and significant reductions in the numbers of 
nuclear weapons, and by other essential control measures. 
29. The General Conference had before it a broad agenda covering many of 
the major international issues of the day, from economic development to 
disarmament, and the Secretary-General was confident that it would effectively 
carry forward the task of leading the Agency as it moved into the 1990s, 
including planning the ways in which it would meet altered circumstances and 
new demands. That would be challenging work of great importance and he wished 
the Conference a stimulating and productive meeting. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


30. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that one of the most prominent issues at 
the centre of public discussion in the world during the past year had been the 
environment. It was seventeen years since the United Nations Conference on 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 9 


the Human Environment had been held at Stockholm, and the world was becoming 
painfully aware that, despite all efforts, environmental problems had 
escalated from local to regional level and now posed global threats - as in 
the case of the thinning of the ozone layer and the greenhouse effect. In the 
public eye, nuclear power and energy had so far been associated with 
environmental problems rather than with their alleviation. In particular, the 
need to dispose of waste remaining radioactive for thousands of years and the 
risk of accidents leading to radioactive contamination had led to those 
attitudes. However, there were signs that some individuals and groups which 
in the past had been committed to anti-nuclear positions for environmental 
reasons were taking a cautious new look at nuclear power because they feared 
that successful resistance to nuclear power might in practice have the result 
of accelerating the use of fossil fuels and thus exacerbating the 
environmental consequences of burning such fuels. Other groups had 
consistently been of the view that nuclear power was an environmentally benign 
source of energy, emitting no sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides or carbon 
dioxide and adding very little radioactivity to the biosphere. Yet other 
groups continued to oppose nuclear power and to contend that energy saving or 
conservation and expansion in the use of renewable sources of energy should be 
the answers to the world's energy needs and environmental problems. Although 
the new and intensified concern about the grave environmental impacts of the 
use of fossil fuels had thus begun to affect the psychological climate for 
nuclear power, it did not alter the Agency's work in that field, which placed 
emphasis precisely on the areas which had given rise to fears, namely safety 
against radioactive releases whether from power plants or disposal sites. 


31. Some 50% of the greenhouse effect was traced to the increase in 
atmospheric carbon dioxide which resulted from the burning of fossil fuels and 
deforestation. Since fossil fuels were the most important source of primary 
energy in the world, a number of questions regarding energy had to be answered 
in order for a strategy to be shaped in response to the greenhouse threat. 
The most fundamental question was how to limit the emissions of carbon 
dioxide. Further questions could be derived from that fundamental one, namely 
how much energy, in particular electricity, would be needed in the future; 
how far increased energy demands could be offset by higher energy efficiency 
and conservation; what contribution renewable energy sources, like solar and 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 10 


wind energy, could make and by when; how significant a continued or expanded 
use of nuclear power would be in providing energy without contributing carbon 
dioxide; and which supply mixes would best respond to the world's needs for 
energy taking into account the environment and economic questions. The forum 
in which the community of States was considering those issues was the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), sponsored by the World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP). Viable strategies for responding to the greenhouse threat could be 
expected from those discussions only if scientific experts on the atmosphere 
were joined by experts on energy. The reports of the IPCC were still 
outstanding, but it could already be seen from the public discussion of the 
matters before the Panel that a variety of conflicting views existed on them. 


32. Many of the groups and conferences discussing the greenhouse threat had 
only two recipes for action to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, namely energy 
conservation and the accelerated development of renewable energy sources, 
notably solar and wind power. When advanced in general terms, such proposals 
could be supported by all, but the crucial question was what reduction of 
carbon dioxide emissions could realistically be expected in the foreseeable 
future if such methods alone were followed, and there was little in the world 
today to support the contention that they would offer an adequate response. 
Over the past 15 years, world primary energy consumption had increased by 2,2% 
a year, and in developing countries by more than double that figure. Informed 
organizations agreed that those trends would continue, in spite of 
conservation measures, and forecast increases up to the year 2005 of some 2% 
per year for the world as a whole and 2-3% a year for the developing 
countries. Demand for electricity was expected to rise at an even higher 
rate. Barring some dramatic development leading to drastic government action, 
and judging from past experience, additional conservation policies were 
unlikely to offset much of the further increased demand. 
33. Various calculations had been made as to how much renewable sources of 
energy - apart from hydroelectric power - might contribute in the future. 
Today, those sources contributed 0.3%, most of which was geothermal, and there 
was little to suggest anything but a modest contribution in the coming two 
decades. The Executive Director of the International Energy Agency in Paris 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 11 


had estimated that they might at the most contribute 5% of world energy 
consumption by the year 2010, a view echoed by the recent Fourteenth Congress 
of the World Energy Conference in Montreal, which had concluded that it must 
be recognized from a realistic point of view that alternative and renewable 
energy sources were not likely to provide a major part of the world's future 
energy requirements in the foreseeable future - except for hydropower, which 
was likely to play a major role in some areas, although the potential had 
largely been exploited in others. Regarding conservation, the World Energy 
Conference had concluded that it was an important issue, but that it was 
necessary to be realistic about it inasmuch as few subjects had been or were 
the object of so much wishful thinking. 


34. As to the potential significance of continued and expanded use of 
nuclear power in restraining carbon dioxide emissions and the greenhouse 
effect, views differed rather widely. Some suggested that the electric power 
production sector was a small contributor to the greenhouse gases and that 
greater use of nuclear power for electricity generation would therefore not be 
very helpful. However, the following data should be noted. At the present 
time, the generation of electric power contributed about 25% of the world's 
carbon dioxide emissions, and nuclear power provided 17% of that electricity 
without any carbon dioxide - only a few percentage points less than 
hydropower, also free of carbon dioxide, which provided 20%. The amount of 
approximately 637« of electricity generated by fossil-fuelled power stations 
thus contributed 25% of the world's carbon dioxide emissions. Given the 
predominant view of competent organizations that the demand for electricity 
would double within the next 15-20 years, it would clearly matter whether 
nuclear or fossil-fuelled power was used. The summit meeting of seven 
industrialized nations in Paris in July 1989 had clearly recognized that. In 
their concluding declaration, the leaders of Canada, the Federal Republic of 
Germany, France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States and 
the President of the Commission of the European Communities had stated: 
"We are committed to maintaining the highest safety standards for 
nuclear power plants and to strengthening international co-operation in 
safe operation of power plants and waste management, and we recognize 
that nuclear power also plays an important role in limiting output of 
greenhouse gases." 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 12 


Also in July, President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union had said: 


"An opinion has grown in the world, and I share this opinion, that one 


cannot do without nuclear energy. What place it is to take in our 


overall electricity production is another question. And, naturally, 


safety should be guaranteed. But we won't survive without nuclear 


power." 


35. A brochure issued recently by the French Government about global 
warming indicated that emissions of carbon dioxide in France for 1973 had been 
450 million tonnes. In 1985 they had been 325 million tonnes, with 
110 million tonnes indicated as having been avoided through energy saving and 
140 million tonnes through the use of nuclear power. During 1988, 14 new 
nuclear power stations had been connected to the grid world-wide, while some 
100 more remained under construction. It was clear that in the future as at 
present the world's energy supply would be a mix. What mattered, however, was 
how that mix would be composed. The conclusions of the Paris summit, apart 
from recognizing the relevance of nuclear power in the face of the greenhouse 
threat, reflected the understanding that the viability of nuclear power was 
dependent upon safe operation of power plants and safe waste management. 
36. The awareness that nuclear safety must be uniformly high around the 
world had led to additional safety measures at the national level and to a 
remarkable increase in international co-operation. Where the Agency's work in 
those areas was concerned, two approaches were being adopted simultaneously to 
the strengthening of safety: one through technological change, and the other 
through attention to operational safety. In its pioneering report entitled 
"Basic Safety Principles for Nuclear Power Plants", the Agency's International 
Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) had formulated a coherent and rational safety 
approach, encompassing both technological and operational requirements and 
designed to provide significant strengthening of safety, which seemed likely 
to become an important reference work for designers, constructors, regulators 
and operators. 
37. In the field of technical change the modifications to all RBMK-type 
reactors in the Soviet Union should be noted, as also the introduction in a 
number of countries of filtered venting of containments in existing plants. 
Much discussion and much work were centred on the development and design of 
new reactor models and systems with enhanced safety features. Governments 
should perhaps consider whether some new type or types of power reactor could 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.313 
page 13 


be designed and developed by a group of Member States in a scheme under Agency 
auspices, on the lines of the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 
(ITER) in the field of fusion. High development costs and the scarcity of 
government resources were arguments for an international pooling of effort. 
In that connection, the General Conference would be discussing the issue of 
new reactors under the scientific programme. 


38. There was increasing activity in the area of strengthening operational 
safety, which involved over 400 existing plants. He welcomed the creation of 
the World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), whose main purpose was to 
promote direct exchange of experience between plant operators to enhance 
performance and safety. The first Chairman of the Governing Board of WANO, 
Lord Marshall of Goring, would be explaining the working of that organization 
in the course of the general debate. Arrangements had already been put in 
place for continuous co-operation between WANO and the Agency. 
39. Since the start of the Agency's programme of Operational Safety Review 
Teams (OSARTs) in 1983, 38 OSART missions to 22 countries had been completed. 
The continuing usefulness of the programme was evidenced by expanding 
governmental support and growing demand for OSARTs. Safety advisory services 
had for many years been offered to Member States requesting assistance in 
reviewing various safety aspects of nuclear installations. In June 1989 work 
had begun on the initial phase of a comprehensive safety review of the nuclear 
district heating plant in Gorky in the Soviet Union, which would cover safety 
design, probabilistic safety analysis and operational safety. A safety 
advisory mission focusing on design issues had also been undertaken for the 
KNU-11 and -12 units in the Republic of Korea. 
40. In January 1989, the Agency's Emergency Response System (ERS) had been 
formally put into operation. However, in many Member States parties to the 
Conventions on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and on Assistance in 
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency the necessary 
arrangements for emergency response had not yet been completed, and he urged 
that action be taken so that the system could work if it was needed. The 
Emergency Assistance Convention now had 37 parties and the Early Notification 
Convention 42 parties. 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.313 
page 14 


41. A general problem with the promotion of nuclear energy was poor public 
understanding of matters relating to radiation. There was often excessive 
concern about small additional doses of radiation from the normal operation of 
nuclear power plants or about small and unlikely leakages of radioactive 
substances from waste disposal sites in the distant future. On the other 
hand, the pub]ic was frequently unaware that radiation was and always had been 
ubiquitous, that it was stronger at high altitudes than at low ones, and 
stronger in some geological locations than in others. 
42. The public was unaware that the additional radiation to which it was 
now subjected through man-made activities was a small fraction of what it 
received naturally, and that the medical sector was a much bigger contributor 
to that fraction than was nuclear power. Radiation protection standards had 
wide safety margins. They were unique in assuming that any additional dose of 
radiation, however small, might be harmful and they prescribed that today's 
various nuclear activities must be carried out in such a way that future 
generations were as well protected against radiation as the present 
generation. The public was not well informed about those matters and without 
better public understanding rational attitudes could hardly be expected to 
develop regarding the use of nuclear power or the disposal of nuclear waste. 
Any information provided should include the significant fact that the 
scientific, medical and industrial communities using radiation had followed 
stringent regulations almost from the outset and that as a result additional 
doses to the public had been kept very low. It was interesting to note that, 
while the carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere had increased by 25% 
through the normal combustion of fossil fuels since the pre-industrial era, 
all normal activities associated with nuclear power - from mining to waste 
disposal - now contributed an additional collective dose of less than 0.1% of 
the dose received from natural sources. 
43. Rules requiring that additional exposure to radiation should be 
prevented or very severely limited would be an advantage only if the costs 
were not too high. Moreover, it must be understood that, within certain 
limits, actual exposure in excess of the preventive standards set need not be 
a source of concern. Decisions about costly or difficult post-accident 
measures, for example regarding food intake or evacuation, should certainly be 

GC(XXXI.II)/OR.313 
page 15 


adopted on a basis that was independent of such preventive standards. In his 
opinion, international discussion was needed on what attitudes could 
reasonably be adopted in the face of radiation levels for which individual 
risk was very small. 


44. While the radiation protection standards adopted had very wide margins 
of safety, many countries using radiation sources actually lacked the 
necessary infrastructure for implementing a safety policy based on 
international recommendations. That had led to an increasing interest in 
international expert advice on long-term strategies for the use and control of 
ionizing radiation. The Agency was responding fully to that interest, and 
since 1986 Radiation Protection Advisory Teams (RAPATs) had been invited to 
provide such advice in 44 countries, and three more missions were planned for 
the current year. 
45. He had recently received two proposals from the Soviet Union which 
deserved careful consideration by the General Conference. The first concerned 
the establishment of a centre for international research at Chernobyl, which 
could offer interested Member States and their nuclear institutions unique 
opportunities to study important biological and technological questions 
related to nuclear accidents. He was examining with the Soviet authorities 
how the proposal could be carried out without major budgetary implications for 
the Agency, and he intended to arrange for a meeting of interested countries 
in the near future. Apart from yielding specific research gains, such a 
centre might help to improve the accuracy of the information reaching the 
world news media about the Chernobyl aftermath, which currently was often 
erroneous. 
46. The second proposal was for an international research project on waste 
disposal at a site in the Soviet Union; such a project could be of great 
benefit to the Soviet Union and to many Member States which would have to 
dispose of such waste in their own territories and lacked underground research 
facilities, or which wished to supplement their own research. In that 
connection, the Soviet authorities had made available to the Agency in July a 
report on the effects of the accident which had occurred in 1957 at a military 
production facility at Kyshtym in the Southern Urals. The report deserved 
considerable attention since it provided unique information about the impact 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.313 
page 16 


of a serious radiological accident on health and agriculture over a period of 
30 years. The report and additional information to be provided by Soviet 
experts would be discussed at the Agency's symposium on accident recovery 
operations to be held in Vienna in November 1989. 


47. It was a common public view that viable methods did not yet exist for 
the safe disposal of high-level radioactive waste. It was important, however, 
to correct that view, and responsibility for that task lay mainly with 
national governments and authorities. 
48. An increasing number of international activities relating to 
radioactive waste disposal were being pursued through the Agency. In order to 
provide advice and guidance on the Agency's entire waste management programme 
a new international standing group, known as the International Radioactive 
Waste Management Advisory Committee (INWAC) had been established, composed of 
experts from 18 Member States representing both developed and developing 
countries. 
49. During the past year the scattered publications on safety aspects of 
waste management in the IAEA Safety Series had been replaced by a more 
formalized series of safety documents covering the entire field of radioactive 
waste management. The new series, inspired by NUSS, would be entitled 
"Radioactive Waste Safety Standards" (RADWASS). He hoped that the publication 
of those standards in a separate series would more clearly demonstrate the 
existence of coherent systems for safe waste management and would contribute 
to international harmonization. In that connection, the Board of Governors 
had recently authorized him to issue a safety standards document entitled 
"Safety Principles and Technical Criteria for the Underground Disposal of 
High-Level Radioactive Wastes", which set out the basic safety philosophy for 
the planning of underground waste disposal, the main objective of course being 
to isolate the waste from the human environment for extended periods of time. 
The basic requirements laid down in the document arose directly from radiation 
protection principles covering events and processes which could occur in a 
deep underground repository in the distant future. For example, it stated 
that repositories should be designed so that future generations would be 
guaranteed the same protection as people living today, and that the 
repositories should be constructed so as to be independent of the need for any 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 17 


action or controls by future generations. It had been agreed by experts from 
Member States that the document represented a common set of objectives for 
repository design. There was thus an international consensus on the way in 
which underground waste repositories should be designed and on the levels of 
safety which should be achieved. The document would be supplemented later by 
guidance and recommendations on more specific technical criteria. 


50. The Agency had also been active in assisting Member States in 
implementing national waste management programmes. Since the establishment of 
the Waste Management Advisory Programme (WAMAP) in 1987, WAMAP mission teams 
had been invited to 22 countries to provide advice on the establishment of 
programmes for safe management of radioactive wastes arising from both nuclear 
applications and power programmes. In 1989, seven countries had been visited 
by WAMAP teams and an additional mission was planned before the end of the 
year. 
51. Another service established recently provided for peer reviews of 
selected aspects of national waste management programmes. 
52. In April 1989 a meeting had been held at the Agency's Headquarters at 
which trade union representatives from many countries had discussed their 
interest in enhancing international co-operation on the safety of civilian 
nuclear facilities. Invitations to the meeting had been issued through the 
International Labour Organisation (ILO). He warmly welcomed the interest of 
the trade unions, as they represented large groups of employees at nuclear 
installations, were interested in the safety of those employees as well as in 
the provision of energy to industry, and had an understandable and legitimate 
interest in the generation of electricity through safe nuclear methods. The 
main comments and proposals made during the meeting had been summarized by its 
Chairman in a statement issued as Annex C to document GOV/INF/567. According 
to those conclusions, the prime responsibility for developing an effective 
nuclear safety regime must lie with the utilities operating nuclear facilities 
and with the relevant State authorities. Nevertheless, the meeting had taken 
the view that there was a need for independent scrutiny at the international 
level over the functioning of national safety regimes, and a number of 
specific recommendations had been addressed to the IAEA. He recommended that 
Member Governments should consider the ideas and proposals advanced. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 18 


53. Nuclear power plants were in operation or under construction in only 31 
of the Agency's 113 Member States, most of the others being interested mainly 
in the applications of radioisotopes and radiation, for example in medicine 
and agriculture. The economic value of such applications might not be far 
from that of the nuclear power industry - quite apart from the great benefits 
for human health and welfare. For example, on average, one out of every four 
hospital patients in the Western industrialized world would at some time be 
subjected to a nuclear technique in diagnosis or therapy. Some 50-60% of all 
cancer patients were treated by radiotherapy. Also, the application of 
nuclear techniques often directly supported environmental assessments. The 
work of the Agency's laboratories at Monaco and Seibersdorf was most important 
in that connection. For instance, the measurement of variations in the 
naturally occurring isotopes in water was indispensable in hydrological 
investigations for water resource development. Essentially the same type of 
measurement had also been used in a major environmental project which the 
Agency was executing in the Amazon. One significant finding from that project 
was that 48% of the rainfall in the region was derived from local water 
sources. An exhibition in the Conference Centre showed some of the results of 
that project. In agriculture, radioisotope applications had made it possible 
to optimize the use of nitrogen fertilizers in rice production, potentially 
achieving savings of 50% on fertilizers and thereby also reducing the runoff 
which could have serious consequences for groundwater, rivers and lakes. 
In 1987 the dramatic news had been received of the appearance of the New World 
screwworm in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. That insect pest, which had so far 
only existed in the Americas and which had devastating effects on cattle, 
could become extremely serious if it were to spread through Africa and affect 
wildlife. The only practical eradication method currently available was the 
sterile insect technique, which had proved very successful in the eradication 
of the screwworm from the southern United States and most of Mexico. He was 
glad that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 
which must have the primary responsibility, had decided to attempt an 
eradication campaign in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and to co-operate with the 
Agency in using the sterile-insect technique. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 19 


54. For the most part nuclear applications were accepted by the public, but 
the preservation of food through irradiation had been opposed by consumer 
groups in several countries. Irradiation was a uniquely well suited method of 
preserving and disinfesting foodstuffs. Through decades of studies, it had 
been shown to have no negative health consequences and it had been accepted by 
the Codex Alimentarius Commission without reservation up to a maximum dose of 
10 kilogray. In December 1988 the International Conference on the Acceptance, 
Control of and International Trade in Irradiated Food in Geneva had accepted a 
document recommending registration and licensing, regulation and inspection of 
food irradiation facilities and labelling of irradiated food. The document 
stated that food irradiation was a valuable preservation technique if the 
correct controls were exercised. Food irradiation would not replace 
established large-scale preservation methods, like canning, drying and 
freezing, but it was potentially very valuable for particular foodstuffs such 
as spices, shellfish and some fruits, and it might be of special importance 
for developing countries. It would be a great pity if that technique were to 
be discarded as a casualty of poor understanding and misleading campaigns. 
55. He was glad to report that the ITER project had successfully completed 
the definition phase of its work. The project, which would complete the 
conceptual design of the next step tokamak fusion experiment by the end 
of 1990, was of major importance to the international fusion community, and 
preliminary discussions would now start about a possible second phase. The 
information generated by the project was useful to all Member States which 
maintained an interest in fusion as a potentially inexhaustible source of 
energy. In order to make that material readily available to Member States, a 
special ITER publication series had been initiated. 
56. The International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in Trieste 
would be celebrating its 25th anniversary in October. It was jointly operated 
by the Agency and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) with a major financial input from the Government of 
Italy. Under the untiring guidance of its Director, Abdus Salam - Nobel Prize 
Winner for Physics in 1979 - it had grown from a small institution to a large 
complex of interrelated and integrated activities for research and 
training-for-research at the highest level, covering a vast range of 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 20 


disciplines. More than 4000 physicists and mathematicians now came to Trieste 
each year, nearly 60% of them being from developing countries. Since 1964, 
when his predecessor had launched the centre, it had welcomed 40 000 
scientists from all over the world. 


57. With regard to safeguards, in 1988 the Board of Governors had expressed 
the wish that the Safeguards Implementation Report (SIR) should be drafted in 
clear and simple language and the Secretariat had developed a substantially 
new format which had been submitted to the Board in June 1989. There had been 
no change, of course, in the overall objective of the report, namely to 
provide information that would enable the Board to evaluate fully the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's safeguards. The SIR for 1988, in 
the new format, had been generally welcomed by the Board of Governors. 
58. In order to maintain maximum efficiency and effectiveness of safeguards 
operations, which were inevitably growing and involving ever more complex and 
delicate tasks, he had in 1988 requested the Department of Safeguards to 
adjust the organization of the Department; to develop and document unified 
criteria governing safeguards implementation and evaluation; and to 
investigate possibilities of transferring certain tasks arising from 
Member States' support programmes to the Member States themselves in order to 
free some Secretariat posts for other functions. 


59. The changes made in the organization of the Department of Safeguards 
should result in greater efficiency and effectiveness; for instance, some 
posts would be saved in the development and support areas and shifted to the 
Divisions of Operations. 
60. Using detailed advice from the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGSI), a unified set of criteria was now being worked out 
governing all safeguards implementation activities in the field and at 
Headquarters as well as the evaluation of inspection goal attainment. It was 
foreseen that the new criteria would be introduced in 1991 and updated 
periodically. A vital condition for further improved effectiveness and 
efficiency remained the co-operation of Member States with the Inspectorate. 
In most cases such co-operation was good, but not infrequently the Secretariat 
was unable to apply the most advanced safeguards techniques because some 
States would not accept any change in arrangements reached earlier. The 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 21 


Agency could, of course, continue to use old techniques - at a cost in 
effectiveness and resources. Safeguards agreements and subsidiary 
arrangements concluded many years earlier often failed to reflect the present 
level of technology and the conditions now prevailing in nuclear facilities. 
He therefore urged all Member States to co-operate with the Secretariat in 
making use of more than 20 years of experience in a constructive manner to 
work out new and revised subsidiary arrangements and facility attachments. He 
thanked the 20 Member States which had accepted simplified procedures for the 
designation of safeguards inspectors. Quick responses to requests for 
inspector designations and acceptance of a large number of inspectors 
facilitated scheduling and optimum use of inspector travel. He appealed to 
Member States which had not yet done so to respond to the Agency's proposals. 


61. In the past few years the Agency had succeeded in accepting growing 
safeguards responsibilities without increasing the overall budget. The 
safeguards budget must, however, be expected to expand in the future, when new 
equipment would be needed and a number of large and complex fuel cycle 
facilities would come under safeguards. In that context, he wished to inform 
the General Conference, as he had informed the Board of Governors the previous 
week, that the Secretariat was negotiating several new safeguards agreements. 
It had recently received comments from the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea on a draft safeguards agreement under the NPT and had responded to those 
comments and suggested further discussions, in which the Secretariat would 
bear in mind the hope expressed by many Governors that the agreement would be 
ready in time for the February 1990 Board meetings and that it would follow 
the pattern of other NPT safeguards agreements. 
62. Understanding had also been reached with the Socialist Republic of 
Viet Nam on a safeguards agreement under the NPT which was to be submitted to 
the Board of Governors for approval the following week. 
63. He had also informed the Board that he had received a message from the 
Ambassador of South Africa stating that her Government, in line with its past 
statements on the matter, was giving serious consideration to its current 
commitments to the Agency and the possibility of accession to the NPT. Her 
Government would take part in a further round of consultations with the 
depositaries of the NPT early in December, and he had since received a message 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.313 
page 22 


from the Ambassadors of the United Kingdom, the United States of America and 
the Soviet Union confirming that a meeting with South Africa would take place 
at that time. At the request of the three Ambassadors he had circulated the 
text of the message. 


64. With reference to the 1988 General Conference resolution 
GC(XXXII)/RES/487 concerning the nuclear capabilities and threat of Israel, he 
referred to the information given in documents GC(XXXIII)/886 and 887. The 
Secretariat was ready to assist any Member States in the region which might 
wish to consider the technical matters discussed in those documents. 
65. As on earlier occasions, the Agency had been requested to provide 
background papers for the Fourth NPT Review Conference to be held in Geneva 
in 1990. Drafts of such papers had been considered in the Preparatory 
Committee which had met during the present month in Geneva. The 1990 Review 
Conference would be the last of its kind, as the meeting in 1995 would have to 
consider the future extension of the NPT. 
66. The Third NPT Review Conference had declared that the Agency should 
take full advantage of the co-operation offered in the safeguards agreements 
voluntarily concluded with the Agency by four of the nuclear-weapon States and 
evaluate further the economic and practical possibility of extending the 
application of safeguards to additional civil facilities in nuclear-weapon 
States. The Secretariat was ready to follow the recommendation when the 
necessary resources were made available. It had made some calculations of the 
cost of safeguarding all non-military nuclear facilities in nuclear-weapon 
States and had raised with those States the possibility of their reporting to 
the Agency on materials in facilities offered for safeguards - without the 
verification of such reports through the more costly inspection part of 
safeguards. Such reporting was in fact provided by one nuclear-weapon State, 
namely the United Kingdom. Several of the supplier States now emerging had 
stated that it was their policy to ensure that exported nuclear material or 
equipment would be subject to Agency safeguards. The Board of Governors had 
already approved a number of safeguards agreements resulting from those 
policies. To achieve optimal functioning of the safeguards system it would be 
desirable for all new suppliers to follow such policies. He would also ask 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 23 


all supplier States, whether old or new, to assist the Agency by informing it 
in advance of all intended exports and specific shipments so that safeguards 
could be applied in good time. 


67. Pursuant to General Conference resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/491, the Board 
of Governors in February 1989 had established an open-ended Working Group on 
Liability for Nuclear Damage to study all aspects of the question. The first 
meeting, held from 29 May to 1 June 1989 under the chairmanship of the 
Governor from the Netherlands, had made an inventory of gaps and other 
problems in the existing liability regime and had agreed on a list of issues 
that needed further consideration. That list included several central issues, 
such as the concept and definition of nuclear damage and the financial 
limitation of liability. The Working Group was to hold its second meeting in 
October 1989. In that context, Mexico and Hungary had acceded to the Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage on 25 April and 28 July 1989, 
respectively, and the Board had been informed in June that Poland was 
proposing to adhere to the Convention. 


68. Pursuant to resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/490 on dumping of nuclear wastes, 
a group of experts on radioactive waste transactions had met in Vienna 
from 22 to 25 May to draft a code of practice. The group had reviewed a 
working paper prepared by the Secretariat and containing basic principles for 
inclusion in such a code of practice, and had adopted recommendations 
concerning the structure of a code. The group would be meeting again in 
January 1990 and had asked the Secretariat to prepare a draft code of practice 
on the basis of the guidance given. In the light of the progress achieved at 
the first meeting he was hopeful that the group would be able to complete its 
task in time for submission of a draft code to the Board in June 1990 and to 
the General Conference in the same year. 
69. Recent statements by members of the Board of Governors had strengthened 
his feeling that more emphasis should be placed on public information. 
Although the budget for that activity imposed severe constraints on what could 
be done, efforts would be made over the coming 12 months to respond to 
requests by a number of Member States for co-operation in arranging seminars 
providing factual information on nuclear energy, safety and waste management. 
The extrabudgetary funds pledged by the Government of Japan for additional 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 24 


efforts in the public information area were particularly welcome at the 
present juncture and he hoped that other interested Member States would come 
forward with similar support. 


70. Technical co-operation between the Agency and its developing 
Member States remained a continuously expanding activity. In the past 
five years, when the Regular Budget had been practically at zero growth in 
real terms, technical co-operation funds had expanded considerably and 
technical co-operation had become an increasingly important part of the 
Agency's work. The transfer of knowledge and technology was no longer largely 
a North-South operation. During 1988 40% of all fellows, training course 
participants and visiting scientists had received their training in developing 
Member States and 43% of all experts carrying out technical co-operation 
assignments had come from developing countries. Through existing regional 
co-operation agreements, RCA in Asia and ARCAL in Latin America, resources 
were pooled so that individual technologies already in place in one country 
could be shared with others in the region. There had been encouraging 
initiatives in the past year by Member States in Africa exploring the 
possibility of similar regional arrangements and the Agency would assist in 
every way in bringing such efforts to fruition. 
71. There had been a growing feeling that some of the annual publications 
dealing with the Agency's work previously issued mainly to highly specialized 
groups would be of interest to a wider audience and it had therefore been 
decided to combine those publications with annual reviews of specific topics 
in the other main areas of the Agency's programme into a yearbook which would 
provide a comprehensive view of the nuclear world and the Agency's 
contribution to it. The first issue of the new Yearbook was now available, 
and he hoped it would become recognized as an easily accessible source not 
only for the nuclear community but also for a broader audience interested in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and international co-operation activities 
related thereto. 
72. He wished to express his particular concern about the continuous 
deterioration in the conditions of employment of staff in the Professional and 
higher categories. For more than five years they had received no cost-ofliving 
adjustment and as a result Professional staff had suffered considerable 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 25 


losses in income, both in real terms in local currency and in purchasing 
power. For example, a staff member at grade P-4 step V in Vienna had seen 


take-home pay decrease by about 7.4% over the period 1984-89, and if inflation 
was taken into account, the loss in purchasing power was as high as 17%. Not 
surprisingly, that was having an impact on the Agency's ability to attract and 
retain staff of the required calibre. Since November 1986, one third of 
Professional staff members resigning from the Agency had given as their reason 
the deterioration in salaries and pensions or the limited career prospects. 
About 7% of applicants offered Professional appointments declined the offer. 
The main reason was the unattractive salaries. Although large numbers of 
applications were still received in response to many vacancy notices, the 
Agency's ability to attract highly qualified candidates from some countries 
seemed to have declined. 


73. The Secretariat staff was a resource that was vitally needed for the 
Agency's work. If no remedial action was taken, the Agency's ability to 
fulfil its tasks would eventually be affected. Furthermore, if the salaries 
paid by the Agency were not competitive enough to attract highly qualified 
candidates from all States, including those with higher national remuneration 
levels, an adequate geographical balance in the composition of the Secretariat 
would be difficult to achieve and maintain. 
74. He regretted having to call attention once again to the precarious 
financial situation in which the Agency sometimes found itself. Until a few 
days earlier it had been feared that the Agency was heading for another cash 
crisis because a majority of Member States, including the three largest 
contributors, had not met their financial obligations on time. Fortunately, 
the danger had now disappeared - for the time being. However, when 
Member States, and especially major contributors, failed to pay their assessed 
contributions or fell behind their usual payment schedule, the Agency was 
placed in financial jeopardy and its reputation as a well-managed, efficient 
and reliable international organization was at stake. Since 70% of the 
Agency's budget represented staff costs, its ability to adapt disbursements to 
the cash inflow was very limited. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 26 


75. The Agency had been fortunate for most of its existence in basing its 
work on broad common interests of East and West, North and South, but it was 
not of course immune to world tensions, global or regional, and even less so 
to attitudes taken in or by Member States to nuclear energy. As an instrument 
for co-operation between Member States the Agency must at all times be able to 
respond to what they needed and wanted. Where interests were divergent, 
accommodation, compromise and consensus were often possible, otherwise there 
was inaction until consensus could be achieved or, more rarely, majority 
direction. While some regional or other political conflicts, such as those in 
the Middle East and in southern Africa, continued to present the Agency with 
problems, the general climate of East-West and North-South co-operation 
between Members was excellent and improving. Regarding the problems he had 
mentioned, constructive efforts were being made which might, one day, yield 
welcome results. A great deal could be achieved in a positive climate. 
76. The foregoing report would have given some impression of the great 
volume and variety of work that went on under Agency auspices. It might 
indeed seem amazing that so much could be done with a Regular Budget of 
US $150 million and technical co-operation resources of an additional 
$45 million. The explanation of course was that the Agency's budget and 
technical assistance resources covered only a small part of the co-operation 
effort. Other major parts were played, and paid for, by Member States 
individually. Representatives and experts were sent to Agency meetings at the 
direct expense of Members. The heavy homework was performed in capitals and 
national authorities. Research contracts covered only a fraction of the cost 
of the research that was co-ordinated thereby. Technical co-operation 
resources contributed foreign equipment and expertise to national projects. 
Increasingly also, Members engaged the Agency in missions for which they paid 
all or a large part of the costs, as in OSARTS. 
77. The diplomatic missions accredited to the Agency were the antennae of 
Member Governments for picking up and sending messages on co-operation, they 
were instruments assisting their Governments in shaping positions, and they 
were remote-control tools of the Governments in reaching international 
action. The Agency's Secretariat, drawn in large measure from national 
administrations and with a fair amount of staff rotation between national 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 27 


structures and the Agency, served Members as impartial experts, providing 
ideas for possible beneficial co-operation, and as executors of action to 
which Members had agreed. The Secretariat welcomed the successes achieved 
and, like the Members, was determined to tackle and solve the difficulties 
encountered. 


78. In conclusion, he thanked the Government of Austria and the City of 
Vienna which acted as host to the Agency. His thanks were particularly 
appropriate now, when it was ten years since the Agency had moved to the 
Vienna International Centre premises which the Government of Austria had made 
available, and when a start had been made on the construction of an additional 
wing to the Seibersdorf laboratories through the support of several 
Governments, including that of Austria. He also thanked the Government of the 
Principality of Monaco which had provided new and modern premises for the 
Agency's Laboratory for Marine Radioactivity, inaugurated the previous autumn. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1990 


79. The PRESIDENT said that for a number of years, beginning 
with 1982, the Agency's policy-making organs had observed the practice of 
recommending indicative planning figures to serve in fixing annual targets for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. In 
accordance with an agreement at the Board of Governors in 1985, subsequently 
forwarded to the General Conference, the indicative planning figure for 1990 
was US $45.5 million, and in the draft resolution relating to the Fund in 
Annex III to document GC(XXXIII)/875 the Board of Governors recommended that 
figure as the target for voluntary contributions to the Fund for the following 
year. 
80. Early pledging of voluntary contributions greatly facilitated the work 
of the Secretariat in planning the Agency's technical assistance programmes 
and he urged all delegations that were in a position to do so, but had not 
done so as yet, to notify the Secretariat during the current session of the 
voluntary contributions that their Governments would be making to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1990. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 28 


81. He would report at the end of the session, under a later agenda item, 
on the voluntary contributions so far pledged and was confident that he would 
be able to report that a considerable percentage of the 1990 target figure had 
been pledged. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (GC(XXXIIl)/873) 


82. Mr. WATKINS (United States of America) extended his 
Administration's greetings and best wishes to Mr. Chung, the President of the 
Conference, to the representatives of Member States present, and to the 
Director General and the Secretariat. He congratulated the President on his 
election, and saluted the Director General, pledging support during his new 
term of office. He then read out the following message from the President of 
the United States, Mr. George Bush: 
"Shortly after I assumed office, I vowed to the United States 
Congress that I would work to strengthen the IAEA. It was a commitment 
based on a recognition of the Agency's vital role in preventing the 
spread of nuclear weapons, and in promoting co-operation in peaceful 
nuclear technologies among States. It was a commitment founded upon 
the historically strong and active support provided to the IAEA by the 
United States. The U.S. commitment to the IAEA remains firm, 
particularly as we look forward to the challenges of the next decade. 


"One of the greatest challenges we will face is the need to 
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. The IAEA continues to be one of 
the most important institutional barriers to nuclear weapons 
proliferation. As such, it plays a notable role in preserving global 
peace and security through its safeguards function and through its 
promotion of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. This, I 
believe, is the Agency's first priority, and one which deserves the 
unwavering commitment and support of its members. 


"A second challenge we face is that of ensuring sufficient energy 
resources to meet the demands of sustained, non-inflationary growth in 
the world. This task is made all the more difficult when we consider 
the impact that dependence upon fossil fuels is now having upon the 
global ecostystem. 


"I believe the IAEA has much to offer in assisting countries to 
confront the development challenges of the 1990s and the next century. 
Nuclear energy offers a safe, reliable, and environmentally compatible 
means to provide electrical power. It must be considered - together 
with conservation and development of other energy technologies - as 
part of global efforts to enhance energy supplies while addressing 
global climate change. The Agency's efforts to improve nuclear safety, 
and to promote measures for the safe and long-term disposal of nuclear 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 29 


wastes, will be important to overcoming public concerns - in the United 
States and in many other countries - regarding greater reliance upon 
nuclear power. The IAEA can further public acceptance of nuclear power 
by promoting understanding of advanced nuclear technologies that will 
contribute to making nuclear energy cheaper, safer, and more quickly 
available. 


"The IAEA will play a key role in addressing many of the 
challenges of the 1990s. I look forward to continuing the close 
co-operation between the United States and IAEA in the years ahead. On 
behalf of the American people, I would like to wish a]l delegates and 
members of the Secretariat a successful and productive General 
Conference." 


83. The IAEA stood at the centre of international efforts to prevent the 
further spread of nuclear weapons. Its unique system of international nuclear 
safeguards made a major contribution to those efforts. IAEA safeguards also 
provided many and varied opportunities for international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy which were often taken for granted. Without 
verifiable assurances against the hostile use of nuclear energy the tremendous 
potential of the peaceful atom could never be realized. 
84. One had also to be prepared to meet the challenges posed by pollution, 
whether it be of the air, the water, or even the ground. Where pollution had 
once been looked upon as affecting only the immediate area surrounding the 
source of that pollution, it was now clear that its effects were global. A 
serious nuclear accident affected everyone, not only because radioactive 
fission products did not respect national borders, but because the political 
fallout rained on every nation. Just slightly less than two weeks after the 
Chernobyl accident particles of radioactive fallout had reached Atlanta, 
Georgia, about 10 000 miles away. No longer could any country disregard the 
effects of pollution on its neighbours. 
85. The IAEA's focus was specific but nonetheless very significant. On at 
least four fronts it played a most important role. Firstly, in the safeguards 
programme, the work to deter the further spread of nuclear weapons made a 
major contribution to the security of all nations of the world. Secondly, in 
the area of safety, the work to prevent future nuclear accidents was crucial. 
Although safety itself was primarily a national responsibility, the IAEA 
played a critical role, providing guidance and facilitating the predominant 
role of Member States in assuring safety. Thirdly, by encouraging the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 30 


peaceful use of atomic energy for health, research and electricity generation, 
the Agency offered the world a promising new hope and a viable alternative to 
excessive use of fossil fuels. Lastly, in the area of waste management, the 
Agency continued to contribute greatly to the safe and environmentally sound 
treatment, storage, and disposal of waste. 


86. In addition, in its work in such diverse areas as radiation dosimetry 
services, improving human health, guiding transport of radioactive materials, 
fostering adequate and safe food supplies, and in maintaining the specialized 
scientific data networks, the IAEA was making a vital contribution, and those 
efforts should continue. The FAO/1AEA Joint Division of Nuclear Techniques in 
Food and Agriculture was celebrating its 25th anniversary. In view of the 
struggle to feed an expanding world population, such programmes were of ever 
increasing significance. 
87. He had been appointed Secretary of Energy by President Bush nine months 
previously. Accepting the President's offer he had encountered a department 
beset with wide-ranging problems, from the facilities themselves where the 
operating philosophy had placed an inadequate emphasis on a healthy and safe 
environment, to the fact that the department itself which was responsible for 
articulating United States energy policy had not kept pace either with 
national or world events. During the previous nine months some necessary 
changes had been made and a significantly reinforced foundation for future 
improvement laid. There had been problems with certain Department of Energy 
facilities in that too little attention was being paid to safety and the 
environment. Changes had since been instituted within the Department of 
Energy to ensure that safety and protection of the environment carried the 
highest priorities. Under a new initiative, a ten point plan announced in 
June, a new course had been charted assuring full accountability in the areas 
of environment, safety, and health. The United States Department of Energy 
had thus demonstrated its commitment to complying with the nation's 
increasingly stringent environmental laws, and to protecting public health and 
safety while simultaneously achieving primary objectives. The United States, 
by those actions, had openly admitted to a problem affecting all Americans and 
acted to correct it, as they would undoubtedly soon proceed to strengthening 
clean air laws. He urged all nations present to follow suit. 

GC(XXXIJLI)/OR.313 
page 31 


88. It was imperative that national energy policy keep pace with a changing 
world. Accordingly, the United States, through the Department of Energy, had 
begun a process of formulating a national energy strategy designed to serve as 
a blueprint for United States energy policy and governmental decisions, and to 
guide the United States in achieving ample supplies of competitively priced 
energy in a manner sensitive to the environment, security and the health needs 
of the American people. As part of the process of formulating that national 
energy strategy, the United States would elicit views of other nations. 
Nuclear power would play a fundamental role in the national energy strategy. 
The world was at the threshold of a new era for nuclear power - an era of 
inherently more safe, better managed, economically competitive, plentiful, and 
clean alternatives to fossil fuels. As the United States rapidly approached a 
shortfall in electricity supplies with demand exceeding production capacity, 
nuclear power would probably be increasingly viewed as a safe and economical 
alternative to meet expanding electricity needs. No single fuel source should 
be called upon, but rather a mixed and balanced energy supply to maximize 
energy security. Nuclear power currently furnished 20 per cent of US 
electricity needs from more than 100 operating nuclear plants, most of them 
with excellent operating and safety records, and many regions of the United 
States depended on nuclear power for 30-60 per cent of their total power 
requirements. 
89. On the other hand, support for nuclear energy world-wide had been 
seriously eroded. Some believed that public confidence in the nuclear option 
could be regained through advanced designs. While new designs promising 
enhanced safety were clearly important in providing safer and cheaper 
generating plants for the future, new designs would not restore the public's 
confidence in the 450 nuclear plants currently operating world-wide. The key 
to restoring public confidence in nuclear energy was a positive track record 
of operational safety. Nuclear safety was not something that could be 
instilled through regulation or legislation. It had to come from a commitment 
on the part of the industry - the owners and operators of nuclear facilities. 
Organizations such as the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations in the United 
States and the World Association of Nuclear Operators played a significant 
supporting role, but they were no substitutes for direct management attention 
to safety in the day-to-day operation of plants. 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.313 
page 32 


90. The achievement of safe nuclear operations was no mystery but it came 
at a high cost. Following the Three-Mile Island nuclear accident, the United 
States had devoted a tremendous amount of resources, time, and effort to 
learning the hard lessons and to establishing the necessary institutions to 
provide a framework for safety improvements throughout their nuclear 
industry. Achieving adequate safety could be costly but it was not a luxury; 
there was no acceptable alternative to safe operations if the industry was to 
survive. More than just a large commitment of resources was needed, what was 
required was a firmly embedded safety culture of openness, critical 
self-assessment, and resolute corrective follow-up in all utilities and 
governmental institutions. 
91. Thus the key to public confidence lay in a policy and practice of 
openness in the nuclear industry, in acceptance of full responsibility for 
failed operations or deficient human performance, and in total willingness to 
learn the lessons and make the necessary changes no matter how fundamental 
they might be. One such lesson was that nuclear safety required a management 
approach that encouraged teamwork, discipline, and the attitude that safe 
practices were inviolable. Nuclear safety also required the tools to do the 
job right: well-written and validated procedures; adherence to the use of 
them; proper training, including the use of simulators, job mock-ups and 
computer-assisted instruction; adequate engineering support for operations 
and maintenance; rigorous investigation of root causes, contributors, and 
potential contributors to accidents and unusual plant events; quality 
assurance; thorough and competent safety analysis; and independent internal 
and external oversight of plant operations, accompanied by attention to detail 
on the part of management and employees, and supervision that provided clear 
guidance, maintained discipline, yet was infused with a sense of elemental 
fairness as far as relations between managers and employees were concerned. 
The role of human performance, both of management and operators, was critical 
to nuclear safety and to the restoration of public confidence in nuclear power. 
92. He urged the IAEA and its Member States to establish the highest 
standards of excellence in nuclear plant operations, encouraged Member States 
themselves to demonstrate that they were taking all the necessary steps to 
assure improvement in human performance, and he called on the Agency to review 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 33 


with them that progress. Those States which had made major commitments to 
nuclear power generation had to play a leading role. A case could only be 
made for nuclear power if safety could be clearly demonstrated. The nations 
of the world had a responsibility not only to those with whom they shared the 
planet, but also to future generations. In the search for and use of energy 
they had to avoid damaging or destroying the very air, soil, and water on 
which life depended. 


93. Mr. SAITO (Japan) stressed the importance which his country 
attached to nuclear safety and pointed out that although Japan had 37 nuclear 
power reactors which accounted for about 30% of its total electricity 
production, there had not been any serious accident involving loss of human 
life, or any minor incidents affecting the lives of people living in the 
vicinity of nuclear facilities. Since promotion of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy was dependent on the provision of safety guarantees, it was to 
be hoped that the Agency's activities in the area of safety assurance, such as 
the improvement of nuclear safety standards and OSART missions, would be 
further promoted. 
94. Various developments in Japan's nuclear programme had taken place 
during the past year. For example, the uranium enrichment demonstration plant 
had become fully operational and safety examinations of the commercial 
reprocessing plant and radioactive waste management facility had started. In 
addition, more than 70% of the construction of "Monja", the fast breeder 
reactor, which was expected to go critical in 1992, had been completed. 
95. In the field of liability for nuclear damage, relevant measures, 
such as increasing the amount of maximum compensation for damage arising 
from nuclear accidents, had been taken. A new agreement between Japan and 
the United States in the field of nuclear energy had entered into force 
in July 1988 and in November 1988 Japan had acceded to the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, to which it hoped more countries 
would accede. 
96. Japan was active in the field of nuclear fusion research and would 
continue to participate in the joint conceptual design activities of the 
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER). It also intended to 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 34 


promote the use of nuclear power by stressing the fact that it was an energysource 
which did not emit carbon dioxide. 


97. With regard to NPT, Japan hoped that the universality of that regime 
would be further expanded and that the effective implementation of safeguards 
would be assured. For its part, it would make every effort to ensure the 
success of the Fourth NPT Review Conference in 1990. In its nuclear-related 
co-operation agreements with non-nuclear-weapon States, Japan had made it a 
prerequisite for counterparts to join NPT and to apply safeguards based 
on NPT. Increasing safeguards coverage in nuclear-weapon States would help to 
enhance the universality of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and Japan 
therefore welcomed the fact that China had made a voluntary offer to place 
facilities under Agency safeguards. Although the safeguards system had 
functioned well so far, further effective and efficient implementation of 
safeguards would be required in order to meet the increase in and 
diversification of nuclear facilities placed under safeguards. 
98. The Agency's technical co-operation activities had made an enormous 
contribution to the spread of nuclear technology in developing countries. In 
view of the importance of such activities, Japan had, in addition to its 
contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, made a further 
contribution by providing manpower resources for technical co-operation 
activities and by holding training courses. His country would also continue 
to participate actively in RCA activities, since the RCA was one of the most 
successful examples of regional co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. 
99. Public understanding was essential for the smooth development of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and his country hoped that comprehensive 
activities to deepen public understanding of the necessity and safety of 
nuclear energy would be carried out by the Agency. For that reason, Japan had 
decided to make a special contribution for such activities in 1989. It was 
also important to strengthen international ties through, for example, the 
close exchange of information between countries. 
100. The Agency had an outstanding reputation for efficiency and the 
Secretariat was to be commended for its efforts to maintain a zero-growth 
budget in real terms during the past few years. Japan hoped that the Agency 
would continue its efforts to maintain realistic and efficient management in 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 35 


fulfilling its mission to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Japan, 
for its part, would make every effort to contribute positively to the Agency's 
work. 


101. Mr. PROTSENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
current session of the General Conference was being held at a time when there 
had been a definite improvement in international affairs, and an easing of 
tension and confrontation. Talks had taken place between the Warsaw Pact and 
NATO countries on the reduction of armed forces and weapons in Europe. The 
recent meeting between the Soviet Minister for Foreign Affairs and the 
US Secretary of State had given fresh impetus to the Soviet-American talks in 
Geneva. Although many Governments still pursued the anachronistic "cold-war" 
strategy of nuclear deterrent, the Soviet Union would continue its firm and 
consistent policy to reduce military tension, encouraging its partners in the 
talks to understand the need to think in a new way, and to find a mutually 
acceptable solution to the problems confronting them. 


102. The Soviet Union appreciated the Agency's efforts to strengthen the 
non-proliferation regime, develop international co-operation in the field of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and ensure the safe development of nuclear 
power. 
103. The Agency should continue its constructive role by strengthening 
the NPT. The current General Conference was the final one before the Fourth 
NPT Review Conference in 1990. He urged Member States to consider the role 
and meaning of the Treaty in maintaining peace and international security, and 
appealed to those countries who had not yet acceded to the Treaty to do so, 
thus contributing to building a world free of nuclear weapons and violence. 
He called on the signatories to the Treaty to observe all of its provisions, 


including those concerning obligations to place peaceful nuclear activities 
under safeguards and to conclude the relevant agreements. 


104. The Agency's safeguards activities played a vital role in international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and formed a basis for the 
Agency's implementation of its statutory functions. The Soviet Union hoped to 
see an expansion of safeguards to cover all nuclear activities in non-nuclearweapon 
States. Further organizational improvement of the Safeguards 
Department was possible, and the limited resources available should be 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.313 
page 36 


concentrated on monitoring the "sensitive" stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
The Soviet Union fully supported the Agency's technical assistance programmes 
and had paid its voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund in full. 


105. The 1988 Annual Report showed that the Agency had been successful in 
all of its main areas of activity, including nuclear power and the fuel cycle, 
the application of nuclear methods in medicine, agriculture, hydrology and 
other economic fields, the collection and distribution of scientific and 
technical information, liability for nuclear damage, and the implementation of 
conventions relating to nuclear accidents. The Agency's work on a comparative 
assessment of the environmental effects of nuclear and other fuels should be 
used to assure the public of the ecological advantages of nuclear power, as 
well as its safety. Greater emphasis should be given to that area in the 
future. 
106. Even conservative estimates showed that the world's energy requirements 
would at least double in the first quarter of the 21st century. What energy 
source could possibly ensure such growth? It would have to be fossil and 
nuclear fuels and hydroenergy, as no other energy resources with similar 
potential yet existed. 
107. As the further development of energy from fossil fuels had to be 
limited owing to the ecological effects, and the "alternative" sources, 
including renewable energy sources were as yet far from capable of making any 
substantial contribution, nuclear energy should play a decisive role in 
meeting the growing energy requirements of the world economy. However, 
nuclear energy was going through a rather difficult period in many countries, 
including the USSR, where the issue of its social acceptability had become 
prominent on account of accidents at a number of nuclear power plants in 
various countries, and of course in particular, the accident at Chernobyl. 
108. The IAEA should take a leading role in solving the problems relating to 
nuclear power and its social acceptability, as it had the objectivity and 
expertise required to review the world's energy situation. The Agency should 
give greater attention to certain areas, including: (1) the safety of NPPs 
and the nuclear fuel cycle; (2) the development of a new generation of safer 
and more efficient nuclear reactors; (3) the treatment of radioactive wastes 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.313 
page 37 


and their disposal; (4) the drafting of technical and other materials and 
provisions for public relations work, and co-operation to increase the 
acceptability of nuclear energy to the world community as the alternative 
source with greatest potential. 


109. A special consultative committee should be set up to draft 
recommendations on these policies. The convening by the Secretariat in 1989 
of a working group of senior experts on those questions had been a first 
step. 
110. The work initiated by a special scientific meeting which was to take 
place during the General Conference should be continued with a view to 
producing criteria and standards for new designs, possibly including the 
international designs for the new generation of reactors, such as the ITER 
project. 
111. The search for the optimum means of reprocessing, transporting and 
storing radioactive wastes had recently attracted the attention of the world 
community. As yet there was no internationally accepted method of dealing 
with wastes and each country was developing its own approach. The most 
rational solution would be for the Agency to take a lead in that area, and an 
important step had been taken with the "IAEA Safety Principles and Technical 
Criteria for the Underground Disposal of High-level Radioactive Wastes". The 
programme of work on reprocessing and storage should be strengthened, with 
additional research into regional storage facilities, and a comparison of the 
environmental damage caused by the various types of waste resulting from human 
activities. 
112. The IAEA programme for 1991-92 should include a technical support 
programme for the Agency's public relations activity, and the Secretariat 
should consider the desirability of setting up a joint UNEP-IAEA department or 
section in the Agency to ensure closer co-ordination in research on nuclearenergy-
related ecological problems. 
113. The IAEA should also take an active part in a wide-ranging discussion 
of the world's energy and ecological problems. The Agency should intensify 
its activity in that field and its participation with other organizations, 
particularly in the next two years, in preparation for the 1992 United Nations 
Conference on the Environment. The Agency would have the opportunity to 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 38 


participate in the relevant conferences of the Soviet nuclear society in 1990, 
as well as the conference to be held by the American and European nuclear 
societies. It was important to ensure the success of the IAEA symposium on 
electric power and the environment in Finland in 1991. He suggested that the 
results of those discussions and the activity in the field of nuclear energy 
safety could be used for a very general type of IAEA conference at the end 
of 1991 or the beginning of 1992, prior to the UN conference. 


114. The Soviet Union was considering the possibility of organizing an 
international scientific research centre on the site of the Chernobyl nuclear 
power plant, where Soviet and foreign experts could study a wide range of 
questions relating to the consequences of the accident at the plant and their 
liquidation. The centre would provide an opportunity for experts from many 
countries to co-operate in joint research, a proposal which had already 
received a positive reaction from Member States. 
115. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation wished to join the other 
delegations in approving the Annual Report for 1988. He attributed the 
Agency's successful work to the effective leadership of the Director General 
and supported the recommendation of the Board of Governors to reappoint him as 
Director General for the next four-year period. During the General 
Conference, the Soviet delegation would be guided by its sincere desire to 
participate with all Member States in a constructive and effective manner to 
search for ways of dealing with the important and responsible tasks facing 
them. 
116. Mr. BRADY ROCHE (Chile) said that his country had made significant 
progress in the field of nuclear applications. In agriculture, more efficient 
use was now being made of phosphate fertilizers, which were in great demand 
given the nature of Chile's volcanic soils. Studies had commenced on the use 
of irradiation for the quarantine treatment of fruit, as required by external 
markets. New radiopharmaceuticals, such as biological cells labelled with 
technetium-99m, had been developed and made available to the country's nuclear 
medicine centres. Radioisotopes produced in Chile met 90% of local 
requirements and were also exported to other Latin American countries. With 
regard to nuclear safety and radiation protection, Chile had continued to draw 
up supplementary regulations to the Nuclear Safety Act and to provide support 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 39 


to other areas of national activity, including environmental monitoring, 
certification of radionuclide concentrations in food products for export, 
personnel dosimetry and the calibration of sources and of equipment used to 
generate ionizing radiations. 


117. Of particular significance were the joint efforts being made by the 
Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission (CChEN) and the Ministry of Health to 
establish common criteria governing the regulation, inspection and licensing 
of radioactive facilities within Chile. One result of those efforts was that 
responsibility for the monitoring and inspection of Category 1 radioactive 
facilities had now passed from the Ministry of Health to CChEN. 
118. With regard to nuclear reactors, the RECH-1 research reactor at the 
La Reina nuclear centre, which had previously operated for 15 years with 
uranium fuel enriched to 80%, had since January 1989 been using fuel enriched 
to 45%. The Agency had given considerable support to the conversion process 
through its regular programme of technical co-operation. Studies were 
currently under way aimed at enabling the reactor to run on fuel enriched 
to 20% once the existing core was exhausted. 
119. Chile's second research reactor, at the Lo Aguirre nuclear centre, was 
currently at the power build up phase, which was expected to be completed by 
the end of November 1989. The reactor would initially use fuel enriched 
to 90%, reducing to 20% at a later stage. The raw material used was uranium 
hexafluoride, purchased in the People's Republic of China and processed into 
fuel elements by Chilean technicians. 
120. His country accorded great significance to training, in which 
connection the Institute for Nuclear Studies had now come into operation with 
the aim of organizing and co-ordinating all official nuclear training 
activities in Chile, both for nationals and foreigners. Furthermore, in its 
desire to co-operate with the Agency's regional activities, Chile had made 
every effort to host training events under the ARCAL and other regional 
programmes. 
121. The ARCAL programme had now been in existence for five years and had 
made a major contribution to nuclear activities in Latin America. Its 
achievements had been possible thanks to the Agency's effective co-ordination 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 40 


and to the essential financial support received both from the Agency and from 
individual donor countries from outside the region. However, the major reason 
for its success had been the enduring will of its 15 member countries to 
continually strengthen the bonds of technical co-operation between them in the 
interests of their common good. Chile, for its part, would continue to 
support both ARCAL and all other permanent regional bodies which favoured 
technical co-operation in the nuclear field. 


122. The success of ARCAL led him to reflect on the present situation of the 
Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (IANEC), which had now been in 
existence for 30 years. In its early days it had played a most effective role 
in the pursuit of peaceful nuclear development among the countries of the 
region, but had over the years lost some of that effectiveness, owing 
primarily to the effects of the financial situation of the Organization of 
American States (OAS), but also to the limited interest shown by many of its 
member countries and to the lack of a professional staff dedicated exclusively 
to its tasks- Chile supported a draft resolution submitted by a commission of the 
OAS to the effect that IAIMEC go into recess, but at the same time felt 
that, once the present financial difficulties had been overcome, measures 
should be taken to promote its recovery. 


123. Turning to specific agenda items, and first to the item on the Agency's 
accounts for 1988, he was pleased to note that Member States' efforts to bring 
their contributions up to date had led to an improved financial situation -a 
trend that he hoped would continue. 
124. With regard to the item entitled "Dumping of nuclear wastes", he noted 
with satisfaction both the progress made by the technical working group in 
elaborating a code of practice for international transactions involving 
nuclear wastes and the Secretariat's work in preparing the corresponding 
documents. Chile, with its coastline of over 4000 km, was deeply concerned 
about the matter of sea dumping. It was therefore a party to all agreements 
aimed at regulating that practice, and co-operated actively towards that end 
with specialized regional bodies such as the Permanent South Pacific 
Commission, which would in the near future be deciding on a draft agreement 
aimed at banning the dumping and burial of nuclear wastes in the south-east 
Pacific. Chile supported all moves to strengthen legislation in that area, 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.313 
page 41 


and urged all Member States to ensure that the world's seas were protected 
from radioactive contaminants. 


125. As to the Conventions on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and 
on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, 
Chile had signed both and was currently in the process of ratifying them. 
Given their major significance, moreover, it was also playing an active 
co-ordinating role in the ARCAL programme aimed at ensuring the implementation 
of both Conventions in Latin America. 
126. On the matter of the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat, he was 
confident that the Director General's worthy efforts to increase the number of 
professionals from developing countries would continue, in order to reduce the 
imbalance which still persisted, particularly at the level of executive 
posts. A reasonable period of time spent in the service of the Agency was an 
excellent means for professionals to gain experience in the nuclear field, 
subsequently carrying that experience back to the home country. However, 
although an applicant for an Agency post required the consent of his 
Government, no such approval was subsequently sought by the Agency when it 
came to extending the staff member's initial contract, and he recommended that 
the Secretariat should in future consult Governments when proposing to extend 
the contracts of their nationals. 
127. Expressing dissatisfaction at the continual reappearance of certain 
items of the agenda that were clearly political in nature, he emphasized that 
the General Conference had, in the short space of time available to it, to 
attend to many matters of great technical significance, and that for many 
countries it constituted the sole forum in which they could express their 
needs and concerns. It was therefore unjust that valuable time should be 
devoted to matters which were clearly not within the Agency's competence, to 
the detriment of its true mission as a scientific forum. 
128. Finally, he welcomed the proposal to amend Rule 89 of the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference, noting that such a move would serve to 
complement the efforts already being made by the Agency to reduce expenses, 
and would also result in the more expeditious supply of documents. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
15 November 1989 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 25 September 1989, at 3.5 p.m. 


President: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 


General debate and annual report for 
1988 (continued) 1 - 144 


Statements by the delegates of: 


China 1-14 
France 15 - 36 
India 37 - 47 
Brazil 48 - 62 
Algeria 63 - 80 
Spain 81 - 100 
Czechoslovakia 101 - 111 
Zimbabwe 112 - 121 
German Democratic Republic 122 - 132 
Cuba 133 - 144 


[*] GC(XXXIII)/871 and Add.1-3. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIII)/INF/274/Rev.2. 


89-4661 
5611e/0588e 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (GC(XXXIIl)/873) (continued) 


1. Mr. HU (China) said that since the thirty-second session of the 
General Conference, the Agency had made gratifying progress in promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the world. It had done a great 
deal of useful work to help the Member States develop nuclear power and 
promote nuclear applications. Its activities aimed at encouraging 
international co-operation in the sphere of nuclear safety, facilitating 
research on radioactive waste disposal and management and strengthening 
radiation protection guidance and its promulgation of the revised safety codes 
for nuclear power plants were generally welcomed by Member States. The Agency 
should be given full credit for the series of measures it had taken to raise 
the implementation rate of its technical co-operation projects, make effective 
use of the financial resources allocated for such projects and evaluate their 
effect. Thanks to the concerted efforts of the Member States and the 
Secretariat, the Agency had also played a positive role in the implementation 
of safeguards. China viewed with satisfaction the continual expansion of 
areas of co-operation covered by the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for 
Asia and the Pacific and the positive results achieved in that connection. 
2. While the Agency's achievements deserved recognition, the difficulties 
facing it should not, of course, be forgotten. As a Member of the Agency and 
the Board of Governors, China considered itself duty-bound to support the 
Agency in discharging its important responsibilities regarding the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. Activities in the field of nuclear applications and 
the development and utilization of nuclear power, conducted by the Agency as 
part of its "promotional" work were of great importance for most of the 
developing countries. The Agency should take account of the needs of the 
developing countries and earmark a reasonable share of its programme and 
budget for projects relating to nuclear applications and the development and 
utilization of nuclear power. It would thus be able to maintain an 
appropriate balance between the promotional and regulatory sides of its work. 
3. There was an ever increasing awareness of the potential climatic and 
ecological impact of using fossil fuels. Nuclear energy could play an 
important role in reducing environmental pollution and the greenhouse effect. 
The Agency should endeavour to achieve even greater public understanding of 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 3 


the merits of nuclear energy in that regard and to continue its comparative 
studies on the effects and risks of using nuclear energy and energy from other 
sources, respectively, in order to win greater public acceptance of nuclear 
energy on the basis of sound scientific evidence. 


4. The Agency should continue to regard its work to improve nuclear safety 
and promote greater international co-operation in that area as an important 
component part of its activities. Since Chernobyl it had achieved a great 
deal in that regard. However, in the light of the Agency's foreseeable 
financial resources in the coming years, he hoped that its nuclear safety 
programme would place greater emphasis on operational safety and accident 
prevention. With respect to radiation protection, special attention should be 
given to providing developing countries with guidance on the management and 
safe use of radiation sources. 
5. Over the past few years the developing countries Members of the Agency 
had made encouraging progress in the development of nuclear power. However, 
that development had been rather uneven because of financial and technical 
constraints. China hoped that the Agency would play a greater role in 
assisting nuclear power planning, disseminating state-of-the-art nuclear power 
technologies, strengthening the infrastructure necessary for such countries 
for the development of their nuclear power programmes, and promoting 
corresponding training activities. 
6. Over the past decade, the Agency had stepped up its programme in areas 
such as nuclear power, nuclear safety and safeguards, which had undoubtedly 
boosted the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the 
world. Regrettably, however, with the near-zero growth in real terms of the 
Agency's Regular Budgets during the 1980s, many projects which should 
otherwise have been included in the programme had been left out. Furthermore, 
the emphasis given to different parts of the programme within the overall 
structure was sometimes misplaced. It was his country's view that the Agency 
should adjust its budgetary policies and arrangements in accordance with the 
changing requirements of its Member States. Maintaining zero growth over long 
periods of time interfered with the Agency's ability to discharge its 
responsibilities under its Statute and was bound to undermine its viability as 
an organization and sap its vigour. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 4 


7. With regard to the financing of technical assistance, the Chinese 
delegation had noted that, owing to the current financial constraints, a 
number of technically valuable projects, whose implementation would have 
benefited developing countries both socially and economically, had not 
received the support they deserved. The approach based on the Indicative 
Planning Figures (IPF) adopted by the Agency since 1982 had undoubtedly been a 
good departure. However, that should not obscure the fact that the more 
valued and indispensable such an approach became, the less capable the Agency 
was of envisaging other ways and means of implementing its resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/388. His delegation therefore considered that the Board of 
Governors should review the mechanisms used for applying the IPF in order to 
rectify the situation whereby, for several years running, the payments 
actually received had fallen short of the IPF. At the same time, the Board 
should renew its efforts to evolve other financing modalities. 
8. The Chinese Government attached great importance to the Agency's work, 
supporting it fully and taking an active part in it. During the past year 
China had hosted in co-operation with the Agency a series of meetings such as 
the INIS Regional Training Seminar for Input Preparation and Output 
Utilization, the second FAO/IAEA Research Co-ordination Meeting on the Use of 
Isotopes in Studies of Pesticide Residues in Rice-Fish Ecosystems, the 
Technical Committee Meeting on Electron Cyclotron Emissions, the Regional 
Training Course on Radiation Sterilization Practices for Tissue Grafts in 
Clinical Use, the FAO/IAEA Research Co-ordination Meeting on Radiation-Induced 
F Sterility in Lepidoptera for Area-Wide Control and the Third Regional 
Workshop on Energy, Electricity and Nuclear Power Planning. Within the 
framework of the RCA for Asia and the Pacific, China had funded the Agency's 
Regional Training Course on Formulation Technology for Radiation Cross-Linking 
Application, and planned to host the Regional Workshop on the 
Commercialization of Food Irradiation in Shanghai early in 1990. Moreover, 
China had sent experts to various developing countries in the region of Asia 
and the Pacific to provide technical services and had received technicians 
from developing countries for professional training. China would continue in 
the future to do everything within its power to co-operate with the Agency and 
contribute to its work. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 5 


9. It was well known that the previous year China had signed an agreement 
with the Agency placing some of its civilian nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards. He now had the pleasure of announcing to the General Conference 
that his country had recently completed the necessary domestic legal 
procedures relating to the agreement, which had now entered into force. The 
Chinese Government would comply strictly with the obligations set out in that 
agreement. In the meantime, on 10 January 1989, China had acceded to the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, a subject to which 
his Government attached great importance. 
10. The past year had seen significant developments in China's nuclear 
power programme. Smooth progress was being made in the installation of major 
equipment for a 300 MW nuclear power plant designed and constructed 
domestically as part of the first phase of the Qinshan project. The civil 
engineering work for the imported nuclear power plant at Daya Bay in Guangdong 
province and the design, production and installation of equipment were all 
going ahead according to plan. The construction of a 1200 MW (600 MW x 2) 
nuclear power plant as part of the second phase of the Qinshan project had 
already been approved by the State Council as a separate project and had 
reached the stage of technical and commercial negotiations with foreign firms 
and the completion of the preparatory work. 
11. In developing its nuclear power programme, it had always been China's 
policy to give absolute priority to quality and safety. In April 1989 it had 
invited a preliminary operational safety review team (OSART) mission to 
inspect the Qinshan project. While fully recognizing the quality of the civil 
engineering work and the equipment, that mission had suggested a number of 
improvements. Its visit had been very useful in the construction of the plant. 
12. In the future, China would concentrate on developing pressurized water 
reactors for nuclear power. Its aim was to standardize and produce 
industrially the 600 MW pressurized water reactor and to perfect the design of 
its 300 MW pressurized water reactor, which had been both designed and built 
domestically, with a view to their early commercialization. 
13. In developing its nuclear power programme, China would follow the 
principle of mainly relying on itself, while maintaining co-operation with 
other countries. By introducing foreign advance technology and strengthening 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 6 


independent research and development activities, it planned to accelerate the 
domestic manufacture of nuclear power equipment, while at the same time 
actively promoting international co-operation in the sphere of nuclear safety. 


14. As part of its national modernization plan, China would steadfastly 
implement a policy of openness towards the outside world and would firmly 
pursue an independent peace-based foreign policy. With regard to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, it would continue to uphold the principles of respect 
for sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs, equality and mutual 
benefit in developing co-operation with other countries or regions and with 
the international organizations. In particular, it would collaborate even 
more closely and more effectively with the Agency. China was convinced that, 
with policies guided by a spirit of reform and openness to the outside world, 
it would make greater advances in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in 
international co-operation. 
15. Mr. ROUVILLOIS (France), speaking first of all on behalf of the 
member countries of the European Community, paid tribute to the work done by 
the Agency and the distinguished role played by the Director General, who had 
the full support of those countries for his new term of office. 
16. The present joint statement by the Community demonstrated the interest 
which it took in the Agency's work and also reflected the importance of 
nuclear energy in the lives of a great many Europeans. Nuclear energy had 
been a feature of European planning from the very first, since the signing of 
the EURATOM Treaty in 195 7. That instrument continued to provide the 
framework for present-day activities conducted by the Community in a wide 
variety of domains. 
17. The development of the nuclear industry had given the Community greater 
self-sufficiency with regard to energy and had resulted in an increase of the 
share of nuclear energy in overall electricity production in Europe from 11.77o 
in 1980 to 33.9% in 1988. 
18. The Community therefore had a particular responsibility with respect to 
nuclear energy. In the first place, each State should ensure a very high 
level of safety in all its installations, especially nuclear power plants. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.314 
page 7 


The Community attached great importance to of research on the improvement of 


safety and environmental protection, and supported efforts to strengthen 


international co-operation in that area. It welcomed the initiatives 
undertaken in that regard by the Agency, which had, as part of its Nuclear 
Safety Standards (NUSS) programme, revised five Codes of Practice; extended 
the mandate of the International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) for a 
further three years; strengthened the safety evaluation and information 
exchange services for nuclear power plants and research reactors and, in 
particular, the OSART programme, three OSART missions having been received in 
recent months by Community countries; issued a new series of safety documents 
concerning radioactive waste; conducted safety studies on the design of new 
reactors; and, finally, undertaken the preparation of a Code of Practice for 
international transactions involving radioactive waste. The Community hoped 
that the work undertaken at the beginning of the year by the Working Group on 
Liability for Nuclear Damage might be completed as soon as possible. 


19. On a more general level, the Community considered that studies and 
discussions concerning nuclear energy were inseparable from the wider issue of 
the relationship between energy policies and environmental protection for both 
present and future. That was particularly true in a world where energy 
consumption was set to grow considerably and where a great many countries did 
not have available the range of energy options enjoyed in Europe. The 
increased energy consumption expected should be prevented from resulting in 
increased pollution, especially by those gases contributing to the greenhouse 
effect in the atmosphere. Nor should it damage the environment in any other 
way. The Community was aware of nuclear power's potential role in that regard 
and, in the context of its environmental policies, welcomed the contribution 
recently made by the Agency to a debate of global scope. 
20. The Community believed that the development of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy was inseparable from action aimed at eliminating the risks of 
arms proliferation. It attached the greatest importance to an effective 
international non-proliferation regime, as demonstrated by its declaration of 
a common policy adopted in 1984. In order to prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, it was absolutely essential to restrict the dissemination of 
equipment, material and technologies capable of being used in the manufacture 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.314 


page 8 


of a nuclear weapon. At the same time, however, countries should not be 
denied access to nuclear material or technologies necessary for their energy 
programmes and for other peaceful, non-explosive applications. The European 
Community welcomed the constraints which many countries, recipients as well as 
suppliers, imposed upon themselves in that domain by agreeing to the total or 
partial application of Agency safeguards, which represented the keystone of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


21. Continual efforts must be made to arrive at an international consensus 
on the balance between non-proliferation and the development of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. The Community hoped that that vital balance would be 
maintained and strengthened as a result of the international discussions which 
would take place at the Fourth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The States members of the 
Community, whether parties to that Treaty or not, would not fail to make an 
active contribution to those discussions. 
22. Finally, the Community attached particular importance to the Agency's 
programmes relating to scientific and technical co-operation. It made a very 
significant contribution to those programmes, which provided technical 
assistance to developing countries at their request in a wide range of fields 
relating to the application of isotopes and radiation. 
23. The European Community was determined to make concerted efforts to find 
solutions to the complex problems facing the world. As far as energy was 
concerned, the growing demand, the difficulties of sharing resources, 
ecological necessities and the exigencies of non-proliferation were all such 
that lasting solutions were dependent on close international co-operation. 
The Agency, by virtue of the universality of its composition, had a vital role 
to play in that regard. 
24. Speaking on behalf of France, he wished first of all to express his 
country's support for the re-election of Mr. Blix as the Agency's Director 
General for a third term of office. France greatly appreciated the 
determination with which he supported the development of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy in a period as fraught with difficulty as the present one and 
would continue to lend him its active support. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 9 


25. The past year had been rich in lessons. It had confirmed in the first 
place the difficulties which the development of nuclear energy had to confront 
throughout the world. The development of nuclear power programmes remained 
slow, both in the industrialized countries, where hindrances were being placed 
in their way in the shape of continued or extended de facto moratoriums, the 
postponement of projects and sometimes the abrupt cessation of construction, 
and in the developing countries, where the nuclear option continued to be 
beset by numerous obstacles. Furthermore, public opinion was becoming 
increasingly sensitive in countries which, until only recently, had been 
sheltered from anti-nuclear movements. 
26. The consequences of rejecting nuclear power, a decision made for a 
variety of reasons, were now making themselves particularly clearly felt in 
certain countries. The growing awareness of the damaging effects to be 
expected from a massive utilization of fossil fuels seemed to have stimulated 
a new attitude towards the possible relationship between nuclear power and the 
environment. The Agency's task and that of its Member States was to highlight 
the contribution which a cautious and expert utilization of nuclear energy 
could make and, in a world where the die had not yet been cast, to respond to 
the questions now most preoccupying public opinion. 
27. Those questions concerned first and foremost safety, which was the 
cornerstone of confidence in the nuclear option. France had always advocated 
an exacting and rigorous safety policy, which was not only an obligation 
towards its own citizens but also a duty towards the international community. 
Regular exchanges of experiences in the safety field were particularly 
important, and France would accordingly continue to support that work, whether 
in connection with INSAG, the NUSS codes or the OSART missions, one of which 
had been made to the Saint-Alban nuclear power plant in the past year. France 
also welcomed the creation of the World Association of Nuclear Operators 
(WANO). 
28. Nuclear waste storage was another controversial question, because 
opponents of the nuclear industry based their antagonism to it on the 
industry's alleged inability to solve the problem of final storage and because 
the interim storage of waste in developing countries had attracted public 

GC(XXXLII)/OR.314 
page 10 


attention internationally. In that connection, France welcomed the creation 
within the Agency of a working group with the task of elaborating a code of 
practice. 


29. The future would likewise depend on the progress of technology, which 
should be continually improved with a view to the development of new 
generations of reactors and further progress in the fuel cycle industry. That 
would be one of the main avenues of international co-operation in the future. 
Finally, the place occupied by nuclear energy in the world of tomorrow would 
depend on the conclusions which governments drew from the analysis of 
environmental problems, in particular the greenhouse effect, in determining 
their energy policies. 
30. Convincing scientific and technical arguments should be presented on 
all those points to the public in all the Agency's Member States. Significant 
progress had been made in that regard, as demonstrated by the establishment in 
France of a scale of seriousness for incidents. Other countries were studying 
similar arrangements and some form of harmonization would therefore be 
necessary. In order to make preparations for the future, international 
co-operation would have to be strengthened. France was co-operating with the 
United States and Japan, but primarily with other European countries. In the 
past year the European Community had made substantial progress in its analyses 
of the common energy market and had embarked on a pragmatic and progressive 
course. In the vital area of safety, the Council of Ministers had, 
on 21 June, taken note of the existing consensus between the safety 
authorities, technicians and industrialists concerning the objectives to be 
pursued and methods to be applied by member countries in the sphere of nuclear 
safety. The Community had also seen the emergence of an analytical approach 
to the common principles which should guide the external nuclear policies of 
member countries. 


31. Regarding the nuclear industry, European co-operation in the 
development of breeder reactors had led to the signature in 1989 of agreements 
on research and development, industrial property and engineering, confirming 
the commitment of France, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United 
Kingdom to develop that kind of reactor. That series of agreements gave full 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 11 


credit to the work carried out among European electricity producers in 
connection with the European Fast Reactor project for the joint conception of 
a new reactor. 


32. On the bilateral plane, co-operation between France and the Federal 
Republic of Germany had received a new impetus with the common declaration 
signed in June 1989. France had also strengthened its nuclear relations with 
the countries of Central and Eastern Europe. 
33. Another priority concern of his Government was the strengthening of 
co-operation with developing countries. One of the great challenges of the 
decade to come would undoubtedly be to enlarge the scope of the energy options 
available to those countries by making nuclear power accessible to them under 
conditions acceptable to all. It was one of the Agency's missions to 
contribute to that process within the framework of its technical co-operation 
policy. France, for its part, would henceforward participate in the direct 
voluntary financing of development projects. 
34. A specific study should be undertaken of the role which nuclear energy 
could play in the developing countries, two major conditions being borne in 
mind: the satisfaction of safety requirements and the elimination of 
proliferation risks. The task was difficult, but it was impossible on the one 
hand to continue to affirm the right of developing countries to have nuclear 
power, while on the other hand denying them the wherewithal to exercise that 
right in practice. France and the European Community had always defended the 
necessity of assisting those countries which needed nuclear power to obtain 
it, while at the same time preventing the risks associated with the 
proliferation of weapons. 
35. With all those considerations in mind, France was pursuing its nuclear 
power programme by developing new uranium enrichment processes, starting up 
the new installations at the La Hague reprocessing plant, designing reactors 
for the future and tackling the problems of radioactive waste disposal. 
36. The way must be prepared for the future. The Agency had an important 
role to play in that regard, and could count on the support of France in its 
endeavours to accomplish that common task. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 12 


37. Mr. SRINIVASAN (India) said that his delegation much appreciated 
the Director General's role during the past eight years in advocating the 
cause of peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Under his leadership, the 
Agency had admirably adapted to the varied fluctuations experienced by the 
nuclear programmes in Member States. India therefore supported the Board's 
recommendation to extend his term of office. 
38. The thirty-third regular session of the General Conference was 
significant in that it was being held shortly after the World Energy 
Conference in Montreal. At that conference, the consensus had been that 
conservation alone was not the answer to the global energy problem. Neither 
was nuclear energy alone the answer. What was required was a combination of 
conservation, increasing use of nuclear power and pollution-mitigating 
technologies for fossil fuels. A consensus had also emerged at the World 
Energy Conference that the time was not yet ripe for economic exploitation of 
solar and wind power, or biogas, except in special circumstances. The 
Director General had also pointed out in his opening statement that about 50% 
of the greenhouse effect was traceable to the increase in CO levels 
resulting from the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation. He had also 
stated conclusively that energy conservation and the accelerated development 
of renewable energy sources, notably solar and wind, which were often claimed 
by some groups to be the panacea for all the ills arising from increased 
energy production, would provide only a minuscule fraction of the projected 
energy demand by the year 2010. 
39. In only twenty years, the population of the world had doubled to more 
than 5 billion, and might double again by the middle of the next century. The 
population of the developed countries, which at present consumed more than 75% 
of the world's primary energy, would remain more or less stable. 
Consequently, the pressures of expanding population and deteriorating energy 
resources would in fact fall on the developing countries. Those countries 
should therefore consider it a major responsibility to contain population 
growth, as otherwise global resources would be insufficient. Furthermore, an 
equitable world could not be built up without attempting to rectify the 
existing imbalance in the pattern of energy consumption between the developed 
and developing countries. Energy had a central role in all development 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 13 


related activities. At the same time, there was concern that a large part of 
the primary energy consumed was not renewable and was environmentally 
degrading. 


40. In India, the population depended for 40-45% of its power on wood, cow 
dung and agricultural refuse. The dependence on wood as fuel to such a large 
extent was a cause for serious concern. Electricity accounted for about 19% 
of primary energy in India, and it was expected to increase to about 30% by 
the year 2000. More than 60% of electricity generation in India was based on 
coal and other fossil fuels. Ideally, for domestic purposes, wood should be 
replaced by coal, coke, kerosene and gas and a greater proportion of 
electricity generation should come from nuclear power. That energy scenario 
highlighted the relevance of nuclear power to meet energy demands in India. 
It was disconcerting that some of the industrially advanced countries, which 
had demonstrated their capability to operate nuclear power plants 
successfully, had announced plans to use natural gas increasingly in place of 
nuclear energy to produce electricity. The question might be asked whether 
such replacement on a global scale was feasible and indeed whether a shift to 
natural gas was even sustainable, except in the context of a nation with a low 
population. 
41. Having been involved in the field of nuclear power for a very long 
time, he had witnessed the gradual expansion of the role of nuclear power in 
many countries. There had been two major accidents and other setbacks, but 
there had been quick recovery and the installed capacity of nuclear power in 
the world continued to expand. Indeed it was heartening to learn from the 
IAEA annual report for 1988 that 14 more nuclear power reactors had come on 
line during that year and that nuclear power now accounted for 17% of total 
power generation in the world. 
42. Expansion in nuclear power generation was more vertical than 
horizontal. The Senior Expert Group on Mechanisms to Assist Developing 
Countries in the Promotion and Financing of Nuclear Power Programmes had 
recommended in its report, inter alia, that the Agency should promote closer 
co-operation with the World Bank in energy and power sector planning, 
undertake preparatory studies, continue its efforts to find partners to 
implement and finance a feasibility study for a small- and a medium-power 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 


page 14 


reactor, encourage involved Member States to review the Organisation for 


Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) consensus on financing 


conditions, etc. There was a shortage of orders with the established nuclear 
power plant suppliers in the industrially advanced countries. At the same 


time, a number of developing countries which could accelerate their economic 
growth through augmentation of electricity supply by resorting to nuclear 
power were unable to do so for a variety of reasons, such as inadequate 
infrastructure, lack of acceptable financing arrangements, public attitude, 
etc. India had adopted a self-reliant approach to nuclear technology. That 
approach required arduous efforts and involved lengthy gestation periods 
before the benefits were derived. However, it provided a stable foundation 
for the further development of nuclear power in the country. As a supplement, 
India called on external assistance with some of its nuclear power reactors. 
That would help bridge the gap between power supply and demand. 


43. After Chernobyl and Three Mile Island the world had learned at great 
cost that assurance of public and environmental safety should be the 
foundation of all nuclear energy programmes. The world nuclear community had 
since then taken decisive steps. One such step worthy of mentioning was the 
setting-up in May 1989 of WANO. That association reflected the determination 
of nuclear operators to globalize nuclear safety issues. Until the Three Mile 
Island accident in 1979, emphasis had been placed on design safety, and that 
accident had served to underline the significance of operational safety. Then 
the Chernobyl accident had occurred in 1986. All those incidents had 
galvanized the nuclear community into strengthening co-operative steps to 
enhance the safety of nuclear power plant operation. The contributions by the 
Agency in that area and in the field of radiation protection were 
commendable. The codes which had been adopted had been responsible for making 
nuclear safety, which had hithertoo been merely a nebulous concept, into a 
highly accomplished science. The reaction of the international nuclear 
community to the basic safety principles document had been very positive. 
Those principles should be updated periodically. At the same time, however, 
the Agency, in its programmes, should not lose sight of safety in design and 
construction. Concepts such as inherent safety and passive safety should also 
be pursued actively. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 15 


44. In India, people had realized that without a strong public information 
effort, a negative image of nuclear energy might become ingrained in the 
public mind. That could become a stumbling block to the further growth of 
nuclear power. He was happy that the Agency had realized the importance of 
public awareness programmes. 
45. In India, the commitment to harness nuclear energy for development was 
deeply rooted. Another milestone in the Indian nuclear power programme had 
been the attainment of criticality of the first unit of the Narora atomic 
power station in March 1989, and, in July 1989, its synchronization to the 
grid. That was the seventh nuclear power reactor in the country and the third 
235 MW(e) PHWR to be nationally designed and built. The design and 
construction had posed many challenges to the Indian engineers and scientists, 
who had had to evolve innovative designs to suit the moderately seismic 
conditions and other characteristics of the location. The reactor employed a 
double containment feature to make it safe to the public and the environment 
under virtually all conditions. The two other nationally built power reactors 
at the Madras atomic power station had had some problems. In spite of their 
complexity and the location of the damage in a very high radiation zone, the 
Indian technicians had been able to bring the two reactors back into operation 
reasonably quickly, even though at reduced power levels. Action was now being 
taken to make other modifications so that the reactors could resume full-power 
operation. Other nuclear power stations based on pressurized water reactors 
of 235 MW and 500 MW were making steady progress. Nuclear technology was 
highly demanding but India was convinced that the rewards were high if the 
challenges were faced. 
46. India continued to attach considerable importance to fast reactors. 
Design and development work on a 500 MW(e) prototype fast breeder reactor was 
progressing. The fast breeder reactors were an important energy option and, 
in the long term, India planned to build facilities of that type to make 
optimum use of nuclear fuel. It also attached considerable importance to the 
increasing use of radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture and industry. 
47. Finally, he reiterated his country's commitment to the cause of 
disarmament. India regarded the action plan which it had submitted to the 
Special Session on Disarmament of the United Nations General Assembly as a 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.314 
page 16 


programme which should be taken up without delay. That plan called on the 
international community to negotiate within a fixed time period the complete 
phasing-out of nuclear weapons. The vast resources which were being poured 
into armaments should rather be channelled into economic development and 
social well-being. Moreover, non-proliferation could only succeed under a 
non-discriminatory regime. India reaffirmed its support for the Agency's 
activities. It sincerely hoped that the Agency would play a catalytic role in 
bringing the achievements of nuclear technology to the common benefit of all 
mankind. 


48. Mr. ALVES (Brazil) said that his country had not deviated from its 
long-standing policy of firmly supporting the activities of the Agency, the 
guidelines for which were set forth in the Agency's Statute. In addition, the 
Brazilian Government renewed its full support for the safeguards system: it 
was an effective means for the control of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
since it was the result of sovereign negotiations and was applied in strict 
accordance with the Agency's Statute, in other words in a non-discriminatory 
manner. Brazil stressed the great effort of the Agency's safeguards 
inspectors and expressed confidence in their work. 
49. His Government attached special importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme and followed its development closely. The fact that it 
continued to grow within an overall scenario of zero growth was an assurance, 
for the developing countries, that the Agency was fulfilling its mandate. It 
was important that such a trend should continue, especially during the present 
difficult period when so many developing Member States were experiencing a 
deterioration in their socio-economic situation. Brazil was aware that such 
constraints affected the timely implementation of technical co-operation 
projects. 
50. However, improvements could be achieved in certain areas of the 
technical co-operation programme. Delays in the placement of fellows and 
visiting scientists undermined the Agency's efforts, and countries should 
therefore be urged to expedite the acceptance procedures. Furthermore, the 
implementation of footnote-a/ projects should follow the established plans, 
and the restrictions relating to experts and equipment should be reduced. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 17 


Similarly, increased participation of the developing Member States in the 


programme should be sought, through the provision of expert services and 


equipment. 


51. The Agency's mandate to promote the exchange of scientific and 
technical information between Member States should not be forgotten. In that 
connection, he commended the excellent work of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS), which for almost twenty years had enabled vital 
knowledge to be disseminated to the Agency's Member States. The efficient use 
of such information, particularly in the developing countries, was essential 
to the development of their nuclear activities. His delegation was pleased to 
note that INIS was expanding its support, through regional agreements such as 
ARCAL, by helping countries in the initial stages of nuclear development to 
establish or improve their nuclear information infrastructure. Brazil 
strongly supported such initiatives by providing, through its Nuclear 
Information Centre, both services and expertise to the Latin American region. 
52. The technical assistance provided by the Agency had contributed to 
Brazil's achievements, particularly in radiation protection, dosimetry and 
nuclear safety. The Amazon project had enabled the Brazilian Government to 
complete its studies by means of isotope techniques on the effects of land-use 
changes on the ecology and climate of the Brazilian Amazon. 
53. Turning to the controversial question of environmental protection in 
Brazil, he recalled that much had been spoken about the "destruction" of the 
Amazon forest and that many romantic or biased opinions had been expressed. 
It was therefore time to correct at least some of those opinions: recent 
studies, universally accepted, demonstrated that 5 7% of the total greenhouse 
effect came from energy production, 17% from chlorofluorocarbons, 14% from 
agriculture, 9% from deforestation and 37o from industry. Important as they 
were, the consequences of deforestation came far behind those of energy 
production. It should be recalled that 75% of overall energy was produced and 
consumed in the developed countries. Account should also be taken of the 
concern expressed by the United Nations General Assembly that the largest part 
of the emissions into the environment, including toxic and hazardous waste, 
originated in the developed countries and that those countries therefore had 
the main responsibility for combating such pollution. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 18 


54. With regard to nuclear energy, the World Commission on Environment and 
Development had stated in its report that the nuclear-weapon States had not 
reached an agreement on complete disarmament and that NPT had proved to be an 
inadequate instrument for preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
which was a serious threat to world peace. Brazil had consistently defended 
non-discriminatory policies aimed at nuclear disarmament and 
non-proliferation. It had participated in the group of eighteen countries 
which had been given a mandate to draft an international treaty for those 
purposes. The negotiations held at that time had led to the adoption by the 
United Nations General Assembly in 1965 of resolution 2028, which contained a 
set of principles to which Brazil fully subscribed, as they respected the 
sovereign equality of States. At the United Nations and in other forums, 
Brazil had always supported the measures for global disarmament on a 
non-discriminatory basis. The fundamental principle which guided Brazil's 
nuclear activities was that they should exclusively serve peaceful purposes. 
As his delegation had stated the previous year, the new Brazilian 
Constitution, which had entered into force on 5 October 1988, provided that 
all nuclear activities on the national territory were permitted only for 
peaceful purposes and with the approval of the National Congress. 
55. The Congress, which not only controlled all the country's nuclear 
activities but also approved the financing and established the priorities of 
Brazil's nuclear programme, in addition had to examine, revise or approve the 
measures proposed by the bodies created through the reorganization of the 
nuclear sector which had taken place in September 1988. In that connection, 
it had recently passed a law on the bugetary directives for 1990 which stated, 
with regard to production, that priority should be given to the completion of 
the two nuclear power plants under construction. In its chapter on science 
and technology, the same law gave special priority to the continuation of 
research on uranium enrichment, the fuel cycle and radioisotope production. 
56. Two bills were currently before Congress, one dealing with the national 
policy on nuclear energy and the other on disposal sites for radioactive 
wastes. Both had been prepared after wide-scale consultation with the 
Brazilian people and with the approval of the Superior Council for Nuclear 
Policy, which consisted of ministers, government officials, distinguished 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 19 


representatives of the scientific community and congressmen. The second bill 
had been put forward by the Advisory Committee on Radioactive Wastes, which 
consisted of five scientists. Another committee, on radiological protection 
and nuclear safety, was in the process of revising all Brazilian legislation 
on the subject. 


57. As another consequence of the restructuring of Brazil's nuclear policy, 
the private sector was playing an increasing role in the nuclear programme. 
As well as there being two important plants to produce zirconium and beryllium 
about to come on line, a contract had recently been signed for uranium 
exploration at Lagoa Real, as part of the joint efforts of the National 
Nuclear Energy Commission, the Industrias Nucleares do Brasil S.A. and private 
Brazilian companies. 
58. As could be seen, therefore, nuclear affairs concerned the Brazilian 
people as a whole. The Government continued to defend the principles of 
equality, non-intervention and the right to development of each country on a 
non-discriminatory basis. It fully rejected the fake division of the world 
into "responsible" and "irresponsible" countries, and the prejudices behind 
those concepts. 
59. His delegation was satisfied with the Agency's activities under its 
nuclear safety programme, and continued to support them. The risks and 
benefits of nuclear power could not be considered in isolation, but had to be 
compared with other industrial activities and viable electricity production 
options. Such comparative assessment was also necessary in discussing the 
role of nuclear power in environmental protection, avoiding climatic changes, 
particularly those due to the use of fossil fuels, and in sustainable 
development. 
60. Information therefore had to be compiled on the short-term and 
long-term impact of alternative methods of energy production. The local, 
regional and global effects should also be observed and modelling and 
assessment methods should be developed. It was of the utmost importance that 
the Agency should co-ordinate the preparation of authoritative technical 
reports so as to present the results in a consistent framework to assist 
decision-makers. Brazil therefore encouraged and strongly supported the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 20 


Agency's activities in comparative risk assessment of nuclear power generation 


and its alternatives; those activities should be kept under the nuclear 


safety programme, which had the expertise to carry them out with limited 


budgetary impact. 


61. He emphasized Brazil's positive experience with the Secondary Standard 
Dosimetry Laboratory (SSDL), despite the difficulties which had been 
experienced in setting it up, as no similar programme had existed before. 
The SSDL carried out important work in the fields of maintenance of secondary 
standards, standardization of radiation measurements throughout the nation, 
connection of the national measuring system to the international system, 
technical expertise to the Government (National Laboratory), execution of 
legal radiation measurements (National Laboratory), provision of an 
experimental radiation measuring facility, teaching faculty, research in the 
field of radiation metrology, and assistance to the SSDL network. That 
example illustrated the support which should be given to the Agency's 
SSDL programme, which must be considered within the framework of the 
interdependence of the many technical assistance projects in each country. 


62. Turning to the question of Brazil's bilateral relations in nuclear 
matters, he stressed the wide-ranging relations with Argentina, which had been 
reinforced by the joint declaration on nuclear matter signed by the Presidents 
of the two countries in Foz do Iguacu, in December 1985. Since then, there 
had been closer co-operation and significant exchange of experience and 
materials. The previous month, President Menem had held important talks with 
President Sarney on nuclear affairs. On that occasion, the Governments of the 
two countries had concluded a document to facilitate the exchange of goods to 
be used in the construction of nuclear power plants in both countries. In 
that way Brazil and Argentina were improving their co-operation in the area of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and exploring new ways of contributing to 
the development of Latin America. 
63. Mr. CHERIF (Algeria) began by stating that nuclear power, as long 
as it adhered to stringent safety standards and rules, was a reliable source 


of energy which presented no danger to the environment. Everyone was aware 


that the use of nuclear power could help reduce the concentrations of carbon 



GC(XXXTII)/OR.314 
page 21 


dioxide and sulphur dioxide in the atmosphere and prevent a worsening of the 


greenhouse effect which those gases caused. The noteworthy action taken by 


the Director General and the Secretariat on that matter was commendable. 


64. Nevertheless, the desired objective - the large-scale introduction of 
nuclear energy throughout the world, including the developing countries could 
not be achieved unless serious efforts were made to solve the many 
thorny problems concerning, in particular, international transfers of 
materials and technology, the financing of nuclear power, and international 
co-operation on safety-related matters, including exchanges of relevant 
information. His delegation therefore hoped that new initiatives would soon 
be taken on all those matters under the Agency's auspices. 
65. Economic constraints had seriously affected the level of investments 
during the past few years. For a lack of adequate financial resources, the 
different enhancement programmes, particularly in developing countries, had 
been considerably reduced, and nuclear power was among the areas most affected 
by that continuing crisis. In spite of those unfavourable conditions, Algeria 
remained convinced that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were an important 
factor not only for the future of its economy but also for the well-being of 
its population. On the basis of that conviction, during the past two years, 
it had increased its efforts to consolidate the scientific and technical has if; 
and to continue, at an appropriate pace, the implementation of its programme 
for the development of nuclear applications. Achievements worth mentioning 
included the installation of the first training and research reactor, 
inaugurated in April 1989. That facility, to be used for education, basic 
research and nuclear applications in medicine, agriculture and industry, was 
the result of exemplary co-operation between two countries, Algeria and 
Argentina, which had, by their joint efforts, created the conditions and 
climate of confidence necessary for mutually advantageous exchanges and for 
the development of fruitful co-operation for the well-being of their peoples. 
Over a number of years, Algerian and Argentine scientists and technicians had 
had a most enriching exchange of experiences. The safeguards agreement 
applicable to the reactor had been signed with the Agency in February 1989, 
and safeguards were already being applied. Algeria proposed to explore the 
possibility of organizing research and training activities at that facility, 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 22 


on terms still to be defined, for scientists and trainees from other 
countries, including African countries. 


66. In addition, Algeria had made considerable progress in implementing 
projects on the applications of nuclear techniques in medicine, agriculture 
and industry. Thus, the construction of three new centres for radiotherapy 
and nuclear medicine had just been completed, and the equipment was being 
installed. Those centres, which would be operational by the end of 1989, were 
coming at the right time to strengthen the existing infrastructure and thus to 
respond to an increasing demand in that area. A fourth centre was under 
construction. Also, with the Agency's support, interesting work was being 
carried out in the radiopharmaceutical field. Those activities had opened up 
the way to starting the production of technetium-99 in the near future, and 
the experimental production of small quantities of radioisotopes using the 
reactor's irradiation capabilities was also foreseen. 
67. Another project concerned the use of irradiation techniques. Thanks to 
those techniques, Algeria hoped to reduce the losses attributable to storage 
difficulties and to the country's climatic conditions. The pilot activities 
accomplished with the Agency's support had made it possible to optimize the 
irradiation doses and to carry out technical and economic studies for the 
planned construction of a semi-industrial irradiation facility which would be 
used both for foodstuffs and for sterilizing medical products. In view of its 
continuing interest in those techniques, his country would soon be hosting the 
FAO/TAEA Research Co-ordination Meeting on the Application of Irradiation 
Techniques for Food Processing in Africa. 
68. A secondary standard laboratory with three calibration benches which 
had been set up with the Agency's assistance was now operational and could 
also serve other African countries that might wish to use it. Reliable and 
efficient radiation protection services had been established which could 
analyse imported food products as well. Research activities were also being 
undertaken. The human potential available was already such that Algeria could 
participate in assistance efforts under the Convention on Assistance in the 
Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.314 
page 23 


69. His country's wish for more active participation in the Agency's 
training activities had led it to offer itself as host to regional and 
interregional courses. Thus, a first regional course on the maintenance of 
nuclear medicine instruments for the Africa region was to be held the 
following month in Algiers. In addition, Algeria had requested the 
Secretariat to hold regional and interregional courses on non-destructive 
testing and analytical techniques in Algiers. His country hoped to be able to 
contribute regularly to the Agency's training activities in the future. 
70. With regard to regional co-operation, his delegation thanked the 
Secretariat, and in particular the Deputy Director General for Technical 
Co-operation and his staff, for the valuable assistance given to African 
States with a view to concluding a co-operation agreement similar to the 
existing agreements for Latin America and Asia. His delegation trusted that 
co-operation projects under that agreement would enjoy the scientific and 
material support of the Agency and of Member States. 
71. The provision of technical assistance was one of the Agency's main 
functions, since, for a great many countries, that technical assistance 
greatly contributed to the promotion of nuclear techniques. His delegation 
therefore reiterated its support for the Agency's activities in that area and 
for the steps taken to improve the management of technical assistance, while 
also hoping that resources would increase at a faster rate and their 
availability be certain and foreseeable. In that context, he said that 
Algeria would soon be paying its voluntary contribution. The Department of 
Technical Co-operation was to be commended for the noteworthy volume and 
quality of the work which it had accomplished with limited means. 
72. At a time when the entire international community was rallying to fend 
off the threats to the environment and was co-ordinating efforts to promote 
sustainable development, the Agency should accord high priority among its 
activities to the question of dumping of nuclear waste and other toxic 
wastes. The General Conference's resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/490 and the 
Director General's report to the current session were prerequisites for 
positive developments in that matter. His delegation hoped that the General 
Conference, during its current session, would further increase its efforts to 
lay a basis for the formulation of international regulations on that matter. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 24 


73. Algeria was very interested in the establishment of a comprehensive 
regime of international liability for nuclear damage. It welcomed the signing 
of the Joint Protocol Relating to the Application of the Vienna Convention and 
the Paris Convention, which represented a significant step in the development 
of international law in the area of civil liability, and it also welcomed the 
establishment, pursuant to General Conference resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/491, of 
a working group to study all aspects of that issue. His delegation 
congratulated the working group on the important tasks it had performed in the 
course of its first session. 
74. Although it had been on the General Conference's agenda for 13 years, 
the question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had still not 
been resolved. And yet, in 1978 the General Conference, in its resolution 
GC(XXll)/RES/361, had already pronounced itself in favour of a moderate 
increase in the number of Board members from the regions of Africa and the 
Middle East and South Asia, thus recognizing that those regions were 
underrepresented as well as the need to correct that imbalance. It was time 
to see that justice was done to those two regions by according them fair and 
equitable representation within the Board. That matter should be treated as a 
priority - without prejudice, however, to the need to take due account of the 
proposals for the revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole at a later 
stage. 
75. The State of Palestine had by now received wide international 
recognition, and its participation in the activities of the Agency as an 
observer was a wholly legitimate right which stemmed from the proclamation 
made by the Palestine National Council on 15 November 1988. By that act, the 
Palestinian people had again proved its desire to respect international 
legitimacy and its justified wish to take part in the various activities of 
the international community. By permitting the State of Palestine to attend, 
as an observer, the scientific and technical meetings organized by the Agency, 
the meetings of the Board of Governors and the sessions of the General 
Conference, the Agency - and thus the United Nations system as a whole - would 
only be doing it justice. The Agency was therefore duty bound to respond 
positively to Palestine's expectation. What was said, done and decided at 
those meetings concerned all the peoples of the world without exception, 
including the people of Palestine. 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.314 
page 25 


76. Israel's nuclear capabilities, through the threat and danger they posed 
to peace, security and stability in the particularly sensitive region of the 
Middle East as well as in the entire world, continued to arouse the just 
concerns to all who worked towards international detente. It could not be 
otherwise because, despite the many appeals to reason which had been addressed 
to it by the United Nations, the Agency and other international bodies, Israel 
persisted with its agressive policy towards the countries of the region and 
beyond, by pursuing its tactics of oppression and terror against the 
Palestinian people and by occupying its territory and that of other 
Member States. In that context, the Agency, as part of the United Nations 
system, was duty-bound to help put an end to that threat by adopting 
appropriate measures in the light of the particular situation in the Middle 
East. 
77. The technical study carried out by the Secretariat in response to 
operative paragraph 6 of General Conference resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/487 would 
have done well to bring out more clearly the requirements with regard to 
safeguards, so as to dispel all fear of seeing nuclear energy diverted from 
its peaceful applications and used for purposes of destruction with 
incalculable consequences. That fear was based on serious, reliable and 
objective information and studies on Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat, 
which the Agency had not, however, been able to present in a report which the 
General Conference had requested the previous year. 
78. Another threat, that of South Africa's nuclear capabilities, continued 
to be of serious concern to all African countries in view of the persistent 
violation of international law and of the United Nations Charter by the South 
African regime and of the disregard with which it treated the Agency's 
resolutions. Evidently, the will of the South African regime to respond to 
incessant appeals by the Agency and by the United Nations was no longer 
credible. His delegation therefore considered it the duty of the General 
Conference to continue to put pressure on South Africa to make it adhere to 
its resolutions. 
79. The Agency's accomplishments in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and public acceptance of nuclear energy were great. There was still 
much to be done in certain countries in the areas of radiation protection and 
nuclear safety. In particular, universally recognized principles and 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 26 


technical ccitera for the treatment and storage of radioactive wastes had yet 
to be formulated so as to ensure that that negative aspect of nuclear energy 
did not overshadow all the other positive aspects in the eyes of the public. 
Nuclear power currently accounted for a significant proportion of the world's 
electricity. In future, it could supply even more, given concerted international 
co-operation to that end. Nuclear energy could even be used to 
produce potable water to meet the needs of agriculture, industry and domestic 
consumption in countries having arid or semi-arid zones where water was in 


short supply, such as Algeria. 


80. In view of all that had been done and all that remained to be done, the 
Agency's Member States should combine their efforts to arrive at the 
widespread safe and hazard-free use of nuclear energy. The Agency would then 
remain a bridge between all peoples - in particular between the developed and 
the developing countries - in the nuclear area from which all expected such 
enormous benefits. That expectation must not be betrayed. 
81. Mr. PEREZ PITA (Spain) said that his delegation wished first to 
express its full support for the statement on behalf of the 12 countries of 
the European Community made earlier in the present meeting by the head of the 
delegation from France, the country which currently held the Presidency of the 
Community. The Spanish delegation was aware that such explicit support was 
unnecessary, as all who attended the General Conference knew perfectly well 
that a statement made by the Community Presidency on behalf of the Twelve 
would be fully supported by those 12 countries; however, like the 
Prince de Talleyrand, the French Minister who, also at Vienna, had played so 
important a role in such critical moments for his country and for Europe, his 
delegation felt that that which went without saying was even better said. 


82. He wished to commend the Director General of the Agency in particular 
on the statement he had made under item 3 of the agenda. The Spanish 
delegation had found the content of that statement highly interesting, 
especially where it concerned the environmental problems associated with 
energy consumption and the role which nuclear energy currently played and 
could play in the long term with regard to those problems. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 27 


83. A country's development was dependent, among other factors, on a supply 
of energy which had to be planned taking into consideration everything that 
could affect both supply and demand. Reliability was necessarily one of the 
essential characteristics of supply, because without it serious economic and 
social damage might be done, although the latter type was difficult to 
evaluate. 
84. The choice between various possibilities where the power generating 
structure was concerned was a decision of the greatest importance for the 
future of a nation's economy. Until relatively recently, the sole objective 
of any energy policy had been the achievement of economic development. Now 
that such development was proving, in certain cases, to cause serious damage 
to the environment, society was increasingly recognizing that the ability to 
exploit a natural environment without harming it was a rare commodity indeed. 
85. Nevertheless, it was a fact that developed societies were opting for 
life styles which entailed increased energy consumption, and it was 
foreseeable that developing societies' energy needs would increase as well. 
In those conditions, world energy demand would continue to grow and 
electricity's share of that demand was expected to grow fastest. It was 
commonly agreed that energy should be produced in a way which was both 
economical and acceptable for the environment; however, there was no 
consensus on how to satisfy both of those conditions. 
86. A good number of those who until recently had pointed fingers at 
nuclear energy for being one of the main causes of the environmental 
deterioration which was a consequence of economic development in the most 
industrialized societies were now seriously reviewing their allocations of 
praise and blame and coming to regard nuclear power as less aggressive, from 
the environmental point of view, than other energy sources whose use had never 
been questioned before. 
87. The future role of nuclear fission in energy production would depend to 
a great extent on the confidence it would inspire in the world's populations, 
and that confidence could be based only on the answers to questions concerning 
operational safety, radioactive wastes and nuclear material proliferation. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 28 


88. Safety was the key to the further development of nuclear energy. 
Achieving a maximum degree of safety must not be merely the design objective 
for future reactors, but an axiom governing the operation of reactors 
currently in service. Experience had shown that the most serious accidents 
which had taken place in that type of facility had occurred when a set of 
circumstances not initially foreseen had appeared simultaneously. It was 
therefore important that safety research relating to the prediction, analysis 
and management of accidents should aim to consider the greatest possible 
number of circumstances and that the results of such research be applied to 
operating facilities. Moreover, as had unfortunately been demonstrated, the 
consequences of a nuclear accident could be felt beyond the borders of the 
country where the accident site was and thus be international in their 
impact. It was therefore necessary not only to conclude international 
co-operation agreements, but also for the Agency to continue to promote the 
establishment of standardized criteria to permit a similar level of nuclear 
safety to be achieved the world over. 
89. His delegation had repeatedly emphasized the importance of the Agency's 
role as a focus for international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. The advantages of such co-operation were clear, not only for the 
countries which were at an initial stage of using nuclear techniques, but also 
for those which had already achieved a certain development in that respect. 
Indeed, the exchange of information and experience which such co-operation 
involved brought savings on resources as well as providing better assurances 
with regard to the prevention of accidents. The vital importance of those 
matters for the future of nuclear energy must be properly reflected in the 
distribution of the resources which Member States made available to the Agency. 
90. The recent publication of the report by the International Nuclear 
Safety Advisory Group entitled "Basic Safety Principles for Nuclear Power 
Plants" was a significant step. That document had attracted particular 
interest in Spanish nuclear circles, and his country hoped that it would be 
widely circulated and used by Member States as a reference work for the 
design, construction and operation of nuclear power plants. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 29 


91. With regard to operational safety, his delegation welcomed the 
establishment of the World Association of Nuclear Operators and hoped that the 
Secretariat would maintain close contacts with it so as to achieve maximum 
mutual benefits while avoiding duplication of effort. 
92. Another initiative which his delegation felt was of particular 
importance was the evaluation and consultative services which the Agency 
provided to countries requesting them by means of various mechanisms 
established for that purpose, such as OSART missions, safety advisory services 
and BAPATs. His country had been involved in those activities both as a 
provider of expert services and as a recipient. An OSART mission had recently 
been carried out at the Almaraz nuclear power plant and another was scheduled 
for early 1990 at the Cofrentes nuclear power plant. 
93. Waste management activities deserved special mention because that was a 
topic to which public opinion was particularly sensitive; in many cases the 
public was not sufficiently informed on that subject to be able to make a 
reasonable and objective judgement, a situation which could mean an 
unjustified opposition to nuclear energy as a whole. His delegation therefore 
welcomed the start of the activities of the International Radioactive Waste 
Management Advisory Committee, and also the preparation of the document 
entitled "IAEA Safety Principles and Technical Criteria for the Underground 
Disposal of High-level Radioactive Wastes", which had been approved by the 
Board of Governors the previous week. That was an important first step in the 
project to publish a new series of documents setting out safety standards for 
radioactive wastes, which would undoubtedly contribute to the harmonization of 
national criteria and convince the public that the waste problem had perfectly 
valid solutions which, moreover, enjoyed international support. 
94. Another important question was that of preparing a code of practice for 
international transactions involving nuclear wastes. In that connection, his 
delegation felt it was essential to remember that the measure was a preventive 
one, since, as the Director General had said, there had been no known case of 
dumping of radioactive wastes in third countries. 
95. Without doubt, an effective safeguards system enjoying good credibility 
at the international level was indispensable for the Agency to be able to 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 


page 30 


attain its objectives. His delegation had already given its opinion on the 


Safeguards Implementation Report, the conclusions of which were fully 


satisfactory. Nevertheless, there was an urgent need to update the criteria 


for implementing and evaluating safeguards. On that point, Spain awaited with 


interest the results of the activities undertaken by an advisory group. His 
delegation hoped that by greater rationalization of the criteria and methods 


it would be possible to expand safeguards activities as envisaged with only 
minimal repercussions on the budget. 


96. Spain, which had acceded to NPT in 1987, had acceded to the safeguards 
agreement between the International Atomic Energy Agency and EURATOM 
(INFCIRC/193) on 5 April 1989. 
97. His delegation wished to emphasize its support for the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities, as it considered that they occupied an 
important place in the attainment of the Agency's objectives. He was 
satisfied to note that the increase in the volume of those activities was 
being maintained in spite of current budgetary restrictions, both in the 
Agency and in many countries, including Spain. That meant improved 
productivity in the Department of Technical Co-operation, which was very 
praiseworthy. Spain had assisted in various ways within its possibilities in 
the realization of the technical assistance programmes and it was 
progressively making a substantial increase in its voluntary contribution to 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. Also, Spain had recently 
become involved in new co-operation schemes, for example the financing of 
footnote-a/ projects. Within the framework of those activities, Spain would 
again make available to the Agency, for the technical assistance programmes, 
the technological and scientific capability which it had acquired in the 
course of implementing its nuclear programme. 
98. At the end of 1988, Spain's installed nuclear capacity had been 
7855 MW, and the nuclear power output for that year had been 50 414 GW»h. 
That was an increase over 1987 by 22.2%, resulting both from the increased 
yield of the units in operation, which had achieved an overall load factor of 
79.4%, and from the fact that the two most recently commissioned nuclear power 
plants had come into commercial operation. The share of nuclear power in the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 31 


total electricity generated had been 36.3%. Those results, which would be 
surpassed in 1989 because the nuclear plants would have attained their full 
capacity, were proof both of the high technological level which Spain had 
reached in the use of nuclear power, and of the high degree of diversity in 
meeting its energy needs which the country had been able to achieve thanks to 
nuclear power. 


99. Spain considered that all activities aimed at promoting the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy should seek to ensure that the attitudes of rejection 
towards that form of energy could never find a legitimate base in technical 
arguments. However, that was not enough. There was the danger that, in 
certain cases, research on reactors, the fuel cycle, waste management or the 
decommissioning of facilities would remain at the stage of meritorious 
scientific studies or particularly ingenious and promising plans. To avoid 
that possibility, it was necessary for the competent institutions, and in 
particular the Agency, to undertake a public information campaign capable of 
rebutting those arguments which, however scientifically unfounded, could none 
the less influence major political decisions. It must be acknowledged that 
nuclear power was for the moment condemned to pass through a crisis of 
confidence which would not be overcome until, in time, it would have 
demonstrated that it could discharge its function safely. 
100. The Agency, in accordance with its statutory objective of promoting the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy, should conduct its activities in such a way 
that nuclear energy would come to enjoy a maximum level of confidence. At the 
international level, the Agency was, in fact, the main authority in that field. 
101. Mr. HAVEL (Czechoslovakia) began by noting that the thirty-third 
session of the General Conference was taking place in a favourable 
international climate. His delegation was pleased to see that there was 
increasing co-operation between States in dealing with world and regional 
problems associated with the elimination of centres of tension. It was 
convinced that disarmament was the most reliable way of strengthening 
international peace and security. It therefore welcomed all steps, even 
partial, which moved in that direction. The Treaty Between the United States 

GC(XXXL1I)/OR.314 
page 32 


of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of 
their Intermediate and Shorter-Range Missiles (INF), supported by 
Czechoslovakia, was being implemented. A total ban on the testing of nuclear 
weapons would complete the process. 


102. Czechoslovakia continued to pay particular atttention to the 
strengthening of the nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime, based on NPT, 
which had successfully fulfilled its mission. Czechoslovakia was ready to 
participate actively in the preparations for the Fourth NPT Review Conference, 
to be held the following year in Geneva. It strongly believed that the 
Agency's safeguards system should be further improved in order to meet growing 
needs. The efficiency of the inspectors' work and of the inspections 
themselves should be increased and efforts should be concentrated on the most 
important parts of the nuclear power plant fuel cycle. In that context, the 
formulation of new safeguards criteria should be considered for the years 
1990-95. Czechoslovakian experts were ready to participate actively in the 
development of a new concept for safeguards activities based on the so-called 
selective safeguards approach. 
103. Czechoslovakia welcomed the new safeguards agreements concluded between 
Member States and the Agency and very much hoped that South Africa and Israel 
would conclude similar agreements. 
104. His delegation also appreciated the results of the Agency's activities 
during the past year and, in particular, the balanced implementation of the 
Agency's fundamental tasks relating to the peaceful and safe use of nuclear 
energy, with regard to both its regulatory and its promotional activities. 
The problem of ensuring the safe operation of nuclear facilities had become an 
international one in recent years, and the Agency played an essential role in 
that area. His country provided continuous support for Agency activities 
aimed at converting basic safety principles into codes, standards and 
recommendations to be applied in Member States. 
105. His delegation welcomed the steps taken to improve the permanent 
communication network within the framework of the Conventions on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident and on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency. It urged those States which had not yet 
done so to accede to those Conventions. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 33 


106. His country also attached great importance to the exchange of 
information on nuclear power plant operation. The work carried out in 
Czechoslovakia, with the co-operation of the Agency, to establish a direct 
link with the Power Reactor Information System (PRIS) data base would soon be 
completed. 
107. Confidence in nuclear power was being restored. It was a fact that 
nuclear power plants had been operated reliably and safely in a number of 
countries, including Czechoslovakia, and the clear advantages of nuclear power 
for solving urgent global environmental problems had been proven. In that 
connection, his country was making structural changes relating to the 
production and consumption of fuels and energy. The extraction of lignite and 
electricity production in traditional power plants had decreased, whereas 
natural gas supplies and particularly the production of nuclear power had 
increased. At present, nuclear power plants provided electricity to cover 
28% of the country's consumption, thereby permitting a substantial reduction 
in the emissions of SO , NO and CO into the atmosphere and at the same 
time making it possible to fulfil international obligations in that area. 


108. Czechoslovakia was therefore convinced that nuclear power was 
particularly important as a means of preventing damage to the environment and 
that, given effective international co-operation, its role would continue to 
increase with the social and economic development of modern societies. The 
Prime Minister of Czechoslovakia, Mr. Adamec, had taken the initiative of 
proposing that high-level government representatives of neighbouring countries 
should meet to discuss environmental issues. 
109. His delegation considered that the draft budget for 1990 was well 
balanced between the energy and non-energy areas with regard to the 
implementation of the Agency's priority programmes. 
110. His Government was particularly concerned to support the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme and had decided to pay the full amount of its 
share of the target for contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1990. As in the past, Czechoslovakia was ready to 
organize individual and collective training for specialists from developing 
countries and to provide expert services, as well as equipment and materials. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 34 


On the other hand, it also welcomed the opportunity of benefiting from the 
Agency's technical assistance activities, particularly fellowships and 
courses, so as to improve the qualifications of its own experts. 


111. In conclusion, he welcomed the positive results of the Agency's 
activities in 1988. 
112. Mr. KANGAI (Zimbabwe) expressed his appreciation of the 
contribution made by the Agency to prevent the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and to promote nuclear safety and the peaceful uses of radioisotopes. 
The Agency had been very successful in a number of areas and was paying 
increased attention to safety and to the needs of developing Member States. 
113. His delegation was also pleased to note in the annual report for 1988 
that the majority of disbursements for technical co-operation had been made in 
areas which provided tangible advantages to the Agency's developing 
Member States, particularly in the areas of food and agriculture, which 
accounted for 23% of disbursements, human health, radiation protection and the 
related area of radioactive waste management. 
114. Zimbabwe benefited from expert services under the Waste Management 
Advisory Programme (WAMAP) and RAPAT missions, particularly with regard to the 
formulation of regulations to govern the handling, use and disposal of 
radioactive isotopes, which were employed mainly for medical purposes. 
Developing countries which had inadequate regulations, poor monitoring and 
enforcement infrastructures were undoubtedly at risk. That fact was often not 
appreciated, the commonest misconception being that risks of irradiation 
existed only in States with nuclear power reactors. 
115. The establishment and publication of safety standards was another 
successful Agency activity. It was very encouraging to see that there was an 
international consensus on exemption criteria for radioactive sources and 
practices, in view of the difficulties encountered in reaching an 
international consensus on most subjects. 
116. Zimbabwe hoped that a regional co-operation agreement similar to the 
RCA for Asia and the Pacific and the ARCAL arrangements in Latin America could 
be established in Africa. Such an agreement would undoubtedly help to ensure 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 35 


that regional problems were handled more efficiently. It was encouraging to 


see that in ARCAL projects in Latin America, regional experts were gradually


replacing experts outside the region. Regional self-sufficiency was the key 


to development and therefore developing countries were in great need of 
training programmes. Outside experts could not be expected to have a full 
understanding of cultural problems in regions which were not familiar to 
them. Zimbabwe had noted with satisfaction from the Director General's 
opening statement to the thirty-second regular session of the General 
Conference that, in 1987, 66% of courses had been held in developing 
countries, as compared with 17% in 1980. 


117. With regard to the public acceptance of nuclear power, Zimbabwe 
believed that although some countries were abandoning the nuclear option, it 
would be short-sighted to do so without having a practical alternative. 
Thermal power stations were not without their disadvantages and contributed to 
atmospheric pollution and the greenhouse effect. In view of the justified 
public concern over nuclear accidents, efforts to improve the inherent safety 
of the present generation of reactors should be vigorously pursued. Safer, 
simpler reactors could also represent a long-term option for many developing 
countries which, without that possibility, would experience considerable 
difficulties when confronted with a shortage of fossil fuels. 
118. With regard to South Africa's nuclear capability, Mr. P.W. Botha had 
made a statement, two years previously, hinting that his country would sign 
NPT at an early date. It was hardly surprising that it had not yet done so, 
even though South Africa had nuclear power facilities and the capacity to 
manufacture nuclear weapons, if it did not in fact already possess them. The 
General Conference should give a clear indication of its disapproval of 
South Africa and suspend it from the exercise of its rights of membership of 
the Agency until it conformed better with the norms of international 
behaviour. The Director General had announced that morning that South Africa 
had again sent a message to the General Conference. It was to be hoped that 
that message was not a hoax and that the Member States conducting negotiations 
with South Africa would take into account the concern felt by States in the 
region over the presence there of unsafeguarded nuclear material. All 
South African citizens were equal human beings and deserved to be treated as 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 36 


such. The new South African Government would have to implement the necessary 
reforms in the country and eliminate all forms of apartheid in order to gain 
international credibility. 


119. During the current month, the world had witnessed undemocratic 
elections in South Africa. Owing to the colour of their skin, 80% of the 
population of that country had been unable to participate in the election of 
their government. That situation was totally unacceptable and there should be 
strong condemnation of the police brutality which was so often inflicted on 
the oppressed people of that country, who were simply protesting against the 
denial of democratic rights which were taken for granted by many people. The 
international community should unite its efforts to put pressure on the 
apartheid regime so that peace could be restored in South Africa. Elections 
were planned in Namibia and negotiations to put an end to armed conflicts were 
continuing in Angola and Mozambique. That favourable trend towards dialogue 
gave grounds for considerable optimism in the region. 
120. It was to be hoped that as a result of the reasonable and conciliatory 
attitude shown by the Palestinian people, it would be possible to provide a 
homeland for that grossly oppressed group and to establish a lasting peace in 
the Middle East. 
121. In conclusion, his delegation drew the General Conference's attention 
to the problem of the dumping of toxic wastes, which had assumed alarming 
proportions during the past few years. It was a most objectionable practice, 
and mankind should, as a matter of urgency, attend to the environmental 
consequences of the industrial processes upon which it had become so 
dependent. To get rid of raw wastes by simply dumping them in other countries 
was a short-sighted and selfish approach which, in any case, did not solve the 
problem. 
122. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) said that the Agency's 
crucial role in international co-operation in the nuclear field was becoming 
increasingly evident each year. One of the objectives of the Agency's 
activities, and particularly of the technical co-operation programme which had 
been growing continuously during the past ten years, was to support and guide 
developing countries which wished to benefit from the advantages of nuclear 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 37 


technology. That had only been possible with a system of financing involving 
voluntary contributions in national currency based on indicative planning 
figures (IPFs). His delegation welcomed the agreement reached the previous 
year on the IPFs for the next few years, although it was concerned about the 
fact that there had again been a further reduction in the percentage of the 
target for voluntary contributions actually pledged. 


123. Convinced of the importance of the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme, his Government duly contributed its share towards the target for 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund and 
appreciated the way in which that contribution was used. 
124. While traditional energy sources would continue to play a dominant role 
in the future, there were doubts about their development prospects and a 
global reduction in their use seemed desirable. Nuclear energy was one of the 
alternatives. That was why his country, together with others, intended to 
continue its nuclear power programme in order to meet its energy 
requirements. In April 1989, Unit 5 of the Greifswald nuclear power plant 
had been connected to the grid, bringing the installed nuclear capacity to 
nearly 2300 MW. 
125. His Government was convinced of the importance of international 
co-operation and appreciated and supported the Agency's activities, 
particularly those aimed at promoting and ensuring nuclear safety and 
radiation protection. For the same reason, it welcomed the Memorandum of 
Understanding signed in June by the Agency and WANO, since that agreement 
would complement the work of both organizations in the area of nuclear safety. 
126. Many efforts had been made and were being made in order to ensure that 
nuclear power plants operated with adequate levels of safety. In that 
respect, the revision of the NUSS codes was very valuable. His Government 
considered that the revised codes were appropriate international standards, 
and therefore used them as a basis for regulating the safety of its reactors, 
taking national laws and regulations into account. 
127. His country had increased its international co-operation in the field 
of nuclear safety and radiation protection by participating more in the 
safety-related activities of the Agency and the Council for Mutual Economic 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 


page 38 


Assistance (CMEA). The long tradition of contractual relations with the 


Soviet Union and other socialist countries had been confirmed by the recent 
entry into force of bilateral agreements with China and the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea. Agreements, based on the Convention on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident, had been concluded between his country and 
Denmark, Norway, the Federal Republic of Germany, Austria, Spain and Sweden. 
A trilateral agreement on nuclear safety had been concluded at the beginning 
of the year with the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany. 
Furthermore, visits to France and the United Kingdom had provided useful ideas 
about developments in the field of nuclear safety. 


128. Just as nuclear safety and radiation protection formed an integral part 
of all nuclear activities, the safeguards system was inseparably associated 
with all uses of nuclear material. His delegation welcomed the fact that in 
1988, as in previous years, the Secretariat had found it reasonable to 
conclude that all nuclear material under safeguards had remained in peaceful 
nuclear activities or had been otherwise adequately accounted for. All 
parties concerned should ensure that the Agency was able to make that 
statement with increasing objectivity and reliability, so as to make the 
safeguards system still more credible and at the same time to improve its 
effectiveness and efficiency. 
129. Aware of the important role played by safeguards in the world-wide 
efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, his country intended 
to continue to help the Agency to fulfil its obligations in that area. In 
addition to other activities, his country's support programme for Agency 
safeguards had made it possible to organize three training courses in 1988, 
two for new inspectors and one for safeguards trainees from developing 
countries. His Government had accepted the change in policy regarding the 
designation of new inspectors. 
130. The subject of physical protection was also related to the use of 
nuclear energy and closely associated with safeguards. The revised text of 
recommendations for the physical protection of nuclear material which had 
resulted from the meeting of the technical committee held on that subject 
earlier in 1989 was an important step forward towards a more comprehensive 
physical protection regime. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 39 


131. Since the industrialization of the atom, considerable progress had been 
made in using that powerful source of energy in the service of peace and 
prosperity. Nuclear power plants now provided about 17% of world electricity 
production. Another important result was the Agency's safeguards system, the 
first international verification system. However, much remained to be done to 
put an end to the arms race and to achieve the ultimate objective of complete 
nuclear disarmament. His Government fully supported efforts, such as the 
negotiations of treaties between the Soviet Union and the United States, on a 
50 per cent reduction of their strategic weapons and on a universal nuclear 
weapons test ban. Any attempt to rid the world of the nuclear threat had, and 
would continue to have, his Government's full support. 
132. The NPT and the Agency's safeguards system were also instrumental in 
achieving the objective of peace. It was therefore important to strengthen 
the safeguards system and all aspects of the Treaty in the long term, 
particularly through universal adherence to it. In that respect, the success 
of the Fourth NPT Review Conference was very important. His country also 
appreciated other Agency activities related to radiation protection, 
sustainable development, liability for nuclear damage and dissemination of 
information, in particular through INIS. His country regarded international 
co-operation through the Agency as a useful and effective mechanism for 
finding solutions to common problems and would therefore continue to support 
the Agency's activities to the best of its abilities. 
133. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) noted that the General Conference's 
agenda included a number of important and difficult items, the satisfactory 
solution of which would call for a particular effort on the part of 
delegations. For its part, Cuba was resolutely continuing with the 
development of its programme for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Despite 
some delay, the construction of the first Cuban nuclear power plant was 
continuing with strict monitoring of technical aspects so as to ensure 
reliable operation, including State monitoring of the construction and 
assembly work and the training of qualified personnel. At the same time, work 
on the construction of the nuclear research centre, a keystone in the Cuban 
programme for the peaceful use of nuclear energy, was continuing and work had 
begun on the the radioisotope centre workshop, which would be used mainly for 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 40 


the production of radiopharmaceutical products and labelled compounds for 
various sectors of the national economy. At the same time, the applications 
of nuclear techniques were increasing, particularly in the areas of medicine, 
agriculture, the sugar industry and food. 


134. Cuba played an important role in the Agency's activities in Latin 
America. It had hosted a course on medical scintiscanning and a regional 
course on printed circuits and was preparing to host a workshop on nuclear 
documentation before the end of the year . In addition, Cuba was 
participating increasingly actively in other activities of the ARCAL 
programme, providing experts and fellowships for training Latin American 
specialists in various institutes in Cuba. 
135. The Agency's annual report for 1988 noted that the world-wide evolution 
of nuclear power had continued during 1988 without significant changes or 
spectactular events, maintaining in general the same trends which had 
prevailed in 1987, particularly in developing countries. The figures in the 
report showed that at the end of 1988 the installed nuclear capacity in 
developing countries with nuclear plants had represented 3.6% of the world 
total and provided only 3.3% of world-wide nuclear power production. 
136. Many developing countries suffered from a lack of traditional energy 
resources, but various difficulties, such as technology transfer, lack of 
infrastructure and qualified personnel, prevented them from using nuclear 
energy to solve their problems in that area. 
137. That situation was aggravated by the external debt burden, which had 
become so acute that even the main creditors were seriously considering 
accepting the idea of insolvency; in the absence of a new international 
economic order, that debt, which was eating away the scant resources of Third 
World countries, prevented them from investing in development and virtually 
condemned them to permanent underdevelopment. In fact, many of them could 
ensure their development through the use of nuclear energy. 
138. It was all the more deplorable that at the same time certain views, 
casting doubts about the future of nuclear power reactors by emphasizing the 
risks to the environment, were gaining ground. As the Director General had 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 41 


said in his opening statement, the general public had so far associated 
nuclear power and energy with environmental problems rather than with their 
alleviation. 


139. Of course, the development of ecological awareness which had emerged 
during the past few years was very welcome. Poor countries, which supplied 
raw materials and, in many cases, received archaic and polluting industries, 
were extremely interested in environmental protection. However, it was 
obvious that industrial development was not the only threat to the biosphere. 
For different reasons underdevelopment could have just as disastrous 
ecological consequences: desertification, degradation of soils, destruction 
of forests and pollution of waters. The Earth had become a global village in 
which everyone was suffering from environmental damage, wherever it occurred, 
and all human beings were potential victims of the greenhouse effect or of the 
deterioration of the ozone layer. However, it would not be fair for 
developing countries to have to suffer the consequences of the opposition to 
nuclear power plants, which had emerged in another context and which was based 
on other considerations. Those countries should not deprive themselves of 
subsequent benefits by abandoning that source of energy in a suicidal gesture 
before they had even begun to exploit its possibilities. The ecological 
problem was an extremely difficult one and involved a number of elements. 
Nuclear energy was not only not the most alarming element, but it could, in 
fact, help to eliminate other much more dangerous aspects or reduce their 
importance. 
140. The Agency's technical co-operation programme was one of the activities 
which developing countries considered to be very important. However, the 
increase in the targets was not sufficient to meet the growing needs of 
countries which received technical assistance, and many projects submitted and 
approved each year could not be implemented for lack of the necessary 
financial resources. Furthermore, for the last five years there had been zero 
real growth in the Regular Budget. Without disregarding the international 
economic situation, a modest annual increase would give the Agency much 
greater room for manoeuvre in carrying out all its programmes and maintaining 
an adequate balance between its promotional and regulatory activities. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.314 
page 42 


141. The other important agenda items included the Israeli nuclear 
capabilities and threat, which was the subject of General Conference 
resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/487. With its experience and competence, the Agency 
could no doubt carry out a number of studies on the different modalities of 
application of safeguards in the Middle East. However, the root of the issue 
was not the application of safeguards, but the fact that Israel, the only 
country in the region which virtually possessed nuclear weapons, should accept 
the provisions and resolutions of the General Conference and other 
international organizations and submit all its nuclear facilities to Agency 
safeguards. 
142. The General Conference should also consider suspending South Africa 
from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership of the Agency. 
For ten years a series of sanctions had been imposed on that country by 
various international and governmental organizations, which had thereby 
expressed their disapproval of its detestable policy of racial segregation and 
aggression towards its neighbours. His delegation reaffirmed its support for 
all initiatives aimed at ensuring the safety of front-line States and all 
steps to reduce the threat represented by South Africa's nuclear capabilities. 
143. Efforts to develop the peaceful applications of nuclear energy for the 
benefit of all should not obscure the fact that the world was in upheaval and 
facing all kinds of problems which were ever more inextricably linked, such as 
those caused by the recurrence of natural disasters, economic difficulties, 
environmental protection, the continuation of hunger in the world and the 
existence of many areas of tension, as well as the arms race, which was one of 
the most alarming problems of all. Despite the progress towards reducing the 
nuclear arsenal, one could not help worrying about the unceasing manufacture 
of new so-called traditional means of mass destruction and the improvement of 
existing ones. Such military activities accounted for more than 
one trillion!*] dollars per year, an astronomical amount, even a fraction of 
which could solve many existing economic and social problems. 


[*] 1 trillion = 1012. 



GC(XXXIII)/0R,314 
page 43 


144. Cuba had recently stated during the ninth summit meeting of the 
non-aligned countries that the world needed a peace which did not consist 
merely of eliminating nuclear arsenals, but also of guaranteeing respect for 
State sovereignty and the right of all countries to govern themselves in 
accordance with the wishes of their population and to establish an economic 
trade system which was just and equitable and made it possible to abolish the 
hunger, poverty and underdevelopment which afflicted three quarters of the 
world's population. Convinced that mankind would find the necessary solutions 
to those complex problems, he urged all delegations present to show patience 
and determination in solving those problems which came within their competence 
and to ensure once again the successful conclusion of the General Conference's 
work. 
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
16 October 1989 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Dlstr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 26 September 1989, at 10.10 a.m. 


President: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


7 General debate and annual report for 1988 (resumed) I - 96 


Statements by the delegates of: 


The World Association of Nuclear Operators 1 -6 
Federal Republic of Germany 7 -17 
Italy 18 -56 
Republic of Korea 57 -68 
Turkey 69 -85 
Bulgaria 86 -96 


Election of officers and appointment of 
the General Committee (resumed) 97 -100 


General debate and annual report for 1988 (continued) 101 -164 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Islamic Republic of Iran 101 -128 
Saudi Arabia 129 -145 
MaI aysia 146 -155 
GuatemaIa 156 -164 


Reply by the delegate of Iraq to the statement by 
the delegate of the Islamic Republic of Iran 165 -168 


Statement by the delegate of the Islamic Republic of Iran 169 


[*] GC(XXXI ID/871. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXIIl)/INF/274/Rev.2. 


89-4703 (5455e/585e) 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (resumed) 


1. Lord Marshall of GORING (World Association of Nuclear Operators) 
recalled that in October 1987, senior representatives from most of the world's 
nuclear utilities had met to discuss the need for increased co-operation among 
nuclear utilities world-wide. The decision had been taken to strengthen the 
existing links and co-operation among nuclear operators by setting up a 
world-wide association, whose mission would be "to maximize the safety and 
reliability of the operation of nuclear power stations by exchanging 
information and encouraging comparison, communication and emulation amongst 
its members". 
2. From 15 to 17 May 1989, senior representatives of every nuclear 
operating company in the world had met in Moscow to participate in the 
inaugural meeting of the World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO). Every 
operating company, without exception, had elected to join WANO and had signed 
its charter. A great deal of hard work and commitment by many utilities, 
together with the encouragement of the Agency and many national governments, 
had been crucial to the successful establishment of WANO and the Soviet 
Ministry of Atomic Power, as host of the inaugural meeting, had played a 
particularly important role. 
3. International co-operation in the nuclear industry was not something 
new. The early emphasis had been on the exchange of technology and research 
information which had helped to achieve progressive improvements in reactor 
designs. The free exchange of information on safety matters had also always 
played an important role in the nuclear industry. The Agency had stimulated 
discussion between governments on all kinds of nuclear activities and had the 
central role to play in connection with non-proliferation. More specifically, 
the International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) had made good progress 
in developing the concept of safety culture, in reviewing and strengthening 
the Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) programme and in improving the 
usefulness of the Agency's Incident Reporting System. 
4. However, all those activities were not enough. The benefits of nuclear 
power were dependent upon the highest possible level of nuclear safety; and 
nuclear safety ultimately depended upon the nuclear utilities that operated 
the plant. Regulators, designers, manufacturers and individuals all had an 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 3 


important safety role to play, but the ultimate and fundamental responsibility 
for safety lay with the nuclear utility. Therefore, all nuclear utilities had 
a collective responsibility to work together and to help one another improve 
the safety and reliability of the plants that they operated. 


5. WANO operated through four regional centres based in Atlanta, Moscow, 
Paris and Tokyo together with a small co-ordinating centre in London. Each of 
those centres was working together to achieve an ambitious programme of 
technical exchange visits between East and West within two years. An 
electronic communication system was working and was available for use by all 
but a few members. WANO's sole concern was the safe management and operation 
of nuclear power plants throughout the world; it would not duplicate the work 
of the Agency, but intended to work closely with the Agency to achieve shared 
objectives. 
6. In conclusion, WANO was well aware that, in future, it would be judged 
by its achievements rather than by promises and it welcomed that challenge. 
OSART visits were an important measure of WANO's work and WANO was convinced 
that the OSART teams would have increasing difficulty in finding any defects 
in the management and operations of nuclear power plants in future. WANO 
would welcome the opportunity to report to a future General Conference on its 
achievements. 
7. Mr. ZILLER (Federal Republic of Germany) drew attention to the 
increase in world energy demand which was to be expected in view of the 
rapidly growing energy needs of a number of countries, particularly developing 
countries. Since fossil fuel reserves were finite and it was premature to 
hope that large quantities of renewable energies would be available in the 
near future, it was important to develop further and make responsible use of 
all energy sources. 
8. A withdrawal from nuclear energy would not only jeopardize the 
respective country's economy and stability but would also contribute to the 
irreversible damage of the biosphere, since nuclear energy would, for the mosL 
part, have to be substituted by the burning of fossil fuel. The increasing 
importance of nuclear energy as a means of limiting the carbon dioxide level 
in the atmosphere and, therefore, the greenhouse effect, had already been 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.315 
page 4 


stressed. It was essential to limit the use of fossil fuel as far as possible 
so as to prevent irreversible damage to the environment and a change in 
climate with all its potentially catastrophic effects on world food production 
and the inundation of low-lying regions. 


9. For its part, his country intended to spend DM 270 million in 1989 on 
renewable energy research and development, including energy conservation, and 
was already demonstrating the utilization of solar energy. Solar and other 
renewable energies would eventually contribute to meeting the energy needs of 
developing, as well as of industrialized, countries. However, there was still 
a long way to go. 
10. As regards nuclear fusion, his country appreciated the work done under 
the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) programme. It was 
particularly satisfied that the Max Planck Institute for Plasma Physics 
provided excellent working facilities for the ITER team and hoped that their 
work would lead to a joint fusion reactor project. 
11. Effective non-proliferation of nuclear weapons depended on the 
co-operation of all States. It was regrettable that no complete consensus had 
been reached within the Agency's Committee on Assurances of Supply (CAS) on 
the principles governing international nuclear co-operation and trade. If 
supplies were indeed required exclusively for peaceful purposes, there was no 
reason to denounce non-proliferation requirements as unduly onerous. If 
importing States were not willing to provide sufficient assurances that the 
nuclear material and technology supplied would be used only in peaceful 
activities, international nuclear co-operation and trade would come to a 
standstill. 
12. His Government, for its part, would have to refrain from bilateral 
co-operation and to cut existing co-operation if doubts remained whether 
transferred nuclear material or technology was used for peaceful purposes 
only. That could also damage the Agency's technical assistance programme to 
which the Federal Republic of Germany contributed very substantially. His 
country remained firmly committed to the peaceful use of nuclear energy and 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and in that context renewed its 
appeal to all States to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Pro1iteration of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). His Government had fully implemented the respective 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 5 


multilateral undertakings and had also introduced new legislation which would 


further strengthen its export controls. 


13. His country supported the safeguards activities which the Agency 
carried out in many countries all over the world and was pleased to note that, 
for 1988, the Agency had again reached the conclusion that nuclear material 
under Agency safeguards had remained in peaceful nuclear activities or had 
been otherwise accounted for. The new formula for the financing of safeguards 
constituted a valuable step in the right direction and took account of the 
responsibility shared by all Member States for effective safeguards. He was 
confident that the Agency would find ways of further improving and 
rationalizing its safeguards concepts, thereby avoiding an increase in cost 
which might jeopardize a balanced Agency programme and the need for zero real 
growth of the budget. 
14. The risk of another nuclear accident still dominated public discussion 
on nuclear issues in many countries, within the framework of the Agency, much 
had been done to reduce damage in the event of such an accident, in particular 
through the two Conventions on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and on 
Emergency Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency. He was happy to announce that the instruments of ratification of 
both Conventions by the Federal Republic of Germany had been deposited with 
the Agency. The Joint Protocol harmonizing the Vienna and Paris Conventions 
on Civil Liability, adopted during the previous year's General Conference, and 
the establishment of the Working Group on Liability for Nuclear Damage were 
further welcome developments. The General Conference, at its special session 
in September 1986, had emphasized that the highest level of nuclear safety 
would continue to be essential and, although each country engaged in nuclear 
energy activities was itself responsible for ensuring nuclear safety, 
international co-operation, at both the bilateral and multilateral level, was 
of paramount importance. 
15. His country had been very satisfied with the Symposium on Regulatory 
Practices and Safety Standards for Nuclear Power Plants which had been held in 
Munich in November 1988 and sponsored by the Agency, the Nuclear Energy Agency 
of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD/NEA) and 
the Federal Republic of Germany. In connection with the follow-up actions 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.315 


page 6 


proposed at that symposium, his Government believed that all Member States 


should respond to the revised codes of the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS), 


the fundamental safety criteria established by INSAG, and the voluntary OSART 
missions. A further step forward in efforts to achieve an even higher level 
of nuclear safety would be made if all Member States confirmed that their 
national licensing regulations conformed to the revised NUSS codes. His 
Government, for its part, had made such a declaration to the Agency. 


16. At national level, his Government continued to support research work in 
the area of nuclear safety. The probabilistic risk study on nuclear reactors 
prepared by the Gesellschaft fur Reaktorsicherheit (GRS) on behalf of the 
Federal Ministry for Research and Technology represented one major result of 
his country's safety research programme. All other countries were invited to 
share in the experience acquired by his country through that study. 
17. In conclusion, his country appreciated the constructive role played by 
the Agency in encouraging and facilitating peaceful international nuclear 
co-operation. As a mark of that appreciation his Government was donating a 
bronze sculpture of Otto Hahn to the Agency, in commemoration of the fiftieth 
anniversary of the discovery of nuclear fission by Otto Hahn together with 
Lise Meitner and Fritz Strassmann. 
18. Mr. TALIANI (Italy) wished first of all to make some general 
comments on the evolution of Italian energy policies, especially in the 
nuclear field. 
19. Along with the readjustment of Italy's energy production and supply 
forecasts, a new approach had been developed and translated into a general 
framework of economic choices in line with the National Energy Plan adopted by 
the Italian Government in August 1988 and currently undergoing parliamentary 
scrutiny. 
20. The basic objectives of the Plan were the following: energy saving, 
environmental protection, the development of national resources, the 
geographical diversification of supply sources and the improved 
competitiveness of the productive systems. A thorough examination of the 
instruments in force was needed in order to render those objectives mutually 
compatible and attainable. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 7 


21. In the nuclear field, the five-year moratorium foreseen in the Plan on 
programmes for the construction of new fission plants offered a good 
opportunity to explore and develop new solutions based on the use of reactors 
with a high degree of intrinsic and passive safety. 
22. While the new Plan did not envisage that Italy would relinquish the 
development of fission energy technologies, it did, however, recognize the 
need to reorient research, within an appropriate context of international 
co-operation, with a view to designing and constructing innovative reactors. 
23. An ad hoc committee comprising the National Committee for Research and 
Development on Nuclear Energy and Alternative Energy Sources (ENEA), the 
Italian electricity utility (ENEL) and the industrial companies active in that 
sector had recently been set up with the specific objective of formulating a 
strategy to be defined in the course of the year. In that connection, he 
wished to express his delegation's appreciation for the Agency's organization 
in parallel with the Conference of the scientific meeting "The New Generation 
of Nuclear Power", to which Italy would provide a specific contribution. 
24. At the same time, Italy would continue to promote the use of other 
applications of nuclear energy in sectors such as agriculture, medicine, 
industry, etc. 
25. In the field of radiation protection, Italy had participated with 
interest in the expansion of international activities in all the relevant fora 
after 1986, commencing with the Agency. Italy considered that, in 
international terms, radiation protection was an indisputable priority. It 
therefore continued strongly to encourage activities in that sector, both with 
regard to non-energy applications and the control of levels of radioactivity 
in the environment. 
26. In following the guidelines of the new Energy Plan with particular 
respect to nuclear fusion, Italy had increased both the financial commitment 
and the human resources allocated to that sector. As of 1989 ENEA, the agency 
responsible for co-ordinating fusion research nationally, had substantially 
increased its contribution; in 1990 activities related to fusion would 
account for roughly 20% of its overall commitments. Italy was also taking an 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 8 


active part in the European nuclear fusion programme through the Joint 
European Torus (JET) and Next European Torus (NET) joint projects and national 
activities within the framework of the ENEA- EURATOM association. 


27. Regarding research on magnetic confinement, he announced that the 
Frascati Tokamak Upgrade (FTU) plant had already been inaugurated at the 
Frascati Centre, and that the RFX machine was nearing completion at the 
Ionized Gases Institute in Padua. Furthermore, the Ignitor project for a 
prototype high magnetic field controlled nuclear fusion reactor had already 
entered the detailed design phase. 
28. With regard to research into methods based on inertial confinement, 
studies on laser techniques and techniques envisaging the use of heavy ions 
were at an advanced stage. 
29. Turning to the more general international context, he noted that 
similarities with the Italian position could be discerned. 
30. Despite the difficulty of summarizing the undoubtedly wide diversity of 
government strategies and public perceptions, it was perhaps possible 
nevertheless to state that the current debate on the future of nuclear energy 
had reached a more rational in-depth analysis of safety issues and that 
significant progress had been made in the search for appropriate technological 
situations. International co-operation in that regard had expanded 
accordingly, especially through instruments provided by the Agency. 
31. At the same time, general interest in environmental protection and the 
reduction of the harmful impact of technological development on the ecosystem 
had increased dramatically, which had naturally had repercussions in the 
energy sector and had prompted - within the Agency also - a comparative 
assessment of the environmental and climatic impact of the various energy 
systems, including those based on nuclear fusion. 
32. Italy had long hoped for the parallel development of technical and 
regulatory solutions relating to the safety of nuclear plants. 
33. Although responsibility for complying with safety regulations in the 
design, construction and operation of nuclear plants fell upon the individual 
States, developments in recent years had given rise to an increasing demand for 
the harmonization of such regulations and the adoption of more binding rules. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 9 


34. Italy was in favour of intensifying international co-operation aimed at 
improving safety norms and ultimately establishing a more effective 
international regime. The aim should be to achieve the widest possible 
convergence of views on a set of detailed rules and procedures capable of 
solving the various problems raised by nuclear safety considerations. At the 
previous General Conference Italy had made a proposal that international 
initiatives should be undertaken to encourage the generalized and binding 
adoption of the Agency's codes and safety guidelines such as NUSS. 
35. Undoubtedly, the improved harmonization of safety standards and the 
design, construction and operation criteria applied by users would contribute 
substantially to restoring greater confidence in nuclear energy. The emphasis 
placed by the Agency on the OSART, ASSET (assessment of safety signficant 
events team) and RAPAT (radiation protection advisory team) missions should 
therefore be maintained and, if possible, reinforced. In that connection, he 
noted with satisfaction that for the first time China, Czechoslovakia, Poland 
and the United Kingdom had invited OSART missions that year. 
36. The experience to be gained by studying and assessing abnormal events 
or incidents in nuclear plants was of great importance for the continuous 
improvement of safety standards. His delegation therefore maintained its 
belief that a widening and strengthening of the Incident Reporting System was 
an urgent priority and could no longer be postponed. 
37. In addition, the co-operation recently established between the Agency 
and WANO would prove extremely useful in making an in-depth analysis of 
practical problems of common interest. 
38. A further issue likely to be analysed in depth was the still imperfect 
regime of nuclear liability. The Joint Protocol adopted in Vienna on 
21 September 1988 establishing a link between the two parallel OECD/NEA and 
IAEA regimes represented a first significant step, but efforts must be 
continued, particularly within the existing working group on nuclear 
liability, to fill the remaining gaps in the international regime. Italy 
attached the utmost importance to the identification of specific rules on 
international liability for nuclear damage, as well as to the search for 
linkage mechanisms between those rules and the civil liability systems in 
force. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 10 


39. Besides the Agency's activities in the field on nuclear safety and 
radiation protection, Italy also highly appreciated its sponsorship of fusion 
research. The ITER (International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor) 
project, developed under Agency auspices by the USA, USSR, Japan and the 
European Community was of great value and Italy was prepared to give such 
endeavours its fullest support. 
40. Italy's steady support for the safeguards system was another vital part 
of its policy regarding the Agency. The Italian Government was convinced that 
the IAEA safeguards were a highly effective mechanism for guaranteeing the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy. He therefore noted with satisfaction that 
the 1988 Safeguards Implementation Report stated that no diversion of nuclear 
equipment or material subject to safeguards had taken place that year. He 
also noted that there had been further expansion of the safeguards regime 
through the welcome conclusion of other agreements. Spain's accession in 
April 1988 to the verification agreement between the IAEA, EURATOM and members 
of the EEC deserved special mention. 
41. The safeguards regime would undoubtedly continue to expand, which made 
it ever more necessary to contain and rationalize costs and to start an 
in-depth analysis of the technical methods and approaches adopted by the 
Secretariat, dealing effectively with the issue of safeguards financing. 
42. In that respect, he took note of the proposal agreed in June by the 
Board of Governors reiterating his delegation's reservations about its 
duration. It was indeed necessary to find as soon as possible a long-term 
solution reflecting the Member States' responsibility. However, the proposal 
to share safeguards costs among the "unshielded" members was still cause of 
concern. He believed that an equitable arrangement should be based on the 
following principles: safeguards were in the common interest of the entire 
international community; contributions should be proportionate to the real 
financial abilities of Member States; and contributions should reflect the 
specific responsibilities of some members of the Board of Governors. 
43. Italy considered the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) to be an irreplaceable instrument in preventing the spread of 
nuclear weapons and promoting effective co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. It had accordingly always stressed the need for the largest 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 11 


possible number of countries to accede to the Treaty and welcomed the most 
recent signatory, Qatar. 


44. Consequently, Italy looked forward with great expectation and profound 
commitment to the Fourth NPT Review Conference scheduled for summer 1990. 
That Conference would provide a valuable opportunity for reflection and 
dialogue, and also for jointly reviewing appropriate ways and means of further 
extending and strengthening the regime. 
45. The increasing commitment noted in recent years to international 
co-operation, the progress already recorded and that expected in reducing 
nuclear arsenals provided further grounds for optimism that the NPT Review 
Conference would be successful. 
46. With regard to participation in the Agency's Board of Governors, it was 
undeniable that the growing scope of the Agency's activities had a strong 
impact on individual national energy policies and that wide representation of 
the Member States on the Board was therefore essential. 
47. The issue of the revision of Article VI could be postponed no longer. 
As was well known, Italy, together with Belgium, Portugal, Spain and Sweden, 
had submitted a draft amendment allowing full participation of an increased 
number of countries in the adoption of important decisions by the Board, while 
simultaneously preserving the criterion of the balanced representation of all 
regions. The recent presentation by the Cuban delegation of an important set 
of documents reflecting elements of the Italian proposal showed once again, 
that the need for wider representation was widely felt. 
48. For many countries broader and more qualified participation in the 
Board's proceedings could constitute a further incentive to take positive 
action in the fields of non-proliferation, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and safety. 
49. Italy welcomed the report submitted to the General Conference by the 
working group so ably chaired by Ambassador Wiryono, which in its operative 
part recommended renewed efforts on the basis of the Italian proposal. 
50. At the same time, it was necessary to guarantee adequate participation 
in the proceedings and decisions of that body for all those Member States 
which were temporarily not represented on the Board itself. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 12 


51. In the informal working group on the revision of Article VI of the 
Statute his delegation had recently submitted a draft amendment of Rule 50 of 
the Board's procedures which, far from distorting its content, provided a 
clearer and more correct interpretation of its spirit, embracing among other 
things procedures now entrusted to the various Chairmen and dependent on their 
sense of responsibility. 
52. The above remarks and proposals were founded on his country's firm 
belief that the Agency's activities constituted an organized and dynamic 
context in which new opportunities for co-operation could be sought in 
parallel with increasing interlinkage and interdependence between the 
different political and economic systems. 
53. Within that framework, Italy made a sizeable contribution to the 
Agency's financing and was, moreover, strongly committed to technical 
assistance to developing countries, one of the basic tasks of the IAEA, not 
only through its contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund (TACF), but also and above all through a substantial financial commitment 
to special projects in sectors such as agriculture, medicine and industry as 
well as training. Italy took part in training through an organized programme 
of scholarships, and in particular through its increasing contributions, now 
averaging more than US $13 million per year, to the Trieste International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics. 
54. The important role assumed by the Trieste Centre in the past few 
years - thanks to the commitment of its Director, Professor Salam, and his 
team and to the constant financial and scientific support provided by Italy both 
as a meeting place for scientists from North and South, East and West, 
and as a channel for the transfer of science and technology deserved the 
widest recognition, a fact which the Director General had acknowledged in his 
statement. 
55. The Centre was one of the Agency's most significant achievements and 
one insufficiently stressed by the Agency itself. He was surprised to note 
the limited coverage of the Centre's activities in the Agency's official 
programmes, publications and documents, including the annual report, and 
wondered why, for example, the Centre's activities and the financial resources 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 13 


allocated to it were not regularly included in the yearly report on technical 
assistance provided by the Agency, thus offering a more complete picture of 
the efforts undertaken in that sector. 


56. Finally, he hoped that the forthcoming celebration of the 25th Anniversary 
of its foundation with the participation of key figures and scientists from all 
over the world would prove an opportunity for a more satisfactory assessment of 
the importance of the Centre itself and its contribution to developing countries. 
57. Mr. CHOI (Republic of Korea) said that, despite the current steady 
decline in the growth rate of nuclear power generation, nuclear power would 
nevertheless remain a major energy source, since there were few alternatives 
and since it helped to avoid the harmful effects caused by fossil fuel 
utilization. The Agency should endeavour to further promote the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy by every means available. In particular, the technology 
necessary to produce nuclear energy more safely and reliably must be further 
developed and supplied to those countries which were seeking to expand their 
nuclear programmes. 
58. A real problem in many countries was that of public acceptance of 
nuclear power. Anti-nuclear movements chose either to ignore or to undermine 
the fact that nuclear power generation was the major and single most useful 
application of nuclear energy, and it was regrettable that the nuclear 
community had failed to respond in a systematic manner to anti-nuclear 
activists, who had now internationalized their campaign. Despite the 
difficulties involved, the public must be made aware of nuclear power 
generation as a means of dealing both with the world energy demand and 
environmental problems - an exercise in which the Agency, as the central body 
within the nuclear power community, had a leading role to play. 
59. However, such support was fully dependent upon a general feeling of 
reliable safety. Since the Chernobyl accident, nuclear safety had been a 
major concern of governments and public alike. It must continue to receive 
top priority, and he commended the Agency on its long and active role in 
promoting nuclear safety and radiation protection programmes among its 
Member States. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.315 
page 14 


60. In that connection, he expressed deep appreciation for the four-week 
safety review mission recently carried out by the Agency in his country, 
during which the design of units three and four of the Younggwang plant, 
construction work on which was to commence at the end of 1989, had been 
thoroughly reviewed. Also, three OSART missions had to date been successfully 
carried out in the Republic of Korea, the most recent of which had thoroughly 
reviewed the operational safety of the Wolsung nuclear power plant. Such 
safety-related activities by the Agency played a great part in enhancing the 
safety of nuclear plants around the world. 
61. As the tenth largest nuclear energy producing country in the world, the 
Republic of Korea was anxious to participate more actively in the Agency's 
programmes, in which connection a new formula for representation on the Board 
of Governors should be introduced in order to give those countries which, like 
his own, had active nuclear power programmes and which strove to meet the 
Agency's objectives the opportunity to participate on the Board on a 
continuing basis, since proper representation in that forum could only enhance 
the quality of the Agency's work. 
62. Since the Third NPT Review Conference, no new nuclear-weapon State had 
thus far been confirmed. Meanwhile, the number of parties to NPT - a crucial 
regime for preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons - had increased 
from 130 in 1985 to 138 in the current year. With regard to the Agency's 1988 
Safeguards Implementation Report, moreover, he had been relieved to learn that 
there had been neither diversion of sensitive nuclear materials nor misuse of 
nuclear items and facilities. Since concern over proliferation represented 
one of the greatest barriers to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the need 
for international regimes such as NPT and the Agency's full-scope safeguards 
could not be over-emphasized. When all countries were fully committed to 
non-proliferation and had placed all their nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards, there would no longer be any barriers against the transfer of 
advanced nuclear technology for use in peaceful nuclear projects. With that 
end in view, he urged those countries which had not yet done so to conclude 
full-scope safeguards agreements with the Agency as soon as possible, and 
called upon the Secretariat to pursue its best efforts to that end. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 15 


63. Commending the Agency on its technical co-operation activities, he 
noted with satisfaction both the increase in the budget for those activities 
and in their rate of implementation, although he emphasized that qualitative 
improvement should also be a constant goal. 
64. As to his country's nuclear programme, the Republic of Korea had 
remained actively committed to the development and use of nuclear energy. Its 
nine operating nuclear power plants - a total of over 7.6 GW(e) of installed 
capacity - had supplied 46.9% of the country's total electricity requirements 
in 1988. The revised Presidential Decree of the Atomic Energy Law had been 
promulgated the previous June in order to keep abreast of the progress in 
nuclear technology development in the country. Under the Decree, his 
Government was planning a full-scale nuclear waste disposal and spent fuel 
management project, as well as an ambitious research and development 
programme, with funds for radioactive waste management purposes being drawn 
from the sales of nuclear-generated electricity. 
65. His country had also made significant progress with its nuclear fuel 
localization programme. Following the localization of CANDU fuel, it had 
succeeded in localizing nuclear fuels for PWRs. Also, the construction of a 
30 MW multipurpose reactor, led by the country's domestic design team, had 
been initiated in March 1989 and was scheduled to be completed in 1992. 
66. The Republic of Korea was keen to share its 30 years of experience in 
the nuclear field with other developing countries, to which end it had, since 
1987, been participating in the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme as a donor country. In the current year it would be supporting a 
footnote-a/ project in Egypt entitled "Computer-aided nuclear safety analysis" 
and would be hosting the second RCA regional training course on nuclear power 
project planning and implementation in October. It also intended to play a 
more active part in the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme, serving as a bridge between advanced and developing countries in 
the transfer of nuclear technology. 
67. Earlier that day, his delegation had taken great pleasure in presenting 
the Director General with a document certifying his Government's donation of 
30 personal computers made in the Republic of Korea for use within the 
Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme. He was proud of 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 16 


that opportunity to repay the Department of Technical Co-operation for the 


immeasurable assistance it had rendered to his country in the past. 


68. In conclusion, he once again emphasized that all countries should make 
sincere efforts to maintain nuclear power as a safe and reliable energy 
source. The effective and efficient response of the Agency and its 
Member States was necessary in order to render nuclear power more viable and 
valuable for the peace and prosperity of all peoples of the world. 


69. Mr. ALP (Turkey) said that world public opinion was increasingly 
concerned with environmental pollution and had generated a new climate of 
environmental awareness, which promised well for the future. The major role 
played by energy in the development process on the one hand, and the growing 
concern for the environment, together with the depletable nature of 
conventional energy sources on the other called for a reassessment of nuclear 
policies and, in particular, matters related to public confidence. 
70. The environmental aspects of energy supply and consumption, such 
phenomena as the growing atmospheric concentration of CO and other 
so-called "greenhouse" gases had an important bearing on the future role of 
nuclear energy. The dramatic events of the recent past had strengthened 
universal concern for nuclear safety, but public attention to the pollution 
created by conventional sources of energy had not declined. Many Governments, 
including Turkey's, as well as international organizations were still seeking 
ways of curbing the use of fossil fuels in order to mitigate the emissions of 
carbon dioxide and other hazardous elements and particles. While, however, 
the sensitivity to environmental pollution, and the vital concern to keep the 
earth clean for present and future generations might highlight nuclear energy 
as an attractive alternative for the world's increasing energy requirements, 
nuclear power as an energy source would only achieve general acceptance if its 
safe use and operation were assured, and if all States showed their readiness 
to accept their responsibilities. Nuclear safety should not, therefore, 
remain a function of the Agency but should rather be considered as one of its 
objectives. 
71. International co-operation should consequently aim at creating a regime 
for the safe production and use of nuclear energy, as well as for the safe 
handling of radioactive wastes. That regime should also encompass comparable 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 17 


standards and procedures for the management of reactors and the sharing of 


information and technology for nuclear safety. In that context, both the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency should 
be complemented by bilateral and subregional agreements. 


72. The Agency's authority and reputation depended to a large extent on the 
quality and efficiency of the measures implemented to assure nuclear safety. 
It was gratifying to note that the Agency's safety programme had expanded 
throughout the years from the nuclear fuel cycle to the use of nuclear methods 
in medicine, agriculture and industry, and the many activities in nuclear 
safety and radiation protection in 1989, including the establishment of an 
Emergency Response System, were commendable. Turkey had already put into 
operation 11 stations in its radiation monitoring network and early warning 
system and had strengthened its co-operation with the Agency in that area. 
73. The Director General, in his opening statement, had said that the 
application of nuclear techniques facilitated and supported environmental 
assessments. Turkey was aware of the Agency's efforts to encourage the use of 
nuclear techniques in detecting and understanding the behaviour of certain 
pollutants in the environment and particularly of those within the food 
chain. It followed with interest the activities undertaken in that important 
field, and believed that close co-operation with other specialized agencies 
was a prerequisite for efficiency. The credibility of nuclear energy would be 
further enhanced if the nuclear techniques and applications could be employed 
more extensively for the benefit of environmental protection projects. 
74. The question of nuclear waste disposal should certainly continue to 
receive utmost attention. Nuclear waste technology had reached an advanced 
stage of sophistication but, as was pointed out by the World Commission of 
Environment and Development, there was still a lot to be done in the area of 
waste disposal, and there could be no real public confidence in the nuclear 
industry's ability without mechanisms for the safe, effective and timely 
disposal of radioactive wastes. While the final disposal of high-level waste 
remained a vital question for the future, countries were having difficulties 
in finding sites even for interim waste disposal. In that connection, Turkey 
fully supported the work of the group of experts on radioactive waste 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 18 


transactions which was established pursuant to the General Conference 
resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/490 on dumping of nuclear waste. It was to be hoped 
that a satisfactory code of practice would be worked out and adopted in the 
near future. 


75. The Director General had informed the plenary of two highly interesting 
proposals made by the Soviet Union, namely the establishment of a centre for 
international research at Chernobyl and an international project in waste 
disposal research at a site in the USSR. Turkey would be following the 
developments with great interest. 
76. Turkey had consistently supported all initiatives aimed at promoting 
greater security and confidence in the use of nuclear energy, in which the 
question of liability for nuclear damages was an important aspect. 
77. While the signing of the joint protocol linking the Paris and Vienna 
Conventions was a step forward, Turkey was greatly concerned that many of the 
States with important nuclear activities had not yet become parties to those 
Conventions, thereby seriously restricting the scope of their implementation. 
It appreciated the efforts of the working group on all aspects of liability 
for nuclear damage, and hoped that it would be successful in complementing the 
existing liability regime and that all interested parties would participate. 
78. Turkey was pleased to note that in 1988, as in previous years, the IAEA 
had not detected any event indicating the diversion of a significant amount of 
safeguarded material for the manufacture of any nuclear weapon or for the 
manufacture of any other nuclear explosive device. The IAEA safeguards should 
remain the only system for combatting proliferation. As an NPT country which had 
accepted full-scope Agency safeguards, Turkey believed in the universal 
application of safeguards. However, it in no way condoned the misuse of the 
NPT as a barrier in the promotion of peaceful applications of nuclear energy 
in the developing countries. It was disheartening to observe that the 
Committee on the Assurances of Supply had been meeting for over a decade 
without making any substantial progress. The lack of an overall system of 
co-operation in which the supply of nuclear material and equipment could be 
assured on a more predictable and long-term basis would have adverse effects 
on non-proliferation. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 19 


79. The efficient and effective implementation of the technical assistance 
and co-operation programme should be one of the main pillars of the Agency's 
activities. Nuclear applications promoted through technical co-operation 
projects and co-ordinated research programmes had been helpful in meeting the 
needs of developing countries. 
80. In that context, the Agency's projects in Turkey on irradiation of 
disposable medical products and foodstuffs, radioisotope applications in 
industry and hydrology, installation of new units for production of 
radiopharmaceuticals or improvement of existing ones deserved mention. 
81. The recently initiated programme aimed at the use of nuclear techniques 
in assessing the pollutants from coal-fired plants was of great interest, and 
Turkey followed with attention the programme for the analysis of 
non-radioactive pollutants of the sea which was under way in the Monaco 
Laboratory. 
82. It was encouraging to learn from the Director General's statement that 
the developing countries had offered a considerable number of training 
services in 1988. Turkey was among those countries offering training and 
expert services through the Agency's programmes. 
83. In 1989, in addition to the co-ordination meeting of the radiotracer 
studies of fungicide residues in food plant projects which had already taken 
place in Ankara, Turkey would be hosting a seminar in Izmir for developing 
countries in the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific on the applications of 
isotope and geochemical techniques in geothermal exploration. The Research 
Co-ordination Meeting on human daily dietary intakes of nutritionally 
important trace elements as measured by nuclear and other techniques would 
again be held in Ankara in 1989. In addition, Turkey's voluntary contribution 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for the year 1990 had been 
pledged at its assessed level. 
84. With regard to its policy in the use of nuclear energy, Turkey had for 
a long time made efforts to introduce a nuclear power programme. The energy 
projections indicated that, even with the maximum use of its hydro potential, 
Turkey would need extra energy resources in the year 2000 and beyond. Nuclear 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 20 


energy thus remained a valid option for Turkey in meeting its future energy 
needs and its economic planning for the 1990s would lay emphasis on that 
aspect. 


85. A very important point had been made in the statements by the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations and by the Director General of the 
Agency. Both had referred to unprecedented changes in the international 
political climate, to a renewal of confidence in multilateralism and to 
collective approaches to solving world problems. That was particularly true 
in the field of disarmament, arms control and confidence-building. The 
reasons and motivations which had made that drastic change of attitude 
possible were complex and multiple. However, one aspect was clear: a new 
approach to international co-operation had emerged, and it was to be hoped 
that that new spirit would be fully reflected in individual approaches to the 
matters under the responsibility of the Agency. 
86. Mr. PANDEV (Bulgaria) said that over the previous year positive 
moves had been made to strengthen dialogue and co-operation between 
countries; there was a wider understanding of the interdependence of all 
countries, and that trend would continue as problems vitally affecting the 
economic and social development of many countries in the world were solved. 
87. Reduction and elimination of nuclear weapons and the prevention of 
further proliferation were the highest priorities for mankind. The efforts to 
create nuclear-weapon-free zones, in the Near East and Africa for instance, 
were of particular importance. Bulgaria was taking initiatives to create a 
nuclear- and chemical-weapon-free zone on the Balkan Peninsula. 
88. The annual report showed that the Agency's role as an accepted 
authority on international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
had gained in weight over the previous year. Decisions in the nuclear power 
area were currently being re-evaluated and there was increased interest on the 
part of the public in nuclear problems. Nuclear power had to continue to 
develop, but at the same time international safety regimes for its generation 
and use, and for the safe management of radioactive wastes had to be created 
and reinforced. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 21 


89. The Agency's nuclear safety and radiation protection programme was 
extremely important. The "Basic Safety Principles for Nuclear Power Plants" 
which had been drawn up by the International Working Group and published by 
the Agency in March of 1988 had made a significant contribution to the safe 
use of nuclear energy. The wide use being made of the program package for 
probabilistic safety assessment of nuclear power plants should also be noted; 
Bulgarian experts had taken part in the development of that program package. 
An Agency technical committee on the application of probabilistic safety 
assessment programs had convened in Sofia at the beginning of the year. 
90. The signing of the Joint Protocol connecting the Vienna Convention on 
Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Paris Convention on Third Party 
Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy, and the institution of the working 
group which was considering a whole range of problems related to liability for 
nuclear damage had been positive steps towards the creation of a international 
regime for the safe use of nuclear energy. Physical protection of nuclear 
material and its application in nuclear facilities was an important matter 
where nuclear safety and radiation protection were concerned, as was wider 
adherence to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, 
the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, and the Convention 
on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. 
The Agency should also play a role in the prohibition of armed attacks on 
nuclear facilities intended for peaceful purposes. The Governments of 
Bulgaria and Greece had concluded an agreement on notification in the event of 
a nuclear accident and exchange of information on nuclear facilities. A 
regional agreement on notification and assistance in the event of a nuclear 
accident and a radiological emergency was to be signed by CMEA member 
countries in Sofia in October of the current year. 


91. The more active position of the Agency with regard to protection of the 
environment, and the greater attention being given to the connection between 
the safe use of nuclear energy and restoration and protection of the 
environment were the most promising ways of restoring public confidence in 
nuclear power. The IAEA Yearbook which had been published for the first time 
in the current year would play an important role in providing the general 
public throughout the world with objective and competent information on the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 22 


achievements and problems of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The Agency 
was to be congratulated on that well thought-out and excellently implemented 


initiative. 


92. The Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme had grown 
again significantly over the previous year. The implementation of a bi-annual 
planning cycle, the expansion of pre-project assistance, and the evaluations 
and analyses of projects under way had had a beneficial effect on preparation 
and implementation of the programme. Bulgaria actively supported the 
technical assistance and co-operation programme on a regular basis and paid 
its voluntary contributions in full. Agency fellows were trained in Bulgaria 
as far as conditions allowed, and Bulgaria supplied equipment and the expert 
services. In 1990, Bulgaria would be making a voluntary contribution to the 
value of $68 250 in national currency to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund. He stressed again the need to do away with the 8% contribution 
for technical assistance programme costs which had long ago lost its 
original purpose, and he urged all countries to take part in the programme and 
to pay their voluntary contributions. The situation where only 40% of the 
Member States of the Agency were supporting the technical assistance programme 
was far from satisfactory. He thanked the Agency and the Division of 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation for the assistance that they had given 
to Bulgaria in 1988, and for their excellent and creative co-operation. 
Bulgaria was ready to extend its participation and reinforce its connection 
with the Agency in that area in the future. 
93. The Agency's safeguards programme made a unique contribution to the 
prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and to strengthening 
confidence in the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The successful 
implementation of safeguards was in the interests of all countries. He noted 
with pleasure that the Agency had not discovered any diversion of nuclear 
materials under safeguards during 1988, or any use of a nuclear facility for 
the production of a nuclear weapon. Bulgaria had placed all of its nuclear 
activities under Agency safeguards, and safeguards objectives had been fully 
met there. During the previous year, Unit 5 of the Kozloduj nuclear power 
plant, the first WWER-1000 unit outside the USSR, had been placed under 
safeguards for the first time. In that unit Bulgarian experts had 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 23 


collaborated actively on the development of reliable and precise monitoring 
methods for nuclear material even within the reactor containment. Bulgarian 
specialists had developed and presented to the Agency a computerized nuclear 
materials accounting system. Bulgaria would continue to support the Agency's 
safeguards system within the limits of its capabilities. During the coming 
year a review conference on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons was to take place and should significantly help reinforce the 
non-proliferation regime, strengthening international trust and improving 
international safety. He felt sure the Agency would play its due part in the 
preparation and running of the conference. 


94. He approved the draft budget for 1990 presented by the Board of 
Governors and the scale of contributions. Bulgaria would fulfil its budgetary 
obligations. He pointed out that arrears of Member States Regular Budget 
contributions were in excess of US $12 million and that no administrative 
measures could replace the timely payment of Member States* contributions to 
the Regular Budget. He approved the Agency's accounts for 1988 and thanked 
the auditor, and he reiterated his position with regard to the staffing of the 
Secretariat and the proposed changes to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and 
Article VI as a whole. 
95. Nuclear power had continued to develop inside Bulgaria over the 
previous year. Thirty-six per cent of all the energy generated within the 
country had come from nuclear power plants. The construction of Unit 6 of the 
Kozloduj nuclear power plant had been completed; construction of the second 
nuclear power plant in Beleno was still under way and a complex of measures 
was being implemented to improve nuclear and radiation safety, including the 
incorporation of a system to monitor the state of the metal in the steam 
generators which was being done with the help of the Agency; work was also 
under way to determine the optimum method for managing radioactive waste. As 
part of a regional project, problems connected with design-basis accidents and 
serious accidents, and means of preventing them were being studied. During 
1990 the Kozloduj nuclear power plant would receive an OSART mission. Use of 
ionizing radiation to sterilize medical products, to produce materials, and in 
agriculture and the food industry was expanding. It was planned to extend 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 24 


monitoring of the irradiation of food products, and to set up a national 


ionizing radiation metrology laboratory. The international document signed in 
Geneva on the irradiation of food products was an important step, and it 
opened up new scope for the use of radiation in agriculture and the food 


industry. On the basis of that document, and the Agency's interregional 
project, work was in progress on the drawing up and signing of a regional 
agreement on trade in irradiated products. 


96. He concluded by thanking the Agency's Secretariat for their work during 
the previous year, and he congratulated the Director General on his 
re-election and wished him well. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (resumed) 


97. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference that consultations 
within the Latin American group had resulted in agreement on its nominee for 
the post of additional elected member of the General Committee: he 
accordingly proposed that the delegate of Mexico be elected as an additional 
member of the General Committee. Furthermore, the Middle East and South Asia 
group had agreed on its nominee for the post of Chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole: he therefore proposed that Mr. Nethsinghe of Sri Lanka be elected 
as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole. 
98. It was so decided. 
99. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee was now fully 
constituted. However, in order to ensure the smooth progress of the 
Conference's business, he suggested that, pending a recommendation by the 
General Committee, the Conference suspend Rule 42 of its Rules of Procedure ad 
interim, so as to allow the Committee of the Whole to start its work before 
the General Committee met and to embark on consideration of items 10-15 and 
17-20 of the provisional agenda, those being items which had been included in 
the agenda as a result of previous decisions of the Conference or which the 
General Conference was obliged by the Statute to consider. 
100. It was so decided. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 25 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (continued) 


101. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that science and 
technology should be used for the general benefit of mankind and should not be 
treated as the property of particular countries, nor used solely for material 
gain; unscrupulous deployment of science and technology could only lead to 
the degradation of mankind. His country advocated that philosophy and was a 
strong supporter of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
102. Mankind was approaching the end of the 20th century with excesses at 
all levels and on all fronts. Great achievements in science and technology 
were matched by social and environmental problems of unprecedented magnitude. 
It seemed that scientific and technological progress was being pursued solely 
for its own sake; while advances in the industrial or developed countries had 
helped raise the standard of living and quality of life to a considerable 
extent, parallel to that there had been some degradation in the social and 
environmental spheres, the consequences of which were shared with the 
developing countries. That was cause for concern and even alarm. 
103. That was so for a number of reasons. The developing countries' support 
of the scientific and technological infrastructure in the more advanced 
countries was depleting their natural resources at an alarming rate. They 
received little benefit from their raw materials, either financially or 
technologically, since the low prices received for them, combined with the 
high prices charged by the developed countries for their supplies and 
services, were progressively impoverishing the developing countries in real 
terms. An example of that was the vast accumulation of debts owed by the 
developing countries to the financial institutions of the developed 
countries. In effect, major multinational conglomerates forced such debts 
upon the developing countries in order to control their political and economic 
growth. Low GNP, combined with large population growth rates, meant that 
standards of living in most developing countries were stagnant or declining. 
104. The developing countries were also being asked to take on the burden of 
toxic industrial waste and other pollutants produced by the developed 
countries. Although sea-dumping of nuclear and other toxic wastes, nuclear 
test explosions and high altitude tests had been somewhat curtailed, they 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 26 


nevertheless bore witness to the fact that the developing countries were 
environmentally and socially degenerating as a consequence of the support they 
gave to the scientific and technological progress of the developed countries. 


105. An increasing number of important industries, such as the petrochemicals 
and nuclear industries, on which the future of the developing countries might 
depend and which might help to ensure their economic independence, were being 
labelled "off-limits" by the developed exporting countries and becoming 
increasingly "inaccessible". It was regrettable that many oil-producing 
countries were net importers of the petroleum products which they should 
logically be exporting. 
106. The increasingly high tuition fees charged by some European and 
North American universities in recent years had effectively deprived students 
from the developing countries of the benefits of advanced studies. It was 
difficult to imagine that the developed countries were economically dependent 
on the incomes of their institutions of higher learning. Political 
discrimination often deprived scientists, engineers and technicians from the 
developing countries of the opportunity to participate in advanced training 
courses organized in developed countries. When faced with little prospect of 
progress at home, it was inevitable that the top scientists and engineers of 
the developing countries were attracted to the developed countries' industrial 
and academic establishments, thus further eroding scientific and technological 
infrastructures in their own countries. The large and increasing number of 
Third-World scientists and engineers employed in developed countries was proof 
of that. 
107. Factors such as those had widened the gap between North and South to 
such an extent that, unless effective measures were adopted immediately, the 
21st century would see an unbridgeable gap between the two groups of 
countries. Such extremes, such vast differences in standards of living, such 
inequalities, would not be compatible with global peace and prosperity; 
indeed, they constituted the best formula for constant tension, for political 
strife, for regional and ultimately global conflicts. 
108. The industrial countries should attempt to redefine their policies in 
the direction of more equitable sharing of scientific and technological 
progress, aiming for more reasonable terms of exchange between raw materials 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 27 


and industrial supplies and/or services. Less political, religious and ethnic 
discrimination would also benefit mankind as a whole, and was the only way to 
defuse the present time-bomb. Only thus could the 21st century bring lasting 
peace and prosperity. 


109. Technological barriers were set up by most developed countries for the 
purpose of preserving proprietary rights and maintaining a monopoly on certain 
technologies. The developed countries used political means to discriminate 
between various developing countries as to the type and the levels of the 
technologies which they might or might not receive, thus regulating the 
diffusion of technology and its benefits. That applied in particular to the 
nuclear industry, whose growth was strictly regulated by political 
considerations, in spite of NPT, the Agency's full-scope safeguards programme 
and other treaties and safeguards regimes. 
110. Political constraints had thus led to a regrettable erosion of the 
Agency's effectiveness in meeting its objectives: it was constantly obliged 
to perform a balancing act between upholding its Statute and objectives on the 
one hand and complying with unwritten political guidelines on the other. 
Nevertheless, the Director General was to be commended for his efforts in 
pursuing the Agency's objectives under such constraints. 
111. Thus, nuclear technology had remained stagnant in the developing 
countries for a number of years, whereas most developed countries were 
experiencing considerable growth. That was, again, a clear case of the 
developing countries not having the advantages of nuclear technology while 
being required to shoulder their full share of its potential transboundary 
risks. 
112. The concern of most developing countries about the issue of inequitable 
access to advanced technology, particularly nuclear technology for peaceful 
purposes, had been evident during the Ninth Summit Conference of the 
Non-Aligned Nations. One of the resolutions adopted by that Conference 
stressed the importance of all nations having equitable access to technology 
in general and nuclear technology in particular. Further, it had emphasized 
that non-proliferation issues should not be used as a means of preventing the 
utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 28 


113. Political constraints aside, the passage of time and over-regulation 
had made the nuclear industry extremely capital-intensive, so much so that 
even if certain developing countries were not faced with political barriers, 
the sheer magnitude of the investment required, particularly for nuclear power 
plants, would make any such venture prohibitively expensive. No OPEC country 
had an operating nuclear power plant, or, indeed, a viable nuclear industry, 
and OPEC's revenues no longer constituted encouragement to venture into such 
enormously capital-intensive projects as nuclear power plants. 
114. The stagnation of most developing countries' nuclear power programmes, 
in the form of half-completed power plants and dormant nuclear projects, could 
clearly be attributed to financing problems. Unfortunately, slogans such as 
"cheap energy" or "an economically competitive energy alternative" no longer 
applied to nuclear power; the global situation of fossil fuels and the 
declining price of oil had further compounded that difficulty. 
115. Nuclear power embodied a contradiction: it was a desirable alternative 
because generally well-suited to combating degradation of the environment, 
particularly the greenhouse effect, yet at the same time the cost of nuclear 
power was high and currently beyond the financial means of many countries. 
The Agency, aware of that situation, was to be commended for having organized 
a special scientific programme entitled "The New Generation of Nuclear Power" 
which was to take place parallel to the current session of the General 
Conference. 
116. Although the Agency, in its circular on that programme, had described 
nuclear power as "economically proven", that was, regrettably, no longer a 
universally valid assertion; in fact it had become a statement which should 
be made with some caution. The fact was that nuclear power programmes were 
expensive; they could now barely compete with fossil-fuelled plants, and if 
the price of oil continued to fall they would soon become uneconomical. 
Nuclear power programmes had become luxuries which few countries could 
afford. Since nuclear energy was the only reliable energy option for the 
future, and its effectiveness would depend to a large extent on whether it 
could compete safely and economically with other energy alternatives, it was 
vitally important that a fresh approach to nuclear power plant technology be 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.315 
page 29 


adopted, to reduce investment costs without compromising safety and 
operabiLity Levels. The Agency's scientific programme could constitute a 
first step in that direction. 


117. The previous year, his country had accepted United Nations 
resolution 598 in its entirety. It had further announced that that had not 
been a tactical manoeuvre and had demonstrated its serious intent by pursuing 
the full implementation of resolution 598 through appropriate diplomatic 
channels, thus giving the lie to the propaganda efforts of the international 
Zionist news media which attempted to present the Iranian regime as dogmatic 
and warmongering. 
118. However, Iraq, which had started the eight-year war and which had 
always pretended to seek peace, was effectively undermining peace negotiations 
by presenting unreasonable demands. 
119. His country found itself in a situation which not only impeded the 
progress of negotiations but also hampered its attempts to proceed with 
reconstruction programmes and economic recovery. Many countries, including 
several western industrialized nations, had expressed readiness to co-operate 
with Iran in that endeavour. Regrettably, in some cases the claims and real 
intentions did not coincide, a good example being the Bushehr nuclear power 
plant. It had always been his country's intention to complete that plant; 
the Director General, who had recently visited the plant, had also expressed 
the view that it was important to complete that project. In the past, there 
had been promises of co-operation from the West German supplier of the plant. 
However, now that the conditions for resuming construction activities were 
favourable, the West German Government was being evasive about fulfilling its 
obligations under the relevant bilateral agreements. 
120. The Director General had contacted the West German Government, seeking 
clarification of their position on the completion of that vast project. 
Regrettably, the West German Government had not responded to the Director 
General's inquiries. Because of the West German Government's evasive 
position, more than US $3 billion which his country had so far invested in 
that project had remained idle for a considerable period of time. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.315 
page 30 


121. In June, in the course of his visit to the Islamic Republic of Iran, 
the Director General had visited the site of the Bushehr nuclear power plant. 
Although the Director General had been familiar with the plant and knew about 
the damage caused by military attacks, he had been surprised at the extent of 
the damage inflicted - despite Iran's reports on the subject. Iran's nuclear 
power programme had sustained a severe setback as a result of the military 
attacks on the Bushehr nuclear power plant, not to mention the tragic loss of 
innocent lives of technical personnel as well as that of a West German 
expert. Was it not time to take a stand to prevent such atrocities? Was it 
not time to adopt effective resolutions against military attacks on nuclear 
installations, whether in operation or under construction? Indifference might 
encourage further aggression in the future, with even more severe 
consequences. His country expected the General Conference to face up to its 
responsibilities in that respect. 
122. There would be no restrictions on Agency safeguards inspectors 
travelling to Iran. The recent visit of an Agency Radiation Protection 
Advisory Team (RAPAT) demonstrated Iran's close collaboration with the IAEA in 
the field of radiation protection. Moreover, according to the Safeguards 
Implementation Report (SIR) for 1988, submitted to the Board of Governors in 
June 1989, the IAEA's Secretariat had not detected 
"... any event which would indicate the diversion of a significant 


amount of safeguarded nuclear material - or the misuse of facilities, 


equipment or non-nuclear material subject to safeguards - for the 


manufacture of any nuclear weapon, or for any other military purpose, 


or for the manufacture of any other nuclear explosive device, or for 


purposes unknown." 


123. Committed as it was to full-scope Agency safeguards, Iran strongly 
urged Member States to take appropriate measures which would ensure full 
control, prevent any further proliferation of nuclear weapons, and, in the 
long run, eliminate all nuclear arsenals. 
124. On the issue of chemical weapons, as his delegation had declared 
before, Iran had neither manufactured nor deployed chemical weapons, nor would 
it do so in the future. As a reaction to public opinion, the United States 
Government was now proposing a reduction in chemical weapons. But why had 
such weapons been manufactured in the first place? 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 31 


125. Among the main activities of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran 
were applications of ionizing radiation, particularly as applied to nuclear 
medicine, the production of radioisotopes and radiopharmaceuticals, radiation 
processing of disposable medical supplies and various industrial products, 
public protection against the harmful effects of ionizing radiation and 
monitoring of those who handled radioactive materials. 
126. His country's nuclear research centres pursued various activities and 
programmes related to fundamental research, the physical sciences, chemistry, 
engineering and nuclear applications in agriculture. Furthermore, various 
services were offered to the public and private sectors. 
127. The relatively new Theoretical Physics and Mathematics Department was 
also actively pursuing its objectives and in that connection had established 
close links with the International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in 
Trieste. 
128. In conclusion, he expressed Iran's support for the resolution submitted 
for the purpose of altering the name of the Palestine Liberation Organization 
(PLO) to Palestine. That, it was felt, was the right of the courageous 
Palestinians, to whom his country wished complete success in expelling the 
occupying Israelis from their homeland. 
129. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) observed that the General 
Conference, the Agency's highest policy-making body, met to discuss and take 
decisions on matters of interest to the Agency and to its Member States. 
Those decisions could serve their purpose provided they were based on an 
earnest desire to fulfil the Agency's statutory objectives. 
130. Since the Agency's objectives were to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world, the Member States should not confine themselves to taking decisions but 
should ensure that all activities, including power plant operation and waste 
disposal, conformed to the nuclear safety requirements and that nuclear energy 
was not used for non-peaceful purposes. 
131. He wished to comment on a number of matters of current public concern 
and the Agency's activities, which the Director General had reviewed in his 
statement. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.315 
page 32 


132. The latter had referred to the environmental pollution caused by the 
burning of fossil fuel and demands of industrial development. For example, 
emissions of environmentally harmful gases like carbon dioxide into the 
atmosphere and deforestation contributed to the greenhouse effect. It was 
encouraging news that between 1973 and 1985 the amount of carbon dioxide 
emissions in France had declined from 450 million to 325 million tons, thanks 
to the increased use of nuclear power. In that connection, he noted that 
the 1989 Paris summit of industrialized countries had recognized the important 
role of nuclear power in limiting the factors responsible for the greenhouse 
effect. 
133. Predictions indicated a steady annual growth of 2-3% in energy demand 
and consumption over the following 15 years, and it was advisable to meet that 
growth by increasing the share of nuclear power, which would help decrease the 
amount of carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere and, consequently, the 
greenhouse effect. 
134. The Paris summit had also stressed the importance of international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear safety, including the safety of nuclear 
power plant operation and waste management. In that context, he welcomed the 
statement of the Director General who had emphasized that, in spite of the 
already high level of nuclear safety, it should be improved continuously. 
135. As to the Director General's suggestion that Member States should pool 
their efforts and work jointly under the Agency's auspices, as in the case of 
the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project, to 
develop new reactor models and systems with reinforced safety features, his 
delegation considered the idea worthy of consideration and support. Such 
reactors should, in his opinion, be so designed as to serve more than one 
purpose, including production of potable water from sea water, on which 
subject an item had been included in the Conference's agenda at the request of 
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. One of the factors hindering the introduction of 
power reactors in developing countries was the problem of financing, and he 
hoped that the Agency would continue to take an interest in that matter under 
the proposed project together with the participating industrialized States and 
the World Bank. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 33 


136. Another matter which was connected with nuclear safety and which 
created a climate of trust and security for Member States to continue to 
develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy was the positive assurance of such 
safety. One instrument, envisaged in the Statute, of verifying Member States' 
commitment to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was the safeguards system. 
He had noted with regret in the Director General's report in document 
GC(XXXIII)/886 that Israel persisted in rejecting the resolutions of the 
United Nations General Assembly and those of the Agency, which had called upon 
it to place its nuclear activities under safeguards, and in refusing to sign 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty, although most States in the region of the Middle 
East had done so and had concluded or were negotiating safeguards agreements 
with the Agency. Instead, Israel was suggesting that with certain conditions 
the States in the region should conclude a treaty on the lines of the 
Tlatelolco and Rarotonga Treaties making the Middle East a "nuclear-weaponfree 
zone"; it was thus evading the safeguards system. Israel did not 
sincerely intend to eliminate nuclear weapons in the region because it was the 
only State in the region which possessed such weapons. Moreover, it was well 
aware that the conditions prevailing there were different from those in the 
countries party to the Tlatelolco and Raratonga Treaties. 
137. The Arab countries in the region were desirous of establishing 
stability and peace in the region, and were firmly in favour of creating a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. In that connection, the Director 
General would be requested, through a draft resolution to be submitted to the 
Conference, to make available his good offices in negotiations on the 
establishment of such a zone with the States in the region and to report on 
the subject to the Board and to the Conference the following year. 
138. He commended the Agency's intensive efforts in the area of promotional 
activities of interest to its developing Member States and its regulatory 
activities which benefited all Member States. He hoped that it would continue 
to send the Operational Safety Review Teams (OSARTs) to advise Member States 
and the Radiation Protection Advisory Teams (RAPATs), which helped Member 
States in strengthening their technical infrastructure in radiation protection. 
139. He also expressed his appreciation of the efforts by the Director 
General and the Secretariat, together with those of the expert group, in 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 34 


drafting the Safety Principles and Technical Criteria for the Underground 
Disposal of High-level Wastes, and hoped that the expert group concerned with 
drafting a code of practice for international transactions involving nuclear 
wastes would he able to propose such a code for approval by the Conference 
in 1990. 


140. Referring to safeguards, he pointed out that the method of financing 
those activities imposed an additional burden on some developing Member States 
which were not included in the list of shielded countries. His country was 
not on that list, and contributed a relatively large share of the costs 
although it had no nuclear activity. It would be more appropriate for 
countries with nuclear activities and utilizing nuclear energy to bear a 
greater share of the growing costs of verification of nuclear activities. 
141. The Conference had before it the Agency's budget for 1990 amounting to 
US $160 million, representing a slight increase over the preceding year's 
figure but remaining within the bounds of zero growth imposed by the world 
economic situation. However, the principle of zero growth actually limited 
the required expansion in the Agency's promotional programmes and the volume 
of the budget. The developing Member States were not in favour of the 
continued increase in the safeguards expenditure and urged that the latter 
should not be covered at the expense of the important promotional programmes 
in developing countries. 
142. He was especially appreciative of the Director General's efforts to 
respond to Member States' demands by achieving economies through efficiency 
gains and by improving and reorganizing the Agency's activities. 
143. From the list submitted to the Conference he noted that the number of 
nationals from developing countries employed in the Agency had been 
increasing. The Director General deserved to be commended on that account, 
and he hoped that the latter would continue to improve the proportion of 
nationals from those countries, especially at the senior levels. 
144. Lastly, he shared the Director General's concern at the late payment by 
Member States of their assessed contributions to the Agency's budget, which 
not only caused difficulties in the implementation of many programmes and in 
meeting commitments in time, but also led to the cancellation of some 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 35 


programmes. He was pleased to state that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia had paid 
its contribution in full, and appealed to Member States which had not done so, 
especially those whose share was large, to endeavour to meet their obligations 
in time. 


145. In conclusion, referring to the Board's recommendation to the 
Conference to approve the appointment of Dr. Blix for another term of four 
years, he extended his congratulations and support to the latter, and 
expressed his confidence that the Agency would make further progress in 
fulfilling its objectives under the wise guidance of Dr. Blix. 
146. Mr. RAHMAN (Malaysia) said the challenges faced by the Agency in 
executing its functions and duties needed little comment, particularly in view 
of the growing appreciation of the needs and benefits of supra-national 
organizations. However, such organizations should not take it upon themselves 
to attempt to transcend national sovereignties, rather they must work through 
recognition of those sovereignties, particularly since the early enthusiasm 
for the unqualified transfer of technology from the industrialized to the 
developing countries and the optimism and faith in its beneficial effects had 
given way to increasing scepticism and criticism. The appropriateness of the 
technology and the various costs associated with the transfer were 
increasingly being questioned, as was the political and administrative 
machinery to be used. The Agency in particular should do no more than what 
was entrusted to it by one or more nations for the achievement of the purposes 
which that nation or those nations approved. The Agency had been operating in 
that way as could be seen by the benefits now being reaped by Member States. 
147. The complexity of modern life and the rapid growth of technology 
unavoidably allowed impersonal functional forces free play and reduced the 
individual's range of choice. However, scientists were citizens first and 
foremost, and understood, through the many discussions and movements in which 
they were involved, the need for a unitary outlook and for a proper balance 
between science and duty. They would not care to be witness to a process of 
dehumanization, an incipient collectivism or collectivization inherent in and 
inseparable from the very constitution of modern society. Confrontation in 
the political sphere, given the problems posed by nuclear energy, was another 
aspect of their dilemma. The fundamental problems were not political but 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 36 


transpolitical, as was clear from some aspects of decision-making in modern 
society. Scientists could not therefore ignore the political aspects of 
nuclear science, which was only logical given that the Atom for Peace 
Programme had been based on the merger of commercial, political and strategic 
assessments. Malaysia considered that technical co-operation was a very 


important multilateral channel for the transfer of nuclear technology. 


148. Nuclear science and technology had also been successfully promoted 
through regional co-operation, such as co-ordinated research programmes, 
training courses, workshops and seminars implemented within the framework of 
the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA). The Malaysian Government strongly 
supported such activities, and Malaysia was hosting three regional training 
courses. 
149. In the application of nuclear techniques in agriculture, medicine and 
industry, radiation sources of one form or another were being used. However, 
the safe use and disposal of those radiation sources gave rise to some 
concern. While the Agency's efforts to assist Member States in developing an 
adequate infrastructure for radiation protection and waste management were 
commendable, there was still more that could be done. The numerous safety 
series, regulations, guidelines and technical documents were only helpful when 
they were well understood by their users. In that respect, the Agency must 
place greater emphasis on providing practical guidelines as well as more 
training programmes in the safe handling and disposal of radiation sources. 
Assistance in developing the plan and infrastructure to handle radiological 
emergencies was also urgently needed by many developing countries. 
150. The area of nuclear energy should not be studied only by engineers and 
scientists as a technical subject, rather it should be studied from the point 
of view of its implications for and its effects on society. It was not 
therefore totally divorced from other human activities. However, many still 
believed that nuclear science was a highly specialized area and should be 
treated as such. It had undoubtedly played an important part in public 
affairs but the appropriateness of its politics was open to question. 
151. For example, in the Director General's report the previous day it had 
been stated that notwithstanding the relative merits of nuclear power as 
compared with power from fossil fuels, scepticism or even outright opposition 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 37 


continued to be expressed by certain quarters against nuclear power. Such 
opposition arose either from lack of information as to the relative merits of 
nuclear power, or from genuine concern about safety and proliferation of 
nuclear material. Both sources of opposition must be addressed by the 
Agency. On the one hand, an effective public information strategy was needed 
to promote an understanding of nuclear energy and, on the other, greater 
efforts were needed on the part of the international community to develop or 
improve the necessary mechanism to ensure the highest degree of safety and 
protection against a nuclear accident, and in the event of such an accident, 
to ensure appropriate compensation for the victims as a matter of course. In 
that regard, as well as the Agency's developing and ensuring universal 
compliance with improved safety measures, Member States, too, should get 
together and agree with the least possible delay a comprehensive international 
liability regime that would include both civil and state liability. His 
country had noted that a start had been made towards developing such a regime, 
but the urgent need for an early agreement could not be over-emphasized. All 
Member States were therefore urged to support such an agreement which was 
essential to universal confidence in nuclear energy and its acceptance. 


152. As to the application of nuclear energy in the non-power areas, the 
Malaysian delegation held the view that the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme was of direct benefit to developing countries. 
Malaysia had itself benefited from that programme. However, a liberal and 
purposeful sharing and transfer of technology to accelerate the development of 
developing countries would generate whole-hearted support for the goals of 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The use of radiation and isotopes in 
industry was widely established in the industrialized nations, and the 
technologies could be acquired through international collaboration. Malaysia 
was greatly encouraged to see that the programme had gone from strength to 
strength as evidenced by the increasing number of projects and resources being 
made available. 
153. As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT), Malaysia attached great importance to the Agency's safeguards system 
and appreciated the concern expressed in many quarters that the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes implied a certain abdication of sovereign 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 38 


rights. The majority of countries considered that the most appropriate way to 
make a commitment to non-proliferation was through adherence to an 


internationally binding agreement such as NPT or the Tlatelolco Treaty while 
others held the view that the unilateral declaration of state policy was an 
equally valid commitment to non-proliferation. 


154. However, the IAEA's safeguards system provided a service to sovereign 
States wishing to create confidence which might not otherwise be achieved. 
The new procedure for the designation of safeguards inspectors was an attempt 
to improve the efficiency of that system and Malaysia accepted the modified 
version. 
155. Lastly, it was in the interests of mankind as a whole for everyone 
present to be aware of their global interdependence and the need to 
accommodate national and international interests. Divisions of interests or 
of vested interests had become sharper in nuclear matters between the nuclear 
and non-nuclear States on such issues as environmental protection, access to 
energy producing resources, economic development, etc. The vast complexity of 
the situation offered no simple solution, and it was only through 
intergovernmental organizations such as the IAEA that co-operation between 
Governments could be achieved. 
156. Mr. CASTILLO CONTOUX (Guatemala) said that nuclear energy played a 
valuable part in his country's development. Nuclear techniques were being 
introduced wherever appropriate and measures were being taken to ensure that 
both the public and the environment remained adequately protected against the 
harmful effects of ionizing radiations. 
157. The new premises of the Guatemalan General Directorate for Nuclear 
Energy (DGEN) had now been completed. The building housed a secondary 
standards dosimetry and radiation protection laboratory, laboratories for 
nuclear applications in health, agriculture and industry, a nuclear 
information centre, a library and lecture rooms, as well as administrative and 
general service areas. It would increase Guatemala's capacity for generating 
and applying scientific and technological knowledge, thereby contributing to 
the country's comprehensive development. His Government was, moreover, 
willing to put that infrastructure at the disposal of the countries of the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 39 


region and of the Agency, trusting that such co-operation would in part serve 


to repay the assistance they had provided in the past. 


158. His country firmly supported and was increasingly involved in the ARCAL 
programme, having already been selected as the venue for a number of important 
ARCAL activities. The programme, together with the valuable assistance 
provided by the Agency, had been of great benefit to Guatemala, particularly 
in the area of staff training. Guatemalan technicians were now in demand as 
instructors for courses held in the region, and the country's installations 
were called upon to receive Agency fellows. He thanked the donor countries, 
whose support had to a great extent been responsible for the success of ARCAL, 
and also the Secretariat for its co-ordination work. 
159. With regard to nuclear applications in Guatemala, the past year had 
witnessed a very positive increase and diversification in the use of nuclear 
techniques in health, agriculture and industry. The health sector was now 
capable of producing thyroid axis kits and of offering diagnostic services 
using radioimmunoassay techniques; it had commenced production of antithyroid 
antibodies, and had also increased its services in the area of image diagnosis, 
now having the ability to produce 14 different radiopharmaceuticals for 
labelling with technetium-99. 
160. In the agricultural sector nuclear techniques were now widely accepted 
as a useful research tool, and the number of experimental plots had increased 
considerably. Some very promising results had been obtained with crop 
improvement, such as bean and rice varieties with enhanced nutritive, physical 
and earliness characteristics. The necessary research had taken several 
years, and laboratory and field trials would be carried out prior to 
propagation and distribution. 
161. He was pleased to note that in the nuclear analytical area work had 
been completed on the installation of a total X-ray reflection system for 
multi-elemental analysis in biological materials and minerals, traces and 
ultra-traces. Also, work had begun on determining natural radiation levels in 
Guatemala, starting with an analysis of soils and plants. 
162. Radiation protection was accorded the highest priority by his country, 
and regulations governing radiation protection and the licensing of 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 40 


radioactive installations had been drawn up. Courses had been given on the 
operation of gamma radiography units and the management of radiological 
emergencies, and Guatemala was also participating in a pilot plan on radiation 
protection. 


163. With regard to the Agency's safeguards, he reiterated his Government's 
confidence in that system, which was a vital element in ensuring that nuclear 
energy was used for peaceful purposes. 
164. The Agency's technical co-operation programme was a valuable mechanism 
which had made a significant contribution to his country's programme of 
nuclear applications. It was important, however, that an appropriate balance 
be achieved in the distribution of the Agency's resources, so as to satisfy a 
greater number of technical assistance requests. He expressed thanks to the 
Agency for the technical co-operation it had provided to Guatemala; to the 
Government of the United States for providing extrabudgetary funds for the 
implementation of footnote-a/ projects; and to the Government of the 
United Kingdom for its generous donation to permit implementation of the 
project entitled "Dosimetry laboratory". 
REPLY BY THE DELEGATE OF IRAQ TO THE STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF THE ISLAMIC 
REPUBLIC OF IRAN 


165. Mr. ALKITAL (Iraq), exercising his right of reply, said that 
United Nations Security Council resolution 598, to which the delegate of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran had referred, had in fact been adopted by the 
Security Council in July 1987, but the Islamic Republic of Iran had not 
accepted it until July 1988. During the intervening year Iran had been 
occupying parts of Iraqi territory and had only accepted the resolution after 
the defeat of its forces. The difficulty with which it had accepted that 
resolution was demonstrated by its statement that it would be easier for its 
leader to swallow poison than to accept that resolution. 
166. The Islamic Republic of Iran had accepted the Iraqi proposal to enter 
into direct negotiations with Iraq but had not yet actually entered into such 
negotiations. In fact, the delegate of the Islamic Republic of Iran had even 
refused to sit next to the delegate of Iraq in the General Conference. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.315 
page 41 


167. The Islamic Republic of Iran continued to search shipping in the Gulf 
and to keep the Shatt-al-Arab waterway closed. It was also holding prisoners 
of war as hostages for political negotiations in contravention of the 
Third Geneva Convention of 1949 and in violation of Security Council 
resolution 598. For its part, Iraq had repeatedly called for the immediate 
release of prisoners of war and had made a great contribution to the peace 
process. 
168. As to the remarks made regarding the visit by the Director General, he 
would leave it to the Director General to reply to those. For its part, Iraq 
considered that the Islamic Republic of Iran was seeking to use the Director 
General's visit for propaganda purposes and had no genuine desire for 
co-operation with the Agency. 
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN 


169. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his delegation 
wished to reserve the right to exercise its right of reply, at a later stage, 
to the comments which had just been made by the delegate of Iraq. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
4 December 1989 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 26 September 1989, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 
later: Mr. WIRYONO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 


Approval of the appointment of the 
Director General 1 - 12 


General debate and annual report 
for 1988 (resumed) 13 - 98 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Pakistan 13 - 26 
Nigeria 27 - 42 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 


Republic 43 - 54 
Hungary 55 - 66 
Yugoslavia 67 - 76 
Commission of the European 


Communities 77 -- 93 


[*] GC(XXXII)/871 and Add.1-3. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIII)/lNF/274/Rev.2. 


89-46 73 
(5743e/0568e) 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 2 


APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL (GC(XXXIII)/872) 


1. The PRESIDENT said that, as stated in document GC(XKXIII)/872, the 
Board, acting in accordance with Article VII.A of the Statute, had appointed 
Mr. Hans Blix to serve as Director General of the Agency for a period of four 
years from 1 December 1989. Under the same Article, the Board requested the 
General Conference to approve the appointment and accordingly recommended that 
it adopt the draft resolution set out in document GC(XXXIII)/872. 
2. Mr. LAVIÑA (Philippines) said that he had a number of comments to 
make on the draft resolution before the General Conference. The three 
preambular paragraphs - especially the third one - were correct, but they 
contained nothing to support operative paragraph 1, which requested the 
General Conference to approve the appointment of the current Director General 
for a third four-year term. In fact, only operative paragraph 2 followed from 
the preamble. No one doubted that the current Director General's 
qualifications, capabilities and personal experience made him worthy of a 
further term, but his reappointment raised an issue which went beyond his 
person and gave rise to a number of questions. 
3. First, why had there been no candidate from a developing country? The 
main reason might have been that the vacancy for the post of Director General 
had not been officially announced. In order to meet the objectives of 
Article VII.A of the Statute, it therefore seemed necessary to circulate an 
appropriate vacancy notice to all Member States. Secondly, he understood that 
observers - who might have been able to point out shortcomings in the draft 
resolution submitted - had been excluded from the Board's deliberations when 
it had considered the matter of the appointment of the Director General and 
had decided to reappoint the present incumbent. The text of the Board's 
decision offered no justification for its main recommendation. The Board 
could not presume that everybody would approve the appointment of the current 
Director General for a further term. The appointment of the Director General 
had to be considered and approved by the General Conference which was the 
Board's parent body, and had a much larger membership. Even if the Board had 
had reason to suppose that the General Conference would approve its 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.316 
page 3 


recommendation, it should have submitted some justification for the 
appointment, or the approval of the appointment, of the current Director 
General for a further term. There was nothing to that effect in the records. 


4. His delegation had difficulty in approving the draft resolution under 
consideration for two reasons. The first was the formal defects it 
contained: the preamble offered no justification for operative paragraph 1. 
The second pertained to the substance of the draft resolution: since the 
preamble laid so much stress on the need for appointing a Director General 
from a developing country, the Board should have explored the possibility of 
doing so and of thus putting an end to the unfair situation whereby the 
Director General of the Agency had always come from a developed country of the 
Western world. Indeed, a single country had provided two out of the three 
Directors General, with a combined tenure of 28 years to date. That state of 
affairs was in total contradiction with the unwritten but fundamental 
principle of rotation in the United Nations system, to which even the post of 
Secretary-General of the United Nations was subject. 
5. Without wishing to question the qualifications of the current Director 
General, even if it did not always agree with the manner in which he had 
exercised his discretion, his delegation felt that a candidate from a developing 
country should have been appointed. Article VILA of the Statute should be 
reviewed and re-interpreted as to limit the term of office of the Director 
General to an ideal maximum of, perhaps, two consecutive terms. Consequently, 
if the draft resolution was put to the vote unamended, his delegation 
would abstain. 


6. The PRESIDENT assured the delegate of the Philippines that he had 
taken note of his remarks. If there were no other speakers, he would take it 
that the General Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXIII)/872 and thus approve the appointment of Mr. Hans Blix as 
Director General for a further term of four years starting on 1 December 1989. 
7. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIII)/872 was adopted. 
At the invitation of the President. Mr. Blix entered the meeting. 


8. The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Blix that the General Conference had 
approved his appointment to the post of Director General for a further term. 
He was pleased to be the first to congratulate Mr. Blix and invited him to 
take the oath of office. 

GC(XXXILI)/OR.316 
page 4 


9. Mr. BLIX took the following oath: 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and 
conscience the functions entrusted to me as Director General of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, to discharge these functions and to 
regulate my conduct with the interest of the Agency only in view, and 
not to seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of ray 
duties from any Government or other authority external to the Agency." 


10. The DIRECTOR GENERAL, having taken the oath, thanked Member States 
for the confidence they had shown in him in appointing him for a further 
term. His reappointment came at a time when various processes were taking 
place which could affect the role of nuclear power in the world and on which 
the Agency could have some influence. First, while hostility to nuclear power 
was increasing in certain sectors of public opinion, there was at the same 
time a growing awareness of the unacceptable risks for the environment of 
excessive reliance on traditional sources of energy, and a growing realization 
that the advantages and disadvantages of nuclear power needed to be assessed 
not in isolation but in comparison with those of other sources of energy. 
Secondly, an international nuclear safety culture was gradually emerging which 
encompassed quality assurance, operational safety and the legal framework of 
all conventions and standards governing the use of nuclear energy. Thirdly, 
advanced models of currrent types of reactor and designs for new types of 
reactor were appearing. Fourthly, repositories were actually being 
constructed for low- and medium-level wastes and a consensus had been achieved 
on the requirements for high-level waste repositories. Finally, and perhaps 
most importantly, although there were still differences in the world and 
although the gap between rich and poor countries remained enormous, the 
climate of international relations had improved; whether it was East-West or 
North-South relations, there was now more talk of practical co-operation and 
less talk of confrontation. That had led to a greater role for international 
organizations and to the initiation of more ambitious forms of co-operation. 
He felt privileged to be part of the Agency's destiny in such a context and 
would do his utmost to serve the Agency well. 
11. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) said that the Group of 77 endorsed the 
appointment of Mr. Blix, and recalled that her delegation had expressed its 
support for his reappointment in June. The Group of 7 7 felt that the very 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 5 


diverse experience acquired by Mr. Blix in the course of his career, 
particularly as a Professor of international law and the Swedish Minister for 
Foreign Affairs, and his lofty vision of the Agency's role in the modern world 
justified the confidence Member States had shown in him. The Director General 
had shown perspicacity and determination at some difficult moments, especially 
after the Chernobyl accident when he had been one of the first on the spot to 
assess what measures were necessary. The Group of 7 7 also appreciated the 
Director General's positive attitude towards developing countries, and 
specifically his willingness to increase the number of inspectors and other 
staff from those countries so as to ensure that they were more equitably 
represented. Finally, Mr. Blix had shown himself to be a firm supporter of 
dialogue between the Agency and the Group of 77, particularly during the 
preparation of the budget, and it was to be hoped that during his new term the 
Agency would continue, at his prompting, to help developing countries gain 
access to the benefits of nuclear energy. 


12. Mr. QIN (China), Mr. XYDAS (Greece), speaking on behalf of the 
Western Europe and Others Group, and Mr. STEPANENKO (Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic), speaking on behalf of the Eastern Europe Group, also 
congratulated the Director General on his reappointment. 
Mr. WIRYONO (Indonesia), Vice-President, took the Chair. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (GC(XXXIII)/873) (resumed) 


13. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that his country was convinced that the 
Agency could play a crucial role in protecting the environment by promoting a 
greater use of nuclear power, in strengthening the non-proliferation regime 
through safeguards and in accelerating economic development through the 
promotion of peaceful nuclear techniques. 
14. During the past 50 years, over 150 billion tons of carbon had been 
released into the atmosphere, and the annual rate now exceeded 6 billion tons. 
The catastrophic consequences of the greenhouse effect, acid rain and climatic 
changes were taking their toll in different parts of the world. No one could 
remain indifferent when faced with the slow suffocation which resulted from 
the silent destruction of the environment. It had been estimated that, if per 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 6 


capita consumption of fossil fuels in developing countries reached even half 
the level found in advanced countries, carbon emissions would double to 
12 billion tons per year. 


15. However, developing countries - where per capita energy consumption was 
only one tenth of that in advanced countries - could not be asked to stop 
using fossil fuels, forgo industrial growth and practice conservation. For 
those countries, nuclear power represented a great hope, and to deny them 
nuclear power in the name of non-proliferation was to invite environmental 
disaster. The large-scale and worldwide use of nuclear and other 
environmentally benign technologies for power generation should be 
encouraged. The advanced countries, which were responsible for 70% of the 
world's pollution, bore a grave moral responsibility for developing such 
technologies and making them available to poor countries, whose resources they 
had exploited for the benefit of their own industrial development. The Agency 
could play a major role in launching a high-priority programme of North-South 
co-operation aimed at developing small- and medium-power reactors for use in 
the Third World. There should also be South-South co-operation in that area, 
since a number of developing countries had now advanced to the point where 
they could profitably share their experience with other Third World countries. 
16. In view of the reservations and misconceptions about nuclear safety 
which persisted in many industrialized countries, the Agency should embark on 
a vigorous information campaign. It was time to stop being defensive and 
apologetic about using an energy source which was the safest currently 
available. 
17. His delegation commended the positive role which the Agency was playing 
in strengthening nuclear safety. It also welcomed the recent establishment of 
the World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO). For its part, Pakistan had 
already acceded to the two safety conventions adopted previously by the 
Agency's General Conference. 
18. The question of amending Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had been before 
the General Conference and the Board of Governors for 13 years. In 1978, the 
General Conference had adopted resolution GC(XXII)/RES/361, in which a 
majority of Member States had agreed to a moderate expansion of the Board to 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 7 


make possible an increase in the representation of the Africa and Middle East 


and South Asia (MESA) regions. However, no concrete progress had been made 


towards implementing that resolution. While Pakistan was not opposed to the 
amendment of Article VI as a whole being considered by the Conference in 
response to the legitimate concerns of other countries, priority should first 
be given to rectifying the injustice done to the Africa and MESA regions, 
which represented almost 40% of the Agency's membership and about 25% of the 
Board's membership. Many of those countries had reached an advanced stage in 
nuclear technology, produced substantial quantities of nuclear materials and 
had active nuclear programmes. Consequently, they could neither accept 
continuing under-representation nor agree to any ammendment of Article VI as a 
whole which was made at their expense. 


19. Safeguards and technical assistance constituted the two pillars on 
which the future of the Agency rested, and one could not exist without the 
other. Pakistan fully supported the Agency's safeguards activities. However, 
the safeguards budget had now risen to some US $52 million, outstripping the 
resources allocated to technical assistance. If the Agency was to retain its 
effectiveness and credibility, a clear and equitable balance between those two 
activities would have to be maintained. The best way of achieving that was to 
finance technical assistance through the Regular Budget or other equally 
assured and predictable resources, as envisaged in resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388. 
20. Resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386, adopted by the General Conference in 1981, 
called for a substantial increase in the number of Professional staff members 
drawn from developing countries at all levels and for the imbalance which 
existed at that time to be rectified within four years (in other words, by 
1985 at the latest). Eight years later, developing countries held 
164 Professional posts out of a total of 631 compared with only 74 in 1981. 
That was a welcome improvement. Nevertheless, developing countries 
represented two thirds of the Agency's membership and could now offer 
candidates of the highest competence and qualifications in very different 
areas. According to indications given in 1981, those countries should now 
occupy at least one third of Professional posts. That target was still far 
from being met, and at the policy-making level in particular representation 
remained poor. His delegation therefore requested the Director General to 
intensify his efforts to correct that imbalance in the coming four years. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 8 


21. His delegation was in a position to approve the Agency's programme and 
budget (GC(XXXlII)/875), on which it had already expressed its views in the 
Board of Governors. However, the Agency should place greater emphasis on 
nuclear power and nuclear safety and should also give more attention to the 
application of nuclear techniques in agriculture and medicine. The latter 
were very important for a large number of developing Member States and had 
proved to be highly cost-effective. There was room for economies in the 
Agency's administrative expenditures and for even greater savings in the 
safeguards area. 
22. As Ms. Benazir Bhutto, Pakistan's Prime Minister, had repeatedly 
stated, Pakistan was fully committed to using nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes only. It was in favour of the speedy conclusion of agreements 
leading to the reduction and eventual elimination of all nuclear weapons and 
other weapons of mass destruction and supported efforts to draw up a complete 
test-ban treaty. As far back as 1972, at the time of the inauguration of its 
first power reactor, Pakistan had proposed the establishment of a nuclear-free 
zone in South Asia. That remained the corner-stone of its nuclear policy. 
That proposal had been repeatedly endorsed by an overwhelming majority of 
States at the United Nations General Assembly. Pakistan had also made 
concrete proposals for strengthening the non-proliferation regime in South 
Asia. Recently, Pakistan and India had signed an agreement not to attack each 
other's nuclear installations. Pakistan had already ratified that agreement. 
That represented a small but significant confidence-building step which his 
country hoped would be followed by other measures in response to its 
proposals. The poor peoples of South Asia, who made up one fifth of the 
world's population, could not afford to waste their scarce and precious 
economic resources on the luxury of a futile nuclear-weapons race. 
23. Pakistan was among the countries least endowed with conventional energy 
resources. It was estimated that by the turn of the century an installed 
capacity of 20 000 MW(e) would be required. Of that, 12 000 MW(e) could be 
generated through local hydroelectric, gas and coal resources, leaving a gap 
of more than 8000 MW(e). It was expected that half of that gap would have to 
be filled by nuclear power, and his Government had therefore embarked on a 
vigorous nuclear power programme. That programme included co-operation with 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 9 


other countries in the construction - under Agency's safeguards - of nuclear 


power plants to meet short-term requirements. In the long term, Pakistan 


planned to develop its domestic capability to design and construct nuclear 


power plants in order to achieve greater self-reliance in the energy sector 


and to reduce foreign currency expenditure. It had already created a sizeable 


industrial infrastructure in various areas of nuclear technology: it had, for 
example, acquired comprehensive capabilities in the front end of the nuclear 
fuel cycle. Locally manufactured fuel had performed satisfactorily for the 
past ten years in Pakistan's power reactor. In spite of difficulties in 
obtaining spare parts and supplies for the safeguarded Karachi nuclear power 
plant (KANUPP), Pakistan had successfully operated that facility since 1976. 
In June 1989, Pakistan had joined the Candu owners group, a move which would 
help it to exchange operating data and to obtain safety-related information. 
His country was grateful to the Agency for its assistance in enhancing the 
safety of the KANUPP plant by sending Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) 
and Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team (ASSET) missions. 


24. Pakistan also attached great importance to nuclear applications in 
agriculture, medicine and industry. Research carried out in the country's 
three specialized centres had enabled new varieties (for example, of rice and 
cotton) to be obtained which had been introduced for general cultivation and 
had produced significant economic gains. For example, the development of the 
NIAB-78 cotton mutant had revolutionized national cotton production and had 
increase farmers' income by US $300 million annually. An irradiation facility 
used for sterilizing medical and agricultural products was now operational. 
Services of that type could be very useful in Pakistan. Nuclear medicine 
techniques had been used to treat more than 170 000 patients in 1988. 
Pakistan was willing, either through the Agency or bilaterally, to share with 
other developing countries the fruits of the experience it had gained in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the fields of electricity generation, 
agriculture or medicine. 
25. His country continued to organize each year an international summer 
college on physics and contemporary needs. That course was held in 
conjunction with the International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in 
Trieste, whose achievements were to be commended, as was the leadership of 
Mr. Salam. The activities of the ICTP were of immense value to the countries 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 10 


of the Third World. Pakistan had also actively participated in regional 
programmes within the RCA framework, hosting a number of activities under that 
programme. 


26. As the twenty-first century approached, countries and peoples were 
becoming increasingly aware of the need to work together to strengthen world 
peace, reduce pollution and overcome poverty. For all countries the long-term 
availability of clean and safe energy resources was indispensable for 
achieving sustainable economic development. The nuclear option had to be 
preserved, since it offered the possibility of both protecting the environment 
and conserving fossil fuel resources for future generations. The Agency could 
play a major role in meeting those objectives. 
27. Mr. EMOVON (Nigeria) welcomed the increase in the total resources 
available for technical co-operation activities in 1988, which were nearly 
10% higher than the previous year. Those activities provided the most 
tangible benefits of membership of the Agency for the majority of developing 
Member States, which were generally unable to benefit directly from the 
advantages of nuclear power and which, in many cases, would not be able to do 
so in the foreseeable future. In appreciation of the Agency's technical 
assistance activities, Nigeria had pledged US $91 000 to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) for 1990. 
28. The problems of financing nuclear power programmes in developing 
countries would have to be dealt with before such countries were able to enjoy 
the benefits of nuclear power. His delegation therefore urged the Agency to 
implement the recommendation which the senior expert group had made on that 
subject. 
29. During the past year, the Agency had paid greater attention to the 
problems of developing countries in the areas of waste management and 
radiation protection. Waste Management Advisory Programme (WAMAP) and 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team (RAPAT) missions had been conducted in 
about a dozen developing countries in 1988. A RAPAT mission had visited 
Nigeria from 19 to 25 November 1988 and as a result a long-term co-operation 
agreement between the Agency and Nigeria was now being prepared. Furthermore, 
draft national legislation on radiation protection and nuclear safety would 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 11 


shortly become law. Nigeria considered it important that, in one of its 
recommendations, the RAPAT mission had recognized Nigeria as a potential host 
country for a number of activities under a regional co-operation agreement. 
His delegation was therefore pleased that the Agency had convened a meeting 
during the present session of the General Conference to discuss a draft legal 
framework for establishing a regional co-operation agreement for Africa. He 
very much hoped that negotiations between the Agency and African States on 
that subject would be completed before the next session of the General 
Conference. 


30. His delegation noted with great satisfaction that, pursuant to General 
Conference resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/490, an expert group meeting had been 
convened in Vienna to formulate a draft code of practice for international 
transactions involving nuclear waste. The active participation of the 
Nigerian expert in the work of that group underlined Nigeria's determination 
never again to be the victim of illicit dumping or transactions involving any 
kind of hazardous wastes. His country hoped that the planned code would 
become a binding international convention. 
31. He wished to announce that his Government intended to ratify in the 
near future both the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
and the Convention on Emergency Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident 
or Radiological Emergency. 
32. The assistance which the Agency continued to provide to developing 
Member States through the joint FAO/IAEA Division to enable those countries to 
improve their agriculture and food production through the use of isotopes, 
irradiation and related techniques, including biotechnology, was more vital 
than ever. The application of nuclear techniques in medicine also made a 
significant contribution to the welfare of developing nations. Nigeria very 
much appreciated the dosimetry services which had been provided to it and to 
two other Member States where such services were not available locally. His 
delegation therefore urged that additional resources be made available for 
that programme area. 
33. The agreement reached recently in Geneva on a set of principles for the 
acceptance of trade in irradiated food was a step in the right direction. The 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 12 


problem of feeding the enormous populations of developing countries was often 
exacerbated by high post-harvest losses. The extension of the shelf-life of 
food was thus a vital tool in the fight against hunger worldwide. 


34. The previous year his delegation had drawn the General Conference's 
attention to the importance which the Nigerian Government attached to Phase II 
of the BICOT project, which was included as a footnote-a/ project in the 
1989-90 programme. The primary objective of that phase was to eradicate a 
second species of tsetse fly from the original project area and to devise 
practical means of preventing re-invasion of the area which had already been 
cleared. To implementate that phase, donor funding of US $730 600 was 
required for the period 1989-91. In that connection, his country wished to 
thank the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and Belgium for 
their extrabudgetary contributions to the financing of that and other Nigerian 
footnote-a/ projects. It hoped that additional donors would assist Nigeria in 
that area. 
35. His delegation supported the Agency's programme and the budget of 
US $162 852 000 for 1990, which represented an increase of 0.2%. However, it 
was concerned at the declining rate of implementation of activities financed 
from the TACF: the unused balance of US $7 958 083 in 1988 represented 15.3% of 
the funds available. Given the importance for developing countries of 
promotional activities involving the provision of expert services, training, 
equipment and the applications of nuclear energy in agriculture, medicine and 
industry, the Secretariat should make efforts to correct that trend. 
36. In view of that situation, his delegation, although ready to accept the 
compromise reached on indicative planning figures for 1990, 1991 and 1992, 
wished to join others in urging the Agency to take the necessary steps, as a 
matter of urgency, to ensure that technical assistance was financed on a more 
assured basis, as envisaged by General Conference resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388. 
37. He welcomed the proposal to organize a senior expert symposium on 
electricity and the environment in 1991 and endorsed the steps taken by the 
Agency to postpone or cancel certain meetings in order to release the 
financial and human resources necessary for the preparation of that important 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 13 


symposium. In that connection, he also welcomed the emphasis given in 
the 1989-90 programme to the processing and storage of nuclear wastes, and in 
particular, spent sources used in industry, medicine, research and training. 


38. The question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute was a 
matter of some concern. The gross under-representation of the regions of 
Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia had persisted for too long and 
must be corrected. It was regrettable that, although the issue had been on 
the General Conference's agenda for a decade, no solution was in sight. The 
Agency should therefore strive to find an equitable solution. The need to 
correct the present imbalance was a prime concern of his delegation. His 
delegation had also given careful consideration to the proposal to amend 
Article VI as a whole put forward by Italy, Spain, Belgium and Sweden 
in 1986. While stressing the independent nature of the proposal made by the 
African group, he felt that the time had come for all those interested in 
enlarging the Board of Governors to work conscientiously to find a formula 
that would be equitable and in the interests of the Agency as a whole. 
39. The Nigerian Government considered that the abundant energy resources 
with which Nigeria was endowed should be exploited in a rational manner that 
would ensure sustainable economic development. To that end, it had announced 
a new national science and technology policy and had drawn up guidelines on 
energy. The Energy Commission of Nigeria, set up in December 1988, had been 
given the task of formulating national policy and of charting the course of 
energy development and utilization in the country. The rational and optimum 
use of available energy resources was dependent on balanced exploitation, and 
it was the Commission's function to ensure that a rational mix of options was 
found. Nigeria felt that it should consider all energy options, including 
nuclear power. An institutional framework was being established to promote 
and carry out research activities in a systematic manner based on clear 
national objectives. 
40. South Africa's nuclear capabilities were a source of grave concern to 
his delegation. The previous year, the General Conference had adopted 
resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/503 in which, after strongly condemning South Africa, 
it had stated that it would take a decision in 1989 on the recommendation made 
in 1987 by the Board of Governors, calling for the suspension of South Africa 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 14 


from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership of the Agency. 
Another year had elapsed without any sign of progress or even any movement in 
the right direction. Instead, there had been the usual flurry of activity and 
utterances designed to thwart the efforts and aspirations of those concerned 
about the issue. The time had come to ask South Africa for action, not 
promises which were never kept. His delegation urged all those who believed 
in the universal brotherhood of man and in the principles of the Agency's 
Statute and the United Nations Charter to prevail upon South Africa to show 
good faith and heed the requests of the world community. 


41. Many people regarded the events currently taking place in South Africa 
and in the region as signs of progress and urged those who were concerned 
about the situation to give South Africa more time. Unfortunately, the 
situation had lasted a long time and there was no evidence to indicate that 
the leopard was about to change its spots. There were good grounds for 
concern since, despite numerous Agency resolutions, South Africa had 
contemptuously failed to submit its nuclear facilities to safeguards. The 
elections which had recently taken place in South Africa, without the 
participation of Blacks, showed that the racist regime was determined to hold 
power to the exclusion of the black majority. Nigeria, and others who shared 
its beliefs, therefore maintained that, since the racist regime of 
South Africa continued to disregard the basic principle of equality of all 
races and to promote the non-peaceful uses of nuclear energy, that regime 
could not participate in the work of the General Conference, where the 
principle of universality was observed irrespective of the colour of a man's 
skin. 


42. He urged all delegates at the present session of the General Conference 
to send a clear message to the racist regime in Pretoria when item 21 of the 
agenda was considered. Pressure on South Africa to abolish its apartheid 
policy would have to be intensified. 
43. Mr. STEPANENKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
the thirty-third session of the General Conference was taking place at a time 


of positive changes in international relations. As a result of the realistic 


and responsible attitudes that were increasingly being adopted in that area, 


there was a trend for global security to be guaranteed not by proliferation of 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 15 


weapons, as had previously been the case, but by their reduction, the 


strengthening of trust and greater multilateral co-operation. The positive 


changes occurring in the world created the right climate for extensive and 


active international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in 


which the Agency had an important role to play. 


44. Accidents at nuclear power plants could lead to serious consequences if 
not brought under control. One such example was the Chernobyl accident, which 
had had a significant impact on Byelorussia. It had led to major changes in 
Byelorussia's economic and political activity and cleanup operations had 
required considerable human and material resources. 
45. At present, 18% of Byelorussia's agricultural land (more than 1.5 million 
hectares) was contaminated to varying degees and nearly 115 000 people were 
2 


living on land where contamination exceeded 15 Ci per km . The number of 
persons registered for special treatment as outpatients in Byelorussian health 
establishments was 173 000, including some 37 400 children. 


46. The set of measures taken after the accident in the contaminated areas 
had substantially reduced the internal and external doses received, but those 
measures could obviously not totally eliminate the consequences of what had 
happened. It was therefore vital to continue to provide comprehensive 
outpatient services and treatment for the population of the contaminated zones 
and to increase medical supervision in general, since it was at present 
impossible to predict with certainty the long-term effects. Furthermore, 
difficulties were being experienced in obtaining medicines, modern medical and 
biological equipment and radiation monitoring instruments. 
47. Matters relating to the continuation of work to eliminate the 
consequences of the accident had been specially included on the agenda of the 
July meeting of the Supreme Soviet of the Byelorussian SSR, which had 
considered a draft programme for 1990-95 for the elimination in Byelorussia of 
the consequences of the Chernobyl accident. The draft programme was based on 
the principle that the population should be able to live in the contaminated 
area without restriction of its activities and should be able to obtain 
uncontaminated agricultural produce. It foresaw the evacuation, in the first 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.316 
page 16 


stage, of 87 villages (more than 11 000 inhabitants) and, in the second stage, 
of 423 villages (104 000 inhabitants). The implementation of all the measures 
planned would require more than 10 000 million roubles. The preparation of 
the draft programme was continuing and it would be submitted for the approval 
of the Supreme Soviet of Byelorussia at its October meeting. 


48. He had discussed the consequences of the Chernobyl accident at such 
length because he believed that such information was of interest to the 
participants in the General Conference. That accident was a very sad and 
expensive lesson which mankind should never forget. 
49. It could be seen from the documents submitted to the General Conference 
how successfully those Agency programmes which his delegation, like others, 
considered to be very important had been implemented: those included 
programmes in the areas of the technical co-operation, nuclear power, nuclear 
safety and radiation protection, safeguards, and information and technical 
services. The programme which had been prepared and implemented in the area 
of nuclear safety and radiation protection was particularly deserving of 
support. 
50. The efforts made by the Agency to create a climate of confidence, 
mutual understanding and co-operation between States were highly appreciated. 
An important factor in that process was the effective application of Agency 
safeguards which had, in a relatively short space of time, developed into an 
excellent system of control that provided reliable and adequate surveillance 
and information. He was pleased to note that more States had signed 
safeguards agreements and that no anomaly had been detected in 1988 which 
would indicate the diversion of safeguarded nuclear material for the 
manufacture of any nuclear explosive devices for military purposes. 
51. His delegation approved the Agency's budget for 1990. That document 
properly reflected those areas of the Agency's activities which were most 
strongly supported by the majority of Member States, namely nuclear power, the 
nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear safety, environmental protection and nuclear 
applications. The allocations for 1990 provided a stable financial basis for 
the implementation of the programme. The balance achieved in the budget was 
the result of considerable hard work on the part of the Secretariat and the 
Board of Governors. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 17 


52. His delegation appreciated the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities and fully supported their expansion. Growth in that programme was, 
of course, impossible without a corresponding increase in resources, and such 
an increase had in fact been reflected in the rise in the total volume of 
voluntary contributions for technical assistance, to US $46.5 million. The 
system of indicative planning figures had demonstrated its effectiveness and 
provided reliable financing for that programme. 
53. With regard to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and the 
revision of Article VI as a whole, he considered that the present composition 
of the Board of Governors correctly reflected the existing balance of forces, 
ensured fair representation of the interests of Member States and was in line 
with the objective of improving efficiency. 
54. In conclusion, his delegation hoped that the Agency's leading role in 
the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in solving the world's 
energy and ecological problems would continue to be strengthened in the future. 
55. Mr. TETENYI (Hungary) said that the present session of the General 
Conference was talcing place against a background of extremely rapid change in 
international relations, and of increasing recognition of the importance of 
co-operation. The Soviet Union and the United States had an historic 
opportunity to provide the political basis necessary for those changes by 
moving firmly towards nuclear disarmament. 
56. While agreements on other forms of disarmament were of prime 
importance, it remained essential to continue to promote the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime. Comprehensive and effective safeguards arrangements 
for all peaceful nuclear facilities should be worked out by and for all 
countries. His delegation attached great importance to the Agency's 
safeguards programme. Safeguards activities, including the work of 
inspectors, should be carried out routinely and free of any technical and 
administrative hindrance and should be conducted in all Member States. In 
that connection, the slowness of designation procedures for inspectors in some 
countries was a cause for concern. Since such delays had implications for the 
credibility of the system, his delegation favoured a wider application of 
simplified procedures for the designation of safeguards inspectors. 

GC(XXXL1I)/OR.316 
page 18 


57. Adequate resources were required to maintain the efficient functioning 
of that system. He therefore supported the proposed modification of the 
safeguards financing formula which the Board of Governors had submitted to the 
General Conference, although further negotiations must be undertaken without 
delay in order to find a long-term solution which would enable the safeguards 
system to cover all peaceful nuclear facilities. 
58. The date of the fourth review conference of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was approaching. The value of the 
Agency's work in applying the Treaty had been recognized during the second 
meeting of the Preparatory Committee, which had been held recently in Geneva. 
His country supported the non-proliferation regime and the universal 
application of the Treaty, and felt that all proposals that might increase the 
number of parties to NPT or strengthen the Treaty should be considered. He 
urged all Member States not party to NPT to accede to it, and to all parties 
which had not yet done so to conclude safeguards agreements with the Agency in 
conformity with the Treaty's provisions. The desire to make NPT and the 
Agency's safeguards system universal in application should not, however, serve 
as a pretext for heated political debate and accusations. 
59. He was pleased to note that the use of nuclear power had continued to 
increase worldwide in 1988. The nuclear industry was performing well, and the 
availability factor of nuclear power plants was improving. In Hungary, the 
four nuclear reactors in Paks had provided almost 50% of the electricity 
generated in the country, with a cummulative average load factor in 1988 of 
85.4%, which was the highest in the world. 
60. In spite of the ever-growing share of nuclear power in world 
electricity generation and of the side effects of fossil fuels, public 
opposition to nuclear power remained strong. An increase in electricity 
demand and the need to replace some installations meant that Hungary had to 
make a decision on the future of nuclear power. In order for that decision to 
be taken in a rational manner, it would be necessary - inter alia - to 
increase public confidence in nuclear energy. It was thus essential to 
maintain an excellent safety record, to present those results to the public, 
and to support educational programmes on the various aspects of nuclear 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 19 


energy. The Agency's studies on the risks and benefits of various energy 
sources were very useful in that connection and could facilitate dialogue with 
representatives of environmental protection movements. Other governmental and 
non-governmental organizations such as WHO and the International Radiation 
Protection Association could also help make nuclear power more acceptable by 
focusing on problems of particular relevance to their field of activity. 
Co-operation between several organizations had led to the holding of an 


international conference in Hungary the previous September on energy options 
and risk education. Great interest had been shown in the papers presented by 
the Agency on that occasion. 


61. There was growing international interest in the legal aspects of the 
use of nuclear energy. The international conventions drafted with the 
Agency's assistance had made an important contribution to strengthening 
international co-operation in that area. On 20 September, Hungary had signed 
the Joint Protocol Relating to the Application of the Vienna Convention and 
the Paris Convention on civil liability for nuclear damage, and it continued 
to monitor the progress of the working group on liability for nuclear damage. 
62. His delegation welcomed activities aimed at improving nuclear safety 
and noted with satisfaction that not a single accident with radiological 
consequences for the environment had taken place in nuclear power plants 
during the previous year. The completion of the Basic Safety Principles for 
Nuclear Power Plants and the revision of the NUSS codes were very important 
for the dissemination and use of the knowledge and experience acquired by the 
Agency and its Member States. A programme had been initiated in Hungary to 
check the compliance of existing regulations with the Agency codes. The 
preliminary findings of that programme indicated that basically Hungary's 
safety standards met the requirements laid down in those codes. 
63. An OSART mission to Hungary in November 1988 had visited a WWER-type 
plant for the first time. The mission had been very well organized and the 
team included experienced specialists, who had concluded that the level of 
safety at the Paks nuclear power plant was high. The team's suggestions and 
recommendations had been carefully analysed and corrective measures had been 
taken. Hungary had requested the Agency to organize an INSARR (Integrated 
Safety Assessment of Research Reactors) mission to evaluate the safety of the 
research reactor at the Central Research Institute for Physics in Budapest, 
renovation work on which was nearing completion. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 20 


64. The quality of the Agency's technical assistance programmes was to be 
commended. Hungary had benefited from the programme but had also participated 
in it as a donor by awarding fellowships and hosting training courses. 
Hungarian experts had also been invited to several countries. International 
co-operation and Agency technical assistance were indispensable to the 
financing of research on nuclear techniques and their applications. His 
country's contribution to the TACF was increasing and in 1990 would reach the 
local currency equivalent of US $95 000, which was in line with its share of 
the target. 
65. The next few years would be crucial for the nuclear industry and would 
decide the future of nuclear power in the world. He was confident that, by 
working together within the Agency in a climate of mutual respect to make the 
nuclear industry safe and reliable and to prevent its misuse for non-peaceful 
purposes, the challenges of the future would be met. 
66. With those comments, his delegation approved the Agency's Annual Report 
for 1988 and commended the activities undertaken by the Director General as 
reflected in the documents submitted by the Secretariat. 
67. Mr. KRSTIC (Yugoslovia) stated that the present session of the 
General Conference was taking place at a time when other important 
international meetings had been organized with a view to intensifying efforts 
to resolve the problems of world peace, security and economic development. 
Under such circumstances, the results of the Conference's work took on even 
greater significance. 
68. During the Ninth Conference of Heads of State or Government of 
Non-aligned Countries, which had taken place in Belgrade in September, the 
question of nuclear energy had figured prominently and had been mentioned in 
the final declaration as well as in some resolutions. With regard to the 
present world situation, the view of that conference had been that there was 
reason for hope but no cause for undue optimism. 
69. In a document it had adopted on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
the Belgrade conference had declared that all States should have free access 
on a non-discriminatory basis to technology, equipment and materials relating 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and that account should be taken of the 

GC(XXKIII)/OR.316 
page 21 


special needs of developing countries. The Heads of State and Government had 
deplored all pressures and threats aimed at preventing developing countries 
from pursuing their peaceful nuclear programmes. They had reiterated their 
view that the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should not be used as a 
pretext to prevent States from exercising their right to acquire and develop 
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. In another document concerning 
science and technology, it had been stated that the relevant agencies of the 
United Nations system should arrange training programmes for experts from 
developing countries and other human resources development programmes in the 
field of science and technology. 


70. In adopting a law prohibiting the construction of nuclear power plants, 
Yugoslavia had decided to meet its energy needs for a certain period from 
traditional energy sources. However, that did not mean that the country was 
not interested in expanding its co-operation with the Agency and its 
Member States in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Yugoslavia's interest 
was particularly strong in the fields of radiation safety, technical 
co-operation, fusion research and nuclear applications in industry, medicine 
and agriculture. 


71. All energy sources were available in Yugoslavia, and the use of nuclear 
energy was just one part of the country's development and economic policy 
strategy. The strategy included the possibility of achieving an overall 
reduction in energy consumption, which should contribute to environmental 
protection. Any neglect of those different aspects would have dire 
consequences. It was in that context that the Yugoslav moratorium should be 
understood, and it was for that reason that a certain period was required for 
a general review of all energy options. 
72. His delegation could approve the Annual Report for 1988 (GC(XXXIII)/873), 
as the tasks foreseen in the Agency's programme had been successfully 
completed. It also approved the budget presented in document GC(XXXIIl)/875, 
which was well balanced. 
73. His country attached great importance to the strengthening of 
international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiation protection and had 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 22 


therefore ratified the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material and the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident. As 
for the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency, the ratification procedure was under way. 


74. He was pleased to report that Yugoslavia had achieved excellent results 
in its technical co-operation with the Agency. For the 1986-90 period, 19 out 
of 21 projects had already been completed. Of particular note were projects 
concerning the modernization of a research reactor, the construction of a 
cyclotron, the development of dositnetry techniques, radiological protection 
and personnel training. In 1988, with Agency assistance, seven experts from 
developing countries had received specialized training in Yugoslavia, while 
six Yugoslav experts had been able to study abroad. In addition, and also 
with the Agency's help, nuclear safety and inspection teams had been set up at 
the Krsko plant. Yugoslavia looked forward to further positive developments 
and co-operation with the Agency. 
75. There was no doubt that the Agency's technical co-operation activities 
were one of its most significant functions. Technical co-operation was an 
excellent vehicle for the transfer of technology, and the Agency deserved full 
recognition for the results achieved in that area. He wished to point out 
that the Yugoslav scientific community was very interested in fusion. A 
special council had been set up to deal with that subject and to approve the 
research programme. 
76. Finally, his delegation highly valued the Agency's contribution to 
environmental protection. Its activities in that sphere were of fundamental 
importance. 
77. Mr. CACCIA DOMINIONI (Commission of the European Communities) said 
there was no doubt that, under the leadership of Mr. Hans Blix, the 
constructive and fruitful relationship which had been established between the 
Agency and the European Community would continue to be strengthened. 
78. The previous day, the delegate of France, speaking on behalf of the 
Community and its Member States, had referred to the level of electricity 
production from nuclear power plants in the Community. In July 1989 the 
Commission had approved an updated version of its Illustrative Nuclear 
Programme, which had been drawn up in accordance with the EURATOM Treaty and 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 23 


was to be published soon. It dealt with nuclear industries and - particularly 
the nuclear power plant industry - in the community and the completion of the 
single market by the end of 1992. 


79. At the World Energy Conference in Montreal in October, the Commission 
had provided a preview of its study on major energy themes up to the 
year 2010, in which possible energy options were indicated. One was the 
conventional route, which involved continuing growth in energy consumption and 
carbon dioxide emissions. Another option suggested a way of controlling 
energy consumption and its environmental impact while at the same time 
maintaining economic growth; that was the challenge of sustainable energy 
growth. 
80. At the Montreal Conference, the Commission had emphasized that European 
energy policy was increasingly being developed at the Community level. As a 
consequence, the energy market was also included in the plans for 1992. The 
Commission's blueprint for the completion of a single energy market had 
received political endorsement from the Community's Council of Ministers in 
November 1988. During 1989, the Commission had presented a first series of 
proposals which, if adopted, would transform the Community's energy sector. 
All of those initiatives were designed to increase competition in that sector 
and to remove national barriers. The establishment of a single market 
of 325 million people would reduce the price of energy, thus benefiting 
consumers and increasing the competitiveness of Community industries in world 
markets. 
81. The Commission's other priorities in the energy field were security of 
energy supply - where nuclear energy could play an important role - and, of 
course, the environment. 
82. As Mr. Blix had pointed out in his statement, the environment had been 
one of the most prominent issues in public debate during the past year. 
Nuclear power was now in a key position. He congratulated Mr. Blix and the 
Agency on helping to draw the attention of senior Government officials to the 
global environmental problems of the thinning ozone layer and the greenhouse 
effect. 
83. Following the Chernobyl accident, the Commission had drawn up a number 
of reports on nuclear safety problems. On the basis of those reports, the 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.316 
page 24 


Community's Council of Ministers had announced its support in June 1989 for 
the Commission to play a more active role, both at the Community level and at 
a wider international level, in creating international understanding of the 
methods used to ensure the safety of nuclear installations, in research and 
development, and in the continuous critical review of all elements 
contributing to nuclear safety. 


84. With regard to the medical aspects of safety, the Community had adopted 
or initiated further measures concerning health protection against 
contaminated food, the improvement of information systems for emergencies, the 
establishment of networks for protection and mutual assistance in the event of 
a nuclear accident or radiological emergency, and the provision of information 
to the public on the dangers of nuclear energy and protection against them. 
By July 1989, the Community had established a regulatory system setting the 
maximum permitted levels of radioactivity in foodstuffs; that was a coherent 


instrument aimed at correcting some of the shortcomings which had been 
apparent in the action taken following the Chernobyl accident. A report on 
the activities undertaken by the Community following that accident had been 
published in April 1989. 


85. The Community's nuclear research and development programme had been 
established within the framework of a five-year programme based on the Single 
European Act, which had entered into force in July 1987. Research and 
development work was performed through specific programmes implemented by the 
Community's Joint Research Centre or through cost-sharing projects carried out 
under contract. Under certain conditions, States which were not Community 
members could participate in those programmes. One of the main objectives of 
the programme was to contribute to the creation of an internationally accepted 
logical basis for the safety of nuclear plants. The Commission therefore 
attached great importance to collaboration with the Agency, whose role in such 
matters was absolutely crucial. 
86. As part of the Community's research programme for the period 1987-91, 
research on radioactive waste management and disposal had been actively 
pursued during the previous year. In addition to studies on waste management 
systems, waste characterization and natural and artificial barriers between 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.316 
page 25 


stored or disposed-of waste and the biosphere, the Community was developing 
underground laboratories as part of pilot projects aimed at demonstrating the 
feasibility and safety of isolating radioactive waste in geological 
formations. Under the PAGIS (Performance Assessment of Geological Isolation 
Systems) programme, in which many experts from the Community had participated, 
the radiological consequences of high-level waste disposal had been 
evaluated. The study had shown that, provided sites were well chosen, clay, 
salt and granite were able to ensure safe disposal. The results had been 
presented on 30 June 1989 in Madrid to a public audience that included 
experts, decision-makers and political representatives. A new multi-year 
research programme scheduled to start in 1990 had been approved by the 
Commission. 


87. In the field of radiation protection, the Community's Council of 
Ministers had approved in June 1989 a research programme costing 21.2 million ECU 
over two years, which placed special emphasis on human exposure to radiation 
and radioactivity, the consequences of such exposure (including assessment, 
prevention and treatment), the risks involved and risk management. As part of 
that work, the Commission would actively participate in several Agency 
co-ordinated research programmes. 


88. The European fusion programme was an excellent example of commitment to 
co-operation. The twelve Member States of the Community, as well as Sweden and 
Switzerland, were working on a long-term programme aimed at constructing 
reactor prototypes with a view to industrial production and marketing. 
89. The largest tokamak machine in the world had been constructed and 
operated through the Joint European Torus (JET) project. As had already been 
reported to the Conference, the conceptual design phase of the International 
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER), initiated in April 1988 under the 
auspices of the Agency by the European Community, Japan, the United States and 
the USSR, was making progress and was due to be completed on 31 December 1990. 
The Community's special interest was not in the theory but in the possibility 
of practical co-operation for the design, construction and operation of a test 
reactor. 
90. The Commission considered that, from the technical and scientific 
standpoint, research would have progressed sufficiently by the early 1990s for 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.316 
page 26 


the detailed design of a tokamak-type engineering test reactor to be 
undertaken. Such a "next-step" device would provide a further unique 
opportunity for international co-operation and might benefit from the support 
expressed at the highest political levels for increased collaboration on 
nuclear fusion. 


91. The Commission greatly appreciated the continuing co-operation in the 
safeguards field between the Agency, the European Community and the Member 
States of the Community under the agreements of 1973, 1976 and 1978. The 
adherence of Spain in April 1989 to the relevant agreement was particularly 
important. 
92. In 1988 EURATOM had applied its safeguards to plutonium, highlyenriched 
uranium and other nuclear material and heavy water in over 700 nuclear 
installations in the Community. Approximately 7300 man-days of inspections 
had been carried out. As for the Agency, it had again devoted approximately 
40% of its worldwide inspection effort to the Community in 1988, which made 
the Community the Agency's largest customer for safeguards. From that the 
Commission concluded that the combined safeguards operations of the Agency and 
EURATOM confirmed the Community's commitment to non-proliferation. 
93. The European Commission attached the greatest importance to its 
co-operation with the Agency not only in safeguards and, of course, safeguards 
research and development work, but also in all other spheres. One example of 
that collaboration was the Commission's contribution to the technical 
assistance programme in the form of fellowships to Asian and Latin American 
nationals for studies at the Community's Joint Research Centre. The 
Commission would endeavour to strengthen further the Community's support for 
the objectives set out in the Agency's Statute. 
Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) resumed the Chair. 


94. Before ending the session, the PRESIDENT gave the floor to the delegate 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who had asked to exercise his right of reply. 
95. Mr. AYTOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) asked whether he could 
exercise his right of reply on the following day, as his statement was in the 
process of being typed. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.316 
page 27 


96. The PRESIDENT said that he had no objection to that request. 
97. Mr. ALKITAL (Iraq) asked the Secretariat, through the President, 
whether it was permissible under the Rules of Procedure for Iran to defer the 
exercise of its right of reply until the following morning. 
98. The PRESIDENT replied that the Secretariat had informed him that 
the Rules of Procedure contained no specific provision that related to the 
timing of the right of reply. He would therefore abide by the decision he had 
just taken. 
The meetins rose at 5.20 p.m. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.3I7 
2 November 1989 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

THIRTY-THIRD <I989) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THt THREt HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH PLENARY MEE1 ING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 27 September I989, at 10.10 a.m. 


Presjdenj-: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 


CONTENTS 


J tern of the 
provisional 


agenda* 


4 Arrangements for the Conference 


(a) 
Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items 
for initial discussion 


(b) 
Closing date of the session and opening 
date of the next session 


Requests for the restoration of voting rights 


General debate and annual report for 1988 (resumed) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Israel 
United Kingdom 
Fi nI and 
Mauritius 
Norway 
Poland 
Indonesia 
Canada 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Argentina 
Mexico 
Switzerland 
Netherlands 


[*] GC<XXXI ID/871 and Add.1-3. 


Paragraphs 


1 


1 


5 


7 


9 


9 19 
38 
47 
63 
73 
89 
98 
109 
115 
129 
140 
152 



6 


4 


6 


8 


163 


18 
37 
46 
62 
72 
88 
97 
108 
114 
128 
139 
151 
163 


The composition of delegations aitending the session is given in document GC(XXXIIl)/INF/274/Rev.2. 
89-4732 (5699e/588e> 



GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXXI1I)/871 and Add.1--3) 
1. The PRESIDENT announced that the General Committee had recommended 
that the General Conference include in its agenda all the items on the 
provisional agenda contained in document GC(XXXI1I)/871 as well as the three 
supplementary items A, B and C requested for inclusion by Member States in 
documents GC(XXXIII)/871/Add.1, 2 and 3. The General Committee also 
recommended that the items be allocated for initial discussion as indicated in 
those documents. 
2. It further recommended that supplementary item A in document 
GC(XXXIII)/871/Add.1 and supplementary item B in document GC(XXXlIl)/871/Add.2 
be inserted immediately after the present item 20 of the provisional agenda in 
document GC(XXXI1I)/871 in the order referred to above and that supplementary 
item C in document GC(XXXIll)/871/Add.3 be inserted between the present 
items 13 and 14 of the provisional agenda. 
3. In addition, the General Committee recommended that the order of items 
proposed for the agenda - with the inclusion of the supplementary items and 
appropriate renumbering of the items - remain unchanged, on the understanding 
that changes might have to be made in the course of business both in plenary 
session and in the Committee of the Whole in order to make best use of the 
time available. 
4. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
(GC(XXXIII)/871; annotation to item 4 (b)) 
5. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had authorized him 
to inform the General Conference that it recommended setting Friday, 
29 September 1989, as the closing date of the thirty-third regular session and 
Monday, 17 September 1990, as the opening date of the thirty-fourth regular 
session of the General Conference, which would be held in Vienna. 
6. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 3 


REQUESTS FOR THE RESTORATION OB1 VOTING RIGHTS (GC(XXXIII)/INF/276) 


7. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee recommended that the 
General Conference should accede to the request made by Peru that the last 
sentence in Article XIX.A of the Statute be invoked in order that Peru might 
be permitted to vote during the current session of the General Conference. 
8 The General Committee's recommendation was accepted. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (resumed) 


9. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) joined previous speakers in congratulating 
the Director General on his re-election and reiterated his delegation's 
appreciation for the excellent work done by the Secretariat under his 
leadership. 
10. In his previous year's statement, he had made reference to the 
slow-down in the development of nuclear energy which had continued to affect 
the nuclear community during the past decade. That regression had had 
far-reaching consequences for the status of the nuclear industry and nuclear 
research the world over. Such developments, which could adversely affect the 
provision of adequate energy supplies in a clean and habitable environment in 
the future, were mainly due to the growing impact of the anti-nuclear energy 
movement on public opinion. 
11. Much of that opposition resulted from insufficient public education, 
lack of knowledge, and latent fears related to nuclear and radiation safety 
issues. The IAEA should therefore further its efforts to recapture the 
initiative and draw up a broad programme aimed at regaining trust and 
confidence. At the same time the IAEA should be commended for its unsparing 
and tireless efforts in developing and updating safety-related standards and 
codes of practice, and for its excellent professional conferences, 
particularly those dedicated to nuclear reactor safety and accident prevention 
and management, as well as those dealing with future trends in nuclear energy 
and technology. 
12. Israel advocated a greater role for the IAEA in two areas, of great 
value to the future of nuclear energy, and other peaceful applications: 
expert systems, a rapidly growing area in artificial intelligence, were 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 4 


currently being implemented in numerous branches of technology and 
engineering. Two of those, nuclear power and space technologies, involved 
problems of an interdisciplinary nature, and required expertise in various 
fields of science and engineering. In both cases operators had to deal 
simultaneously with a large number of actions and analyse more information 
than could be handled efficiently under real-time constraints. In abnormal 
situations, time limitations could lead to incomplete or incorrect analysis of 
the data and result in errors of judgement. Expert systems could provide a 
reliable analysis and recommend corrective actions in real time, based on 
competent and up-to-date knowledge and experience. Thus, the safety of 
nuclear power plants could be greatly improved by the judicious use of expert 
systems. 


13. Regretfully, many experts and trained professionals were moving away 
from the nuclear discipline to other fields where much of the know-how and 
ability would be lost as the trend continued. In five or ten years' time, 
when the need for nuclear energy re-emerged, it would be difficult to retrieve 
that body of knowledge, important to all Member States. One way of preserving 
and utilizing it was to build expert systems based on the vast realm of 
knowledge available. The IAEA should assume a leading role in that respect. 
14. The Director General, in his opening address, had referred, inter alia, 
to the issue of food irradiation and its advantages. Many nations, axid 
particularly the developing countries, were plagued by serious economic, 
nutritional and health problems resulting in severe malnutrition, famine, 
disease and mortality. Those problems could be alleviated by widespread 
application of irradiation techniques to foods, thus ensuring widespread food 
security and food safety. Irradiation of sprouting vegetables would reduce 
losses and almost double availability of those foods, and the same process 
could be applied to other staple foods such as dry cereal, legume crops, fish 
and meat. Moreover, the introduction of food irradiation technology would 
provide additional benefits by augmenting industrial development. The 
experience gained in related food handling technologies, such as packaging, 
storage and transportation would catalyze and accelerate industrialization of 
such technologies, thus creating much-needed jobs in rural areas, to the 
benefit of local agriculture and industry. 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.317 
page 5 


15. International organizations such as the Joint FAO/1AEA Division and 
WHO, in co-operation with UNCTAD-GATT, had recently contributed significantly 
to facilitating international trade in irradiated foods and had also helped 
considerably through the direct activities of the individual agencies in 
training local professional and scientific manpower. 
16. However, further efforts were called for. The involvement of the 1AKA 
in enhancing the priority status of the food irradiation programme could have 
a significant impact on future progress in that field. The present stage of 
commercialization of irradiated foods required new activities, namely, the 
development of less expensive food irradiation facilities for adaptation in 
developing countries; the development of methods for detection and validation 
of treatment in irradiated foods and, not least, an extensive public 
information and education campaign to acquaint consumers with the benefits of 
irradiated foods. 
17. Israel had developed, over the past 25 years, technologies and 
processes for irradiation of numerous foods which were of great value to 
developing nations. That success was the result of highly fruitful 
co-operative programmes between its agricultural and nuclear research centres. 
18. The representatives of the Member States convened yearly at the General 
Conference of the IAEA in order to enhance international co-operation. The 
majority of those delegations expressed their endeavour to seek better ways of 
implementing scientific and technical progress for the benefit of all Member 
States. It was, therefore, regrettable that irrelevant issues of a political 
nature, such as item 8 of the agenda, were brought up and that much valuable 
time was wasted on political issues which the Agency was never intended to 
handle and which could not possibly be solved by the present assembly. It was 
to be hoped that common sense and a positive approach would prevail and enable 
the General Conference to reject extraneous political issues. 
19. Mr. WAKEHAM (United Kingdom) said that, as he had only very 
recently been appointed as Britain's Secretary of State for Energy, he would 
concentrate - initially at least - on what had struck him most as a newcomer 
to the nuclear scene, particularly in the light of the World Energy Conference 
which he had recently attended in Montreal. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 6 


20. First, the concept of sustainable development was now clearly at the 
top of the international agenda. The debate focused on environmental problems 
attributable to the production and consumption of energy, which energy - it 
should not be forgotten - had also been instrumental in raising living 
standards to unprecedented levels in much of the world. 
21. Secondly, the world would soon no longer be able to put off making some 
fundamental choices about energy, and perhaps particularly about the future of 
nuclear power. Even on the most optimistic assumptions about improvements in 
energy efficiency, a major re-ordering programme for world generating capacity 
would be needed between now and the end of the century simply to replace the 
growing number of power stations that were reaching the end of their useful 
lives, let alone to keep pace with the latest projections of the rise in 
future international demand. 
22. Thirdly, nuclear power, which was currently meeting nearly a quarter of 
the electricity demand within the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OEGD) area, and considerably more in a number of countries, would 
be enormously difficult to replace as one of the world's leading energy 
resources. 
23. Although some environmentalists still argued that further improvements 
in energy efficiency could offer a practical alternative to the continued 
development of nuclear power, it did not follow that to be strongly for energy 
efficiency was to be against nuclear power. Energy efficiency, while having a 
key role to play, could never be the total answer because it was not an 
additional energy resource, although it was still sometimes presented as one. 
Energy efficiency saved energy, it did not produce it; it could help restrict 
the expansion of energy demand, but could not contribute towards meeting that 
demand. Above all, it did not obviate the need for some increasingly urgent 
decisions to be taken in the context of growing worries about environmental 
pollution, about the nature and mix of the power stations which would serve 
the world's energy needs into the late 1990s and beyond. 
24. As could be seen from a number of recent and apparently conflicting 
reports, the question of climatic change was still the subject of very 
considerable scientific uncertainty and controversy. The report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to the Second World Climate 

GC(XXXLTI)/OR.317 
page 7 


Conference scheduled for autumn 1990 was now assuming increasing importance in 
helping to shape an agreed international response to the problem. However, 
many apparently dispassionate observers already believed that, in a world 
beset by problems such as global warming, acid rain and major oil spills, 
nuclear power offered one of the greenest sources of reliable energy yet 
devised. The world was crying out for cleaner energy: the challenge for the 
nuclear power industry was to show that it could provide it safely and 
economically. 


25. In that context, the United Kingdom's own experience was perhaps 
instructive. Recent legislation to privatize the electricity industry had had 
to take into account the undeniable fact that the cost of nuclear power in the 
United Kingdom was currently higher, and more subject to uncertainties 
resulting from changes in regulatory requirements, than fossil-generated 
power. Future changes in energy costs were also uncertain, however, and his 
Government believed that nuclear energy had a strategic role to play in 
providing security through diversity and in helping to reduce the 
environmental impact of electricity generation. 
26. The practical effect of the non-fossil fuel obligation under the 
Electricity Act would be to maintain nuclear capacity at close to the existing 
levels until the end of the century. That would give nuclear power the 
fullest opportunity to prove itself and would provide the maximum flexibility 
to respond to future shifts in energy demand, whether as a result of economic 
or environmental developments. 
27. It had been widely reported that privatization had had the effect of 
bringing to light the true costs of nuclear power in Britain and, if so, that 
was clearly no bad thing. One outcome had been to demonstrate that the costs 
of decommissioning a particular type of nuclear power station - the ageing 
Magnox stations - now seemed likely to be considerably higher than previously 
estimated. His Government had accepted the view that the new private 
electricity companies and their customers should not be burdened with costs 
which related mainly to the previous working life of those stations, and had 
therefore decided to exclude those costs from the privatization. 
28. However, contrary to some reports, what had not been demonstrated was 
that nuclear power as a whole would remain essentially uneconomic in the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 


page 8 


medium to long term. Current Nuclear Energy Agency (NKA) and International 


Energy Agency (1EA) studies confirmed that nuclear power continued to be the 
option favoured on economic grounds for base load power generation within the 
majority of OECD countries. In the United Kingdom, the advanced gas-cooled 
reactor (AGR) and the new pressurized water reactor (PWR) stations would be 
retained after privatization by the National Power Company and Scottish Power, 
reflecting his Government's continuing faith in the future of nuclear power. 


29. The partial privatization of his country's nuclear power plants would 
not change the industry's safety regime. Britain's nuclear regulations made 
no distinction on the basis of forms of ownership. Safety policy would 
continue to be based on a strong, independent regulatory body and on operators 
which had the competence to meet their safety responsibilities to the full. 
30. Nuclear safety was also an international issue by nature, and his 
country wholeheartedly supported the Agency's role as the world's focus for 
the vital work being performed in that area. The work of the International 
Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (1NSAG) and the Nuclear Safety Standards 
Advisory Group (NUSSAG), whose chairman was Britain's Chief Inspector of 
Nuclear Installations, were both of major importance. 
31. The help provided by the Agency's Operational Safety Review Teams 
(OSARTs) was now being welcomed by a growing number of nations. A visit by an 
OSART team to Oldbury earlier in the summer had proved to be a valuable peer 
review of the United Kingdom's safety arrangements as well as a very useful 
exchange of information. 
32. The Agency's Waste Management Assessment and Technical Review Programme 
(WATRP) had undertaken an evaluation of the Nirex deep repository post-closure 
safety research and development and site assessment programmes in 1989. He 
was pleased to report both the very high quality of the panel undertaking the 
evaluation and the valuable nature of their report, and recommended the use of 
that service to other nations. 
33. The World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), inaugurated under 
the chairmanship of Lord Marshall, had also made an extremely valuable 
contribution in the nuclear safety field. 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.317 
page 9 


34. His country's regulators were helped and strengthened by regular 
contacts and discussions with their overseas counterparts, and he very much 
welcomed the exchange of views on regulatory practice at the previous autumn's 
Munich conference. It was encouraging to see the response the Agency had 
received to the United Kingdom's proposals for a third stage of the 
"regulatory initiative", involving an exchange of views and information on 
safety practices between small groups of countries drawn from different 
international groupings. 
35. The nuclear market itself was also becoming increasingly 
international. The recent agreements on co-operation on the fuel cycle 
between the Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom had provided 
the political framework for important commercial contracts. The same was true 
of a similar co-operation agreement between the Federal Republic of Germany 
and France. There now seemed to be a growing tendency for major suppliers to 
move closer together. 
36. The world's nuclear industry would continue to face many probing 
questions and challenges in the years ahead, both from committed opponents and 
from people with genuine uncertainties. The Agency would have a central role 
in that debate, as the forum in which a worldwide consensus on technical 
questions - above all on safety and waste disposal  could be reached. It 
would continue to maintain its unique role in making the benefits of nuclear 
energy available to all countries and in adapting them to the special needs of 
developing economies. Above all, it would continue to play a crucial role in 
maintaining non-proliferation. 
37. The importance of the safeguards system would be highlighted by the 
following year's NPT Review Conference. His country was particularly 
gratified by the growing number of signatories to the NPT, and strongly urged 
those signatories which had not yet concluded safeguards agreements with the 
Agency to do so. 
38. Mr. KAHTLUOTO (Finland) said that his country continued to be 
committed to the utilization of nuclear power and therefore attached great 
importance to the Agency's activities in the field of nuclear power and 
safety. The recently published Basic Safety Principles for Nuclear Power 
Plants and Safety Principles and Technical Criteria for Underground Disposal 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 10 


of High Level Radioactive Wastes were good examples of successful work and 
would help to ensure a high level of safety at nuclear facilities, which was a 
precondition for the general acceptance of nuclear power. The main emphasis 
in the foreseeable future should be on systematic and sustained efforts to 
ensure the safe operation of existing nuclear power plants. With regard to 
the development of the new generation of nuclear reactors, the Agency's 
contribution should take the form of promoting international co-operation. 


39. It was imperative that Agency assistance to Member States in planning 
nuclear power programmes be in harmony with overall national energy planning. 
The Agency could well assume a more important role in that respect because of 
its proven capacity and experience and because no other United Nations body 
was better equipped to do so. As the number of countries intending to 
introduce nuclear power was limited, that work should be addressed only to 
specific interested countries. 
40. The Agency's unique and universal role in collecting and disseminating 
information and data on issues such as nuclear power production and 
performance, operational experience and raw material resources should be 
maintained and further developed in the future, in close co-operation 
with - in particular - OECD/NEA. 
41. Recent developments in the Agency's public information activities, 
including the new Yearbook, were highly commendable. Factual information on 
the Agency's activities and on the nuclear power option was especially 
important at a time when the role of nuclear power was being seriously 
discussed in the context of the global greenhouse effect. He was pleased to 
note that the Director General had recently drawn attention to that issue in 
several fora. He was confident that the Senior Expert Symposium on 
Electricity and the Environment to be held by the Agency in Helsinki in 
spring 1991 jointly with a number of other United Nations organizations would 
make a valuable contribution to future discussions on that important issue. 
42. Turning to safeguards, he noted that the quantity of nuclear material 
and equipment under safeguards was growing steadily and that the volume of 
safeguards activities was expected to have increased considerably by the 
mid-1990s. The Agency's reputation and political credibility rested on its 
ability to meet its safeguards obligations fully. The Agency had reported 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 11 


that objections by some Member States had hampered the introduction of 
sophisticated new techniques that required Less manpower. In order to reduce 
costs and to facilitate the Agency's work, the use of such techniques should 
be accepted. 


43. The safeguards system was a vital instrument in enhancing confidence 
among the international community and, as such, it benefited all members of 
the IAEA. Every Member State should therefore pay a reasonable share of 
safeguards costs. That notwithstanding, the safeguards financing system could 
be based to a larger extent on the principle that the user of safeguarded 
materials should pay. While his delegation supported the resolution on an 
interim arrangement for the financing of safeguards, it urged the Board and 
the Secretariat to resume consultations without delay to find a long-term 
arrangement. 
44. In the field of nuclear applications, the Agency had greatly 
contributed to the introduction of a number of useful methods based on 
radioisotopes and radiation. Although many of those methods were widely used, 
some had been superseded by newer techniques such as biotechnology. It was 
important that, once nuclear techniques had reached a state of maturity, other 
organizations such as FAO and WHO should judge which technique would best 
serve actual needs and, when appropriate, call on the Agency to contribute. 
In agriculture, it would be highly desirable for FAO to increase considerably 


its contribution to the joint FAO/IAEA programme. FAO could also utilize the 
potential of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division and the Seibersdorf Laboratory more 
efficiently in relation to its own programmes. 


45. The importance of technical co-operation was widely recognized. The 
assistance rendered to developing Member States should be co-ordinated with 
their national development programmes and, as appropriate, with the programmes 
of other organizations. Although the Agency's procedures for the approval of 
the technical co-operation programme had been revised the previous year, some 
further adjustments were necessary in order to increase substantially the 
Director General's authority to approve projects. 
46. Finland attached great importance to the successful outcome of work on 
the 1991-92 programme and urged Member States to give the Secretariat clear 
guidance regarding their needs and wishes. Also, the Administrative and 

GC(XXXIL1)/OR.317 
page 12 


Budgetary Committee should discuss the programme in more detail than in the 
past. The programme should be considered first on its own merits, with 
budgetary conclusions being drawn subsequently on the basis of that 
examination. The Agency needed a realistic programme that responded to the 
needs of Member States. A programme that was drawn up only for the purpose of 
meeting the zero-growth principle was not worthy of the Agency. 


47. Mr. UTCHAHAH (Mauritius) said that he had first addressed the 
Regular Session of the International Atomic Energy Agency following the 
Chernobyl incident, when the whole world was concerned about the likely impact 
of nuclear disasters. Now at the thirty-third session there was clearly a 
major change of approach to nuclear issues, and nations were more willing to 
consider the world as a global village. 
48. As the political will towards international stability was translated 
into positive results, the pressures to stockpile nuclear weapons wouLd 
reduce. The recent arms reduction agreements were significant not only 
because they constituted the first step towards the elimination of nuclear 
weapons systems, but also because they permitted unprecedented on-site 
inspection to verify compliance with their provisions. Although that was a 
positive step away from the destructive aspect of nuclear energy, the 
appropriate diplomatic pressures for the total abolition of nuclear arms 
should be maintained at all levels. The financial and human resources thus 
freed could more appropriately be used for social and economic development. 
In a world still burdened with famine, all technological efforts should be 
geared towards ensuring sustained economic development on a worldwide scale 
rather than the development and maintenance of a technological capacity to 
destroy mankind. 
49. Concern was frequently expressed about the negative human impact on the 
world environment, and technico-political issues were considered to be of a 
transnational nature. All too often, however, regional imbalances created the 
tensions that tended to endanger world stability. 
50. One regional issue of great importance to Mauritius concerned the 
island of Diego Garcia which, along with the Chagos Archipelago, was detached 
from Mauritius prior to its independence and leased to the United States for 
military purposes, including possible nuclear capabilities. That still 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 13 


represented a very real danger to the countries of the Indian Ocean region 
both from the point of view of a possible nuclear war and, more important and 
more probable, from the point of view of an accident to a nuclear vessel or 
submarine in the Indian Ocean. With the consolidation of East/West detente, 
it was anomalous for any superpower to maintain a military build-up in a 
region which had repeatedly called for the demilitarization and declaration of 
the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. The Government of Mauritius believed 
that the military installations at Diego Garcia created unnecessary tensions 
in the region and should be removed. The Indian Ocean States had always 
believed in the peaceful development of the region and would continue to do so. 


51. In a world of fast evolving technology, it was important that 
Organizations should not lose sight of their main objective. It was 
gratifying to note that after thirty-three years, the IAEA still had at heart 
its objective "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". During the past eight 
years, the IAEA had been effectively guided by Dr. Hans Blix, who was to be 
congratulated on his appointment for a third term of office. The challenges 
ahead of him were still as great as when the IAEA was set up. 
52. Atomic energy, in its widest sense, covered practically all aspects of 
modern living: in some countries nuclear energy accounted for over 60% of 
electricity requirements, and the use of food irradiation was increasing as 
was the use of isotopes in scientific research. However, the IAEA should 
transmit the benefit of its knowledge and experience to all countries. The 
challenge lay not only in ensuring that the benefits of nuclear science were 
available to all but also that all countries, especially developing ones, had 
the necessary qualified personnel to make use of that knowledge for the 
betterment of their fellow citizens. 
53. Mauritius had been involved in the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme for more than five years. The success of one project, which 
concerned the use of nitrogen fertilizers for optimum production, had led the 
Government to seek the assistance of the Agency in another programme of 
extreme importance to the country, namely groundwater flow measurements, as 
over 40% of the country's domestic water supply came from underground water 
resources. 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.317 
page 14 


54. Mauritius adhered to the principle that nuclear energy should be used 
for peaceful purposes. It had therefore been gratifying to note the 
successful outcome of the Geneva Conference that had been held the previous 
year on the acceptance, control of and international trade in irradiated 
food. In a world where starvation still existed, any attempt to help preserve 
food should be welcomed. Some guidelines concerning the radioactive 
contamination of foods had recently been approved by the Codex Alimentarius 
Commission, and it was to be hoped that they would help reduce the level of 
food wastage worldwide. 
55. Another matter of immediate concern to Mauritius was radiation 
protection. Aware of the potential health hazards of ionizing radiation, 
Mauritius welcomed the use of Radiation Protection Advisory Teams in order to 
assist Member States in preparing strategies for the use and control of 
ionizing radiation. It firmly believed in the need for such a strategy and 
would welcome a RAPAT mission as early as feasible. 
56. Electricity consumption on a per capita basis was increasingly being 
used in economic development models as a measure of national growth, and the 
disparity between countries in terms of per capita electricity consumption was 
very wide. He therefore endorsed the Agency's view that safe and reliable 
nuclear energy had a role to play in the energy matrix of the world. 
Mauritius, which had moved into its growth path three years previously, had 
experienced an increase in electricity demand at the rate of 10% per year. 
That level of electricity demand could be expected in developing countries 
given the right social and economic conditions. All countries had to review 
their energy options regularly, and nuclear energy was but one of them. The 
scientific meeting on "The New Generation of Nuclear Power" to be held during 
the General Conference would provide delegations with an insight into that 
issue and open their eyes to the possibility of including nuclear energy in 
their countries' energy options. The Secretariat was to be congratulated on 
that initiative, and it would be most useful if a topical theme could be 
selected each year as the subject of a special scientific meeting during the 
General Conference. 


57. The previous year, delegates of the African group had raised the issue 
of a regional programme for Africa, which would bring that region into line 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 15 


with all the other regions. Addressing the Thirty-Second Regular Session of 
the IAEA, he had recalled that development would not be easy in the African 
region, which had the highest need for appropriate training. Nuclear science 
and technology would help the region to proceed on the path of sustained 
development. However, economic growth should not be promoted at the expense 
of the environment. As a region, therefore, it should give priority to 
setting up the appropriate structures which would allow the safe utilization 
of nuclear energy. The Mauritian Government was painfully aware of the need 
to provide increasingly sophisticated levels of training for its nationals to 
enable them to cope with fast technological change. Information technology 
and computer-aided designs might be day-to-day issues in the developed world, 
but to the developing world implied a major leap forward with the accompanying 
needs for appropriate training and infrastructure. The IAEA was therefore to 
be commended for having prepared for the African group the priority 
definitions of an action programme for the region. Attention should be 
focused on easily identifiable targets before the wider range of nuclear 
science applications was tackled. 


58. As the world entered the last decade before the 21st century, words 
like "glastnost" and "perestroika" had entered daily use, yet there was still 
an urgent need for the Agency to coin a word that would evoke not only its 
function but also its objective. There was, in other words, a need for 
nuclear literacy. Nuclear literacy not only referred to the need to make the 
public aware of the benefits of the nuclear sciences, but more importantly, 
should imply a conscious effort by the developed countries to narrow the 
technological gap that existed between them and the developing countries. 
59. With the growing political consensus of the world as a global village, 
the heavy debt burden of the developing countries and its potential economic 
upheavals were of great concern to finance ministers meeting in Washington. 
In Vienna, government representatives should consider their future orientation 
in terras of knowledge-sharing in the field of nuclear science and technology, 
and not allow one part of the world to be drip-fed with knowledge while the 
other part hoarded it. As a result of a better international environment, the 
developed world was in a better position to redirect its energy and resources 
to help the developing world to achieve the level of nuclear literacy so 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 


page 16 


essential for it to move along the path of sustainable development. The IAEA, 
as the catalyst between the developed and developing areas of the world, had a 
major role to play and he endorsed the concern of the Director General with 
regard to its precarious financial situation. Only if the IAEA was made 
financially strong would the developing countries be in a position to benefit 
from its technical assistance and training programmes. 


60. The IAEA, with its specialized institutions like the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste and its Laboratory at Seibersdorf, 
had the infrastructure to organize appropriate training programmes. Why, 
therefore, should the infrastructure available in a number of developed 
countries not be used to help close the technology gap? 
61. One of the items on the agenda concerned the financing of technical 
assistance. It was a matter of concern that almost a decade had passed and as 
yet no consensus had been reached as to whether the technical assistance 
programme should be financed by the Regular Budget or by voluntary 
contributions. Countries should first of all agree on the long-term 
desirability of the technical assistance programme. However, in addition to 
the indicative planning figures used the previous year for the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund, governments needed a blue-print of the 
technical assistance programme for the next decade. That would, beyond doubt, 
determine the long-term strategy essential to the accelerated development of 
the deprived areas of the world. 
62. Where there was a political will there was always a possible solution 
to a problem. All the previous speakers had referred to the willingness to 
move towards the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The present session should 
try to ensure that political will was translated into effective action so that 
the world could look forward to a safer and better tomorrow. 
63. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) said that, subject to parliamentary approval, 
his delegation supported the programme and budget for 1990 submitted by the 
Board, the proposed target of US $45.5 million for the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund in 1990, and the planned increase in the level of the 
Working Capital Fund for 1990 to US $6 million. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 17 


64. His Government considered the protection of the environment and natural 
resources to be of vital interest to the entire international community and 
consequently attached considerable importance to the contribution the Agency 
could make in that area. The Secretariat was to be commended on the 
comprehensive report it had drawn up in response to resolution 
GC(XXXll)/RES/494, which provided a useful review of the Agency's surprisingly 
large contribution to the goal of environmentally sound economic development. 
His delegation urged the Agency to provide active assistance to the 
preparations for the United Nations conference on environment and development 
envisaged in General Assembly resolution 43/196. 
65. The Agency should continue to be the main international organization 
concerned with the regulatory and promotional aspects of nuclear energy and, 
although his country attached more importance to the regulatory aspects, it 
recognized both the dual role laid down for the Agency by its Statute and the 
need to maintain a balance between the two. The extensive use of nuclear 
energy in the long run would be acceptable only if the strictest safety and 
environmental protection standards were observed. To that end, vigorous 
action was required to improve the international nuclear safety and radiation 
protection regime. The Agency could play a vital part by promoting 
international co-operation, assisting in solving common problems and providing 
an international forum for the discussion of safety topics. As part of those 
efforts, it should strive to develop more stringent and comprehensive criteria 
on all important safety issues. The meeting the Agency had arranged with 
international trade unions in April 1989 was worth recalling in that 
connection. His delegation supported the growth envisaged in the nuclear 
safety and radiation protection programmes for 1990. The Agency's role in the 
nuclear safety field should be duly reflected in future programmes also. 
66. Norway welcomed the establishment of WANO and hoped that it would be a 
useful complement to, and partner for, the Agency in implementing the common 
objective of further improving nuclear safety and performance. 
67. He was gratified to note the substantial increase during 1988 in the 
number of Member States that had ratified the Convention on Early Notification 
of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a 
Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. However, a few incidents 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 18 


involving nuclear power sources had occurred recently which were not covered 
by those Conventions, but which had caused great public concern and 
demonstrated the need for rapid and reliable information. The question of how 
the Agency could play a more effective role in the case of such incidents 
should be studied further, without prejudice to the two Conventions. 


68. Norway had on several occasions expressed concern about the dumping of 
radioactive waste at sea. Other methods of disposal were also causing 
concern. In that context, he was pleased to learn that the technical working 
group set up to elaborate an internationally agreed code of practice for 
international transactions involving nuclear waste had made some progress 
during the year. The increasing amount of nuclear waste throughout the world 
and the mounting alarm about the environmental consequences thereof made it 
paramount for the Agency to be involved in those matters. The Agency should 
continue to take a strong lead in the global effort to define proper methods 
for the final disposal of hazardous nuclear waste. His country would like to 
see the introduction of internationally agreed norms on that issue. 
69. Norway was pleased to note that Bahrain and Saudi Arabia had acceded to 
the NPT in 1988 and that safeguards agreements with Nigeria pursuant to the 
NPT and with Albania and India had entered into force. It was regrettable, 
however, that the number of non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT that 
had not concluded safeguards agreements with the IAEA within the prescribed 
period of 18 months after ratification had been 52 at the end of 1988, the 
same as at the end of 1987, and included States with significant nuclear 
activities. He urged those States to fulfil their NPT obligations. 
70. Norway had now waived the right of advance approval of designated 
inspectors and would accept automatically those duly designated by the Board. 
It invited those Member States which had not yet done so to follow suit. 
71. His country could accept as a provisional solution the proposal 
contained in document GC(XXXIII)/877 on the financing of safeguards for a 
three-year period. Safeguards were politically the Agency's most important 
task and the collective responsibility of all Member States. A permanent 
solution to the problem of financing of safeguards would have to secure 
sufficient resources to ensure the efficient functioning of the system and 
thus uphold continued international confidence in Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 19 


72. His country had reviewed its export control legislation in the light of 
non-proliferation considerations. A new and stricter export control act had 
been enacted and a ban on the export of heavy water - except for minor 
research quantities - had been introduced. His Government had recently 
informed the Director General that, when considering the export of nuclear and 
non-nuclear material, equipment and technology, it would act in accordance 
with INFCIRC/254, an undertaking which was in addition to a previous 
undertaking to act in accordance with INFCIRC/209. Norway would like to see a 
strengthening of the international regime applying to the export of 
non-nuclear material. 
73. Mr. SOWINSKI (Poland) said that the past year had been marked by 
further progress in the field of nuclear disarmament and in the implementation 
of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics on the Elimination of their Intermediate-Range and 
Shorter-Range Missiles (INF), the commencement of and encouraging progress in 
talks on the reduction of armed forces and conventional armaments in Europe 
and the continuation of the Soviet-American dialogue on deep reductions of 
strategic nuclear weapons. All that had contributed towards expanding 
international co-operation in almost all spheres and had indisputably created 
a favourable climate for the work of international organizations, which had 
now become a genuine forum for solving, through concerted efforts, the 
problems determining the world's future. One of the most urgent problems was 
that of ensuring sustainable global development while paying due attention to 
the protection of the environment and the rational use of natural resources. 
74. He noted with satisfaction that the United Nations General Assembly 
resolution on the question of the world's sustainable development and the 
report by the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) had 
aroused such a positive response within the IAEA. The Agency's report of 
May 1989, entitled "Nuclear Energy and the Environment", deserved widespread 
distribution in all countries. The Agency's capabilities in that field, 
however, were even greater than suggested by that report. Closer co-operation 
between the IAEA and the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) 
might, for example, be worth consideration. Such co-operation might help 
to solve complex environmental problems and to clear up the fundamental 



GC(XXXILI)/OR.317 
page 20 


misunderstandings which had brought about the paradoxical situation whereby 
atomic energy - the environment's most promising ally - was often considered 


its enemy. It would be useful to examine all the different forms of possible 


co-operation, including the creation of a joint department, analagous to the 
FAO/1AEA department, or a laboratory. Poland shared the view expressed by the 
USSR two days previously on that subject. If the Agency was interested in 
such a project, his country was prepared to establish such a laboratory in 
Poland, possibly in Krakow. 


75. The above-mentioned report to the 44th Session of the United Nations 
General Assembly concerning the Agency's contribution to the world's 
sustainable development accorded top priority to the problem of meeting the 
world's steadily increasing demand for energy. In that connection, particular 
attention should be given to the undeniable importance of nuclear power as a 
means of curbing the irreversible processes of the destruction of the world's 
forests, soil acidification and global warming. 
76. The considerable role that nuclear power could play in reducing the 
emission of gases responsible for the greenhouse effect was underlined in a 
joint declaration of the leaders of the seven most industrialized Western 
nations at a meeting in Paris last July. In that connection, he expressed his 
delegation's appreciation to the Director General for the initiatives he had 
undertaken at various multilateral fora concerning energy, environment and 
responsibility for the future development of the world. 
77. In a number of countries and in the most varied circles, however, the 
merits of continuing to construct nuclear power plants or even operate the 
existing ones were now coming into question. Polish experience showed that 
the public's objections concerned safety, the storage of radioactive waste and 
the economic efficiency of nuclear power. Those issues, as well as the 
problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, were also reflected in 
the WCED report. In view of the current threat of irreversible changes in the 
natural environment, the Agency seemed justified in giving priority to efforts 
aimed at helping States to solve the complex problems of energy policies on 
the basis of complete and objective data taking account of both economic and 
ecological factors. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 21 


78. He therefore considered it a matter of urgency that the Agency continue 
its comparative analyses of the various methods of electricity generation, 
taking into account all aspects of the interaction between power production 
and the environment. At the same time, wide and active support should be 
given to initiatives by individual Agency Member States aimed at sharing their 
experience in ensuring maximum safety and protection for the public and the 
environment. Among such initiatives should be included the proposals by the 
Soviet delegation regarding international co-operation in research planned at 
the laboratory being set up at Chernobyl and in the field of radioactive waste. 
79. The WCED report pointed to the irrefutable fact that sustainable 
development was conceivable only in an atmosphere of peace and disarmament. 
Consequently, measures for preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
should also be viewed as one of the Agency's major tasks. His delegation 
hoped that the Fourth Review Conference on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) would confirm the indispensability of maintaining and 
strengthening the Treaty as one of the fundamental components of the global 
security system. The steady, albeit slow, increase in the number of parties 
to the Treaty was certainly encouraging. 
80. Bearing in mind the need further to increase the Agency's efficiency in 
the area of safeguards and responding to the Director General's request, to 
that effect Poland had decided to discontinue its practice of approving 
inspectors. The only condition remaining for Poland's acceptance of an Agency 
safeguards inspector was the maintenance of diplomatic relations with the 
country of which the inspector was a national. 
81. Summing up, his delegation considered that the Agency's work 
constituted a unique contribution to the cause of sustainable development and 
that its many accomplishments in 1988 should be highly commended by the 
General Conference. The following deserved a special mention: its measures 
to ensure nuclear and radiological safety, including co-operation and 
assistance in the event of a nuclear accident and the organization of 
Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) and Waste Management Advisory 
Programme (WAMAP) missions; its safeguards activities; the development of 
new technologies for the protection of the environment and production of 
wholesome food products; and its search for optimal solutions to the problem 
of nuclear liability. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 22 


82. The International Conference on the Acceptance, Control of and Trade in 
Irradiated Food, in which the Agency had participated in December 1988, 
confirmed the correctness of its policies in that area and enabled agreement 
to be reached on several principles. The results of that conference would 
yield substantial benefits to countries which, like Poland, were introducing 
irradiation technologies for food processing. 
83. Poland's technical co-operation with the Agency was a significant 
factor in the activities of Polish nuclear research institutions. The 
co-ordination of Agency-related projects in Poland had led, for example, to an 
increased range of applications of irradiation technologies and to improved 
quality control and safety in nuclear installations. 
84. Poland was actively co-operating on several regional projects such as 
the application of irradiation technologies for food processing, safety 
analysis of the UWER-type reactors and, since 1989, in-service inspections of 
nuclear power plants. It was also interested in establishing a regional 
project on radioactive waste management. 
85. Regarding the applications of atomic energy, Poland attached particular 
importance to the programme for the electron-beam purification of flue gases 
at coal-fired power plants. With the Agency's assistance, it had in 1988 
started constructing a pilot station for the simultaneous removal of sulphur 
dioxide and nitrogen oxides. At the workshop organized in June 1988 in 
co-operation with the IAEA the Polish design had been subjected to thorough 
analysis. Agency experts had expressed their approval of both the design and 
the construction of the facility. His delegation was pleased to note the 
considerable interest aroused by the project both in Poland and among the 
participants in the workshop. The programme would enable the necessary data 
to be collected for designing an economically competitive, industrial 
installation. According to the workshop participants, electron-beam 
technology could be applied very successfully in Poland. 
86. He noted with satisfaction the considerable progress achieved in 
implementing the General Conference resolution of 1988 concerning nuclear 
liability. The May meeting of the working group had made a significant 
contribution towards improving and strengthening the international nuclear 
liability system. The shortcomings of the system had been identified and 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 23 


would now provide the direction for further efforts to find a satisfactory 
solution to the problem. The invaluable assistance provided by the 
Secretariat's Legal Division in the preparation of the group's meeting 
deserved special mention in that connection. 


87. Poland would continue to aim towards regulating questions of nuclear 
liability on the basis of State liability. However, bearing in mind that such 
a challenge would call for considerable time and effort and not wishing in any 
way to belittle the value of international instruments in the field of civil 
liability, Poland had decided to accede to the Vienna Convention and to the 
Joint Protocol, instruments which it regarded as a first step towards finding 
a comprehensive solution to the problem. 
88. His delegation fully endorsed the Agency's Annual Report for 1988 and 
also accepted its draft budget for 1990. In conclusion, Poland would continue 
to do its utmost to ensure the successful implementation of the Agency's 
programme. 
89. Mr. WIRYONO (Indonesia) recalled that 1989 marked the 
50th anniversary of the discovery of fission which had transformed the world 
and taken it into a new era. The world now seemed to be entering a completely 
new international political atmosphere, marked by the relaxation of tension 
and renewal of confidence in multilateralism as well as international 
co-operation. In such a situation, the role of science and technology was 
crucial to the progress of nations - particularly developing countries. 
Having initially taken second place to military uses, the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy now had the opportunity to come to the fore and to be fully 
developed. While it was true that, as with any technology, nuclear fission 
and its by-products entailed a certain degree of risk, the technology to 
minimize those risks - or even to eliminate them - had been making tremendous 
progress. 
90. However, after a series of serious nuclear accidents, efforts to 
maximize safety had led to the introduction of many redundant systems. 
Consequently, the capital costs of new-generation nuclear power plants might 
increase to such an extent that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were put 
beyond the reach of many developing countries. The Agency's challenge lay 
precisely in that field: to ease the many difficulties faced by developing 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 24 


countries that were in need of technical and other assistance. A seminar on 
the financial aspects of nuclear power plants was to be convened in Indonesia 
the following year, and he hoped that experts from both the developed and 
developing world would attend and that creative ideas would result from a full 
discussion of the problem. 


91. The Agency had been successful in promoting closer regional 
co-operation in nuclear activities. In his own region, the Regional 
Co-operation Agreement (RCA) programme was proving very beneficial. 
92. The papers prepared by the Secretariat for the NPT Review Conference 
in 1990 were satisfactory and comprehensive. The IAEA had an important role 
to play in implementing the NPT, and in particular Article IV, which was 
concerned with the provision of assistance to non-nuclear-weapon States party 
to the Treaty in obtaining the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
93. The Annual Report for 1988 provided an excellent record of the Agency's 
activities during that year, including technical co-operation. One aspect of 
such co-operation which might need more attention was the sharing of 
experience and knowledge between States that had achieved a certain degree of 
progress in nuclear technology and those States embarking on a nuclear 
programme. Indonesia looked forward to co-operating with the Agency in that 
area. 
94. The dissemination of accurate and balanced information on nuclear 
energy was of the utmost importance. The conflicting views that came from 
debates among experts only led to further confusion among the general public. 
It seemed that the Agency's publications, while of the highest quality, did 
not always reach those who needed them or who were in a position to pass on 
that information to the general public. Consequently, a more creative 
approach in distributing those publications to the media, decision-makers and 
those involved in the medical and other uses of nuclear technology would be in 
order and might ultimately lead to better public acceptance. It would then be 
easier for governments to formulate rational energy policies based on a 
variety of sources. Many technological advances, such as the development of 
passive reactors with built-in safety features, deserved to be made more 
widely known. 

GC(XXXL1I)/OR.317 
page 25 


95. His delegation welcomed the proposed establishment of a centre for 
international research at Chernobyl and of an international research project 
in waste disposal at a site in the USSR and looked forward to further 
developments in that respect. 
96. Indonesia itself continued to make great strides in the development of 
nuclear science and technology and, before the end of 1989, it would be 
inaugurating various new facilities at the Serpong nuclear establishment: a 
radioisotope centre which initially would be able to satisfy domestic needs 
and would later contribute to regional needs; an experimental nuclear fuel 
facility; and a centre for nuclear engineering and equipment which would 
provide support for a nuclear power programme. His country was ready to 
welcome exports and trainees from the region to share both new and existing 
facilities. In addition, his Government had initiated a programme of research 
on nuclear waste management following the entry into operation in 
December 1988 of a radioactive waste treatment plant located in the Serpong 
complex. Finally, his Government had just taken the decision to initiate a 
final site evaluation as part of a comprehensive feasibility study for the 
construction of a nuclear power plant. It would be seeking the Agency's 
co-operation in connection with that plan. 


97. With regard to Article VI of the Statute, his delegation considered 
that any organization whose policy-making organ had last undergone change 
almost two decades previously ought to be able to adjust to the developments 
which had taken place in the meantime. It was to be hoped that some progress 
could be made in the next working group on Article VI as a whole, but it would 
be helpful if the current session of the General Conference engaged in a more 
substantive debate so as to facilitate the working group's consideration of 
that matter. 
98. Mr. SHENSTONS (Canada) said that many States parties to the NPT 
were preparing for the Fourth NPT Review Conference to be held in Geneva 
in 1990. Two weeks previously, the Second Preparatory Committee had 
successfully completed its agenda, including discussion of three excellent 
Agency papers. It was important to bear in mind the close links between the 
NPT and the Agency's work, especially in safeguards and technical assistance 
activities. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 26 


99. He had been pleased to note from the Annual Report for 1988 that, as in 
previous years, the Agency had not detected any diversion of a significant 
amount of safeguarded nuclear material. The Department of Safeguards had 
taken commendable measures to increase efficiency and productivity: however, 
there were limits to what such measures could achieve, and budgetary pressures 
should not be allowed to lead to the deterioration of safeguards. The Agency 
would soon be releasing new safeguards evaluation criteria for the 
period 1991-95. Canada looked forward to the period of stability that would 
result, as it would greatly assist both the Agency and Member States in the 
planning of inspections and in budgetary forecasting. 


100. Through safeguards support programmes, Member States were able to 
provide significant assistance to the Agency, particularly during periods of 
budgetary restraint. Canada's support programme concentrated on the 
development and procurement of equipment to improve safeguards in on-load 
refuelled reactors. He looked forward to enhanced co-ordination of various 
countries' support programmes through the Agency's support programme 
initiative and the creation of a support programme administration office, and 
strongly supported the move to define more clearly the relationship between 
the Agency and activities in Member States. 
101. At the Darlington nuclear power station, the Agency and Canada had 
elaborated an innovative safeguards approach involving software packages and 
new devices. Final preparations were under way to ensure that the safeguards 
equipment installed was functional before criticality was reached at the first 
reactor unit. 
102. At its current session, the General Conference would be considering the 
thorough report prepared on the Agency's study of the modalities of 
application of safeguards to the Middle East. He called on all States in that 
region, and indeed in all regions, which had not yet done so to accede to the 
NPT and to accept Agency safeguards on all their nuclear activities. 
103. Canada had taken an active role in a recent technical committee on the 
physical protection of nuclear materials and agreed with the planned revisions 
to INFCIRC/225 which had resulted from the meeting and which took into account 
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. Canada had 
fully implemented that Convention in its law and practice. A conference of 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 27 


States parties should be convened in 1992, five years after the entry into 
force of the Convention, to review its implementation and its adequacy. 


104. The technical working group on international transactions involving 
nuclear wastes was to be commended on its efforts to elaborate a code 
containing principles for the proper care, control, management and disposal or 
long-term storage of radioactive wastes. Equally satisfying was the progress 
made in the open-ended working group on liability for nuclear damage, which at 
its first session had identified a number of important issues. Although his 
country was committed to exploring means of improving the existing civil 
liability regime, it remained convinced that a State liability regime could 
provide answers to liability problems that might result from nuclear accidents 
causing damage in more than one jurisdiction. 
105. Canada fully supported the two nuclear accident conventions and would 
deposit an instrument of ratification of the Convention on Early Notification 
of a Nuclear Accident before the end of 1989. Ratification of the Convention 
on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency was 
expected to follow shortly thereafter. 
106. His Goverment welcomed the report to the General Assembly on the 
Agency's contribution to sustainable development. The Agency was 
participating in a number of environment-related programmes and studies being 
undertaken by United Nations agencies, and the Director General was playing a 
constructive role in international discussions on energy and the environment. 
He was pleased to note that the economic summit meeting in Paris in July had 
recognized that nuclear power played an important role in reducing the 
emission of greenhouse gases. One of the conclusions of the World Energy 
Conference (WEC) that had met recently in Montreal, had been that the majority 
of observers expected increased electricity demand in industrial countries to 
be accompanied by a growing perception of nuclear energy as an essential means 
for producing electricity economically and safely. The WEC had also 
recognized the crucial importance of urgently tackling the question of public 
acceptance of nuclear power. The increased importance accorded to those 
matters in various Member States and in the Agency was a matter of 
satisfaction. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 28 


107. Canada needed nuclear energy. Abundant supplies of uranium and 
advanced electricity generation technology meant Canada was independent in its 
nuclear fuel cycle. That independence, combined with the high level of 
technical safety of the nuclear programme, represented a major asset for 
Canada and its trading partners. His Government had undertaken a major 
initiative aimed at maintaining the nuclear option as one means of meeting 
future growth in energy demand. The key part of that initiative was an 
evaluation of alternative organizational structures for the nuclear industry. 
108. His country attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities, particularly in Africa, and commended the Agency's 
focus on building manpower capacity in developing countries and concentration 
on providing practical assistance in such areas as pollution control, 
desertification, deforestation, insect and disease control and food 
preservation. The Agency should continue to concentrate its resources in 
those areas (such as agriculture and health) which would bring tangible and 
sustainable benefits to those most in need. Finally, a greater effort should 
be made to share the results of the Agency's evaluation activities with other 
development organizations. 
109. Mr. VISHHEVSKIJ (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
the current positive changes in the world were creating favourable conditions 
for the development of more extensive international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, and for the constructive involvement of the 
Agency in the solution of global problems in the fields of power generation 
and ecology. The Soviet initiatives in the areas of international security 
and nuclear disarmament, and the proposals on the banning of nuclear tests and 
discontinuation of the production of fissionable materials for military 
purposes had been a worthy contribution to the establishment of a nuclear-free 
world and the reinforcement of stable international relations. A non-nuclear 
world could only be achieved via a new political approach which rejected 
current stereotypes in the clear understanding that there was no alternative 
to a secure world based on mutual trust and co-operation of all countries. 
110. The Agency could certainly make a major contribution to the achievement 
of that noble aim. It had already demonstrated its capacity to monitor 
effectively the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons whilst respecting the 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 29 


sovereign rights of States; it supported their interests in the field of the 
peaceful use of atomic energy and helped reinforce international 


co-operation. Agency safeguards were a worthy activity deserving of every 


support. The Agency could further expand its activities in that area by 
developing a reliable system of measures to prevent any form of nuclear 
terrorism, and an international legal instrument to regulate liability for 
nuclear damage. The Agency's reaction to the Chernobyl accident in 1986 had 
been swift and had resulted in the drawing up and acceptance of two important 
conventions, the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency and the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident. 


111. He lent his support to the Agency's Programme and Budget for 1989-90. 
It was essential that the role and position of nuclear power within power 
generation as a whole be determined and criteria generated for the selection 
of energy sources to be used. The negative effects of thermal facilities were 
already evident in the raised carbon dioxide content in the atmosphere and the 
disturbance in atmospheric processes as seen in the abnormal weather 
conditions. Nuclear power would probably help avoid some of the ecological 
catastrophes which threatened, but to evaluate its competitiveness one had to 
have a clear picture of the complex problems posed by the construction, 
operation and decommissioning of nuclear power plants, and by waste 
management. Capital expenditure for the construction of nuclear power plants 
was constantly rising. Part of that was due to the drive for increased 
reliability and safety. But what constituted a reasonable level of increased 
cost for reactor construction, and what were the costs involved in 
constructing a nuclear power plant which conformed to all the safety standards 
developed by the Agency? There was also a need for comparative data on the 
total cost of the nuclear fuel cycle right from the point where the fuel was 
mined, through its processing and enrichment, manufacture of fuel elements, to 
reprocessing and disposal of nuclear power plant waste. The effect of 
decommissioning of reactors which have outlived their lifetimes on the cost of 
power produced by nuclear power plants was also important. He suggested that 
it might be useful if the Agency organized an international symposium on the 
theme "Comparison of the economic and ecological consequences of the operation 
of thermal and nuclear power stations, and selection of an optimum course of 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 30 


long-term development for the world energy base". The Agency might include 
research into that problem in its programme for subsequent years. 


112. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic valued highly the Agency's 
technical assistance activities and supported their development and 
improvement. The Ukraine received 3-4 groups of specialists from the 
developing countries every year. Those specialists either came on scientific 
visits or to attend training courses. They were shown the achievements made 
by the Ukraine in the use of accelerators in the national economy, the use of 
nuclear energy in biology, agriculture, medicine, and in other fields. In the 
interests of widening its participation in that programme, the Ukraine 
intended to keep up its voluntary contributions to the Agency's Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
113. The nuclear power development programme in the Ukraine had undergone 
both a qualitative and quantitative change subsequent to the accident in the 
Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Measures had been implemented to improve 
safety conditions for operational nuclear power plants by ameliorating the 
reactor emergency protection systems, increasing the reactivity reserve, 
increasing the fuel enrichment, and other technical measures. Training 
demands for power plant staff had been raised considerably. In the 5 nuclear 
power plants in the Ukraine, 13 power units with a total capacity of 12 000 MW 
were currently operating and producing 15% of all the power generated in the 
Republic. All deviations from the normal operating regime were investigated, 
and in every case measures were taken to avoid the repetition of such events. 
Not one incidence of a serious problem in reactor operation which could have 
given rise to an accident had been registered since the Chernobyl accident. 
The Republic's nuclear power development programme had been reviewed. 
Economic, ecological and social factors relating to the construction of 
nuclear power plants in a particular region were taken into account. It was 
planned to limit the number of power units at power plants already in 
existence. Construction of certain new nuclear power plants had been halted 
because their sites did not fully comply with nuclear power plant safety 
standards. In the 30 km zone surrounding the Chernobyl nuclear power plant 
various biomedical research projects were being carried out into the action of 
ionizing radiation on plants and animals, and a lot of material had been 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 31 


collected. Since the conditions for carrying out such research were unique it 
would be appropriate for foreign scientists to take part also. 


114. There was perhaps no area of the national economy where nuclear energy 
could not make a contribution. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic fully 
supported the activities of the Agency, and it would continue to promote the 
constructive co-operation of all countries in the interests of utilizing 
nuclear energy for the good of mankind. 
115. Mr. MONDIHO (Argentina) said that the budgetary cuts which had 
become necessary in recent years on account of Argentina's difficult economic 
climate had had considerable impact on the progress of work within its nuclear 
programme. However, it remained convinced that nuclear energy was the only 
safe alternative source of energy for the early decades of the twenty-first 
century. Proof of that lay in the reaffirmation by President Menem of the new 
Government's political will to continue developing the country's technological 
capacity to achieve economic progress and the well-being of the its people. 
Due to that political will, the necessary steps were now being taken to 
reactivate work which had been held up so that the installations could come on 
line at an early date. At the same time priority was being given to the 
production of the necessary raw materials to maintain Argentina's position in 
nuclear power, and to complete all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle, with a 
view to reasonable self-sufficiency and freedom of decision. 
116. Nuclear power had continued to gain ground in Argentina. Its two power 
stations, whose total power in 1988 accounted for only 8.10% of its grid 
power, had produced 13.18% of the total generated. The remarkable performance 
of the Embalse nuclear power plant was also worthy of note. Between 
August 1988 and August 1989, its load factor was 98.36%, in other words it had 
practically worked at full power continuously for an entire year, 
significantly contributing to alleviating the serious energy crisis which the 
country had experienced the previous year, due principally to abnormally 
difficult hydrological conditions. 
117. Another significant fact was the recent completion of the experimental 
heavy water plant, built with Argentinian technology and by Argentinian 
companies and technicians. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 32 


118. Once again the past year had been very successful for Argentina from 
the point of view of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, both at the multilateral and at the bilateral level. As far 
as the former was concerned, in spite of its economic difficulties, Argentina 
had managed to maintain a high level of co-operation with the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme. Once again the number of experts made 
available to the Agency had been the highest among the developing countries, 
and had put Argentina in fourth place among all the Member States with regard 
to the number of experts provided, and in sixth place with regard to 
fellowships, visiting scientists and trainees studying in Argentinian plants, 
at the request of the Agency. Argentina was prepared to co-operate without 
any discrimination whatsoever. For the ninth consecutive time, Argentina was 
running the interregional postgraduate course in radiological protection and 
nuclear safety in Buenos Aires, with the assistance of the Agency. 
119. As far as the ARCAL programme was concerned, Argentina fully supported 
its development and continuity. Its importance to the region was demonstrated 
by the fact that in just over four years it had implemented 13 projects and 
the number of countries participating had risen to 15, thus covering almost 
the whole of the region. 
120. At the bilateral level, there had been co-operation with a large number 
of friendly nations of all continents, and 20 specific co-operation agreements 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had been concluded, the last of which 
had been with Egypt. In that context special mention should be made of the 
inauguration in December 1988 of Peru's nuclear research centre, which 
included the 10 MW RP-10 research reactor, with auxiliary laboratories, a 
radioisotope production plant and a radiological protection laboratory, as 
well as other relevant service facilities and the inauguration in April 1989 
of the 1 MW NUR research reactor in Algeria, both of them examples of strong 
south-south co-operation, in which Argentina had demonstrated its political 
will to co-operate and its technical capacity as a responsible and reliable 
supplier of nuclear technology to other developing countries. 
121. Special emphasis was placed on the recent reaffirmation by the 
Presidents of Argentina and Brazil of the political will of their Governments 
to maintain their promising political and technical co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.317 
page 33 


122. Argentina was ready to establish close co-operation with all nations of 
the world on a basis of juridical equality and mutual respect. The benefits 
deriving from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be made available to 
all peoples, without restriction but with proper guarantees on all sides that 
the nuclear technologies, plants and materials transferred would only be used 
for those purposes. In that context the Agency's safeguards system provided 
the proper way to guarantee non-proliferation of nuclear arms; any additional 
requirement which implied restrictions on the transfer of technology in the 
so-called "sensitive" areas would be suspected of concealing intentions, 
through the guise of non-proliferation, to preserve political and commercial 
hegemony. 
123. Turning to the Agency's activities during the past year, Argentina much 
appreciated the efforts made by the Secretariat in its technical assistance 
activities to optimize the use of the scarce available resources. Substantial 
improvements had been achieved in the past decade with regard to the quality 
and level of the technical co-operation activities pursued. 
124. With regard to safeguards, it had been gratifying to note that there 
had been no case of nonfulfilment of the undertakings of Member States and 
that consequently the Secretariat was once again able to ensure that no 
safeguarded materials had been diverted for non-peaceful uses. As far as the 
ongoing problem of financing safeguards was concerned, the Argentinian 
Government was convinced that the solution lay in rationalizing their 
application. The Secretariat should thererore concentrate its efforts on 
applying safeguards to materials directly used in the manufacture of arms and 
to plants in which such materials could be produced, processed or stored. 
125. As far as the Committee on Assurances of Supply was concerned, as 
Argentina had already stated at the June meeting of the Board of Governors, it 
was not the lack of negotiating formulas or compromise texts which had for so 
long prevented a consensus, but a lack of political will, and until that will 
was restored, and the extreme positions thereby made more flexible the 
Committee would not be able to achieve the purposes for which it was created. 
126. On the subject of liability for nuclear damage, Argentina supported the 
principle of international liability of States for damage caused by their 
plants, equipment, staff, etc. outside their territories to foreign property 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 34 


or nationals. The development of the "juridical community" was no doubt 
responsible for the widespread adoption of that principle. 


127. The Agency was to be congratulated on its activities in radiological 
protection and nuclear safety and also for its results in agriculture, food, 
and biological and physical sciences. In the latter context, special mention 
should be made of the work and results of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste. 
128. The Director General was to be congratulated on his re-election and for 
his tremendous efforts in implementing the Agency's technical programmes. The 
Secretariat staff, too, were to be congratulated for their efforts and 
achievements in spite of the very real difficulties which they had to face and 
of which the Argentinian Government was fully aware. It therefore guaranteed 
its full support and participation in all the activities of the Agency as it 
had done for many years. 
129. Mr. ARTIGAS (Mexico) said that the rate at which the world was 
developing gave rise to environmental and energy-related problems of such a 
global nature that it was now primarily the task of the international 
organizations - and not least the Agency - to save the situation. 
130. A major effort was now required to combat the anti-nuclear movement and 
to convince the peoples of the world of the benefits to be derived from the 
peaceful use of the atom. Food irradiation, for example, offered great 
benefits to tropical countries, which were among the least developed. Here, 
however, the effect of hostile publicity could in some cases be that people 
would continue to suffer hunger and poverty rather than turn to such 
technology. In order to overcome those negative influences and to place the 
power of the atom fully at the service of mankind, the Agency must throw 
itself into the arena with far more vigour and daring than it had previously 
permitted itself. It must, in effect, assume a leading role rather than 
always seeking out the common ground among its Member States. 
131. Such a fundamental strengthening of purpose would of course cost money, 
and in that connection he questioned the validity of maintaining the 
zero-growth policy at a time when it was more than ever vital that the 
Agency - alongside other key organizations - play its part in warding off the 
danger that increasingly menaced the survival of the planet. However, should 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 35 


it prove impossible to budge the developed Member States from their entrenched 
position on that matter, it would be necessary, through the Director General, 
to push for the establishment of special funds to enable the Agency to pursue 


its vital task. He had every confidence that the Director General possessed 
the necessary strength of character and imagination to carry through such a 
mandate. 


132. Also essential was a thorough review of many of the Agency's component 
parts, starting with the Board of Governors, which could only become the 
effective forum it was made out to be when its membership was adjusted to 
reflect the true composition of the Agency, and when concerns which had thus 
far not been permitted to disturb its esoteric calm were at last given a 
proper airing. 
133. Reforms were also necessary within the Agency's safeguards system, 
under which the same standards continued to be applied to States which 
differed fundamentally in terms of their relationship to the use of nuclear 
energy for exclusively peaceful purposes. Mexico was also concerned at the 
manner in which the Non-Proliferation Treaty extended safeguards to States 
which were engaged in a nuclear arms race, and also, of course, at the fact 
that the system - perhaps through lack of flexibility - had failed to become 
universal. There had been talk during the present Conference of establishing 
a committee to study the financing of safeguards. Since its mandate should 
cover absolutely every aspect of the matter, perhaps it would be appropriate 
for the committee to be set up by the Conference itself, being thereafter 
directly accountable to it. 
134. Such reform measures as he had indicated must also extend to the 
regional groupings which depended on the Agency, in which connection he wished 
to refer in particular to the ARCAL programme. While commending its work, he 
also noted with concern that a process of crystallization, caused by the same 
kind of limitations that bound the Agency, had begun. ARCAL absorbed a large 
volume of technical co-operation funds, since its programmes lacked the 
originality and foresight which might otherwise attract extrabudgetary funds. 
It must not be allowed to stagnate, but must move ahead to become a 
torch-bearer for world nuclear development. 

GC<XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 36 


135. Mexico was now subjecting its own activities to the same kind of 
scrutiny. The quality of work within the framework of technical co-operation 
with the Agency was improving considerably, and it would continue to strive 
for further improvements. It took particular pride in its medfly programme, 
as well as in the assistance it had provided when an accident involving 
radioactive equipment had occurred in El Salvador. 
136. In that connection, he voiced the concern felt by many countries over 
the lack of an adequate regulatory framework governing the sale of such 
equipment - a situation which had much to do with the vested interests of 
major international consortiums and so-called free trade. Clearly there was a 
responsibility on the part of the vendor both to ensure that only trained 
staff would use the equipment and to advise the respective goverment of the 
sale. In that way the three accidents involving the misuse of radioactive 
equipment which had occurred in Latin America could easily have been avoided. 
137. Such a lack of adequate control measures was merely one indication of 
the flagrant contradiction surrounding the exploitation of the atom, an 
activity which by its very nature transcended political boundaries, but to 
which standards from a bygone age continued to be applied. A further example 
was that of Mexico's Laguna Verde nuclear power plant, where the series of 
obstacles his country had had to overcome in order finally to bring the plant 
into operation had had much to do with the problem of rapid obsolescence and 
the resulting additional costs - a problem which commonly hampered developing 
countries in their attemps to take up the nuclear option. 
138. Despite such problems, he was nevertheless pleased to announce that the 
plant's first unit had now been commissioned and that a progressive power 
build-up had since been effected. Using its own resources, moreover, Mexico 
had overcome the various problems that had arisen in the course of 
commissioning operations. The plant had been visited by one RAPAT and 
three OSART missions, as well as routine safeguards missions which had begun 
several years previously. Mexico had for some years been a member of the INPO 
(Institute of Nuclear Power Operations) group and was also a member of the 
World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO). 


139. Considerable time and resources had been invested in operational 
safety - the highest priority - at Laguna Verde. Many full and partial 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 37 


simulations had been carried out to ensure the complete co-ordination of all 
activities at the plant. Approximately 50% of capacity had recently been 
achieved, and he was pleased to confirm that a part of the electricity now 
being consumed in his country was of nuclear origin. Finally, he was 
confident that Mexico would distinguish itself by the safety of its nuclear 
installations. 


140. Mr. KIENER (Switzerland) said that nuclear energy was already 
making a far from insignificant contribution towards the protection of the 
environment and that its potential in that respect was still not fully 
exploited. It therefore offered a workable solution for meeting the growing 
demand for electricity. 
141. An increasing number of countries now recognized the threat which the 
greenhouse effect posed for the entire world, and it was becoming ever more 
obvious that carbon dioxide emissions must be reduced worldwide. All regions 
and all countries must contribute towards that objective by taking whatever 
political and technical measures proved necessary, including the adoption of 
policies for the rational utilization of energy and the use of energies which 
respected the environment. It was not enough simply to construct a large 
number of electricity-generating reactors of the present type. It would be 
necessary to replace fossil fuels in both electricity generation and heat 
production. The nuclear community should therefore define how it saw the 
increasing contribution of nuclear power with reference to environmental 
protection. Switzerland supported the efforts undertaken to re-evaluate 
nuclear energy in measures to control air pollution. In Switzerland, for 
example, the replacement of nuclear by coal-fired power stations would 
increase carbon dioxide production by approximately 40%. 
142. Reactor operators and government authorities were in complete agreement 
regarding the crucial question of safety, an area which demanded further 
common effort. The safety of existing installations was of paramount 
importance. 
143. Regarding the future development of nuclear energy and the frequent 
references made to the absolutely safe reactor, it should be emphasized that 
no system was completely infallible. Even modern light water reactors could 
be further improved. However, there were at present no urgent grounds for 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 38 


radically changing their design. The development of new and even safer 
reactors should be directed towards the design of equipment which placed less 
of a burden on operators and towards the greater reliability of certain 
components. The Agency was an important forum for airing the safety problems 
raised by such new reactors. 


144. Switzerland was keenly interested in the international research centre 
which the Soviet Union planned to set up in Chernobyl. For its part, the 
Agency should support that initiative and contribute to the exchange of 
information and experience which would take place in its connection. 
145. The Agency's safeguards system continued to be a prerequisite for the 
international exchange of nuclear material. Moreover, the large number of 
States involved in the preparations for the Fourth Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) 
demonstrated the growing interest in the future of the international 
non-proliferation regime after 1995. Switzerland was convinced that it was in 
the interest of all to maintain the present NPT regime and hoped that more 
States would accede to the Treaty and that all the Parties which had not yet 
done so would soon conclude safeguards agreements in connection with NPT. 
146. Switzerland had repeatedly stressed the importance which it attached to 
safeguards. While supporting the principle of zero growth, it had none the 
less shown a flexible attitude to the limited budgetary increases which might 
arise in that regard from an increase in statutory obligations. As it had 
clearly stated to the Board of Governors in June, it also considered that the 
present scale of assessment used to meet the cost of safeguards was not 
satisfactory. The fact that the safeguards budget had not increased from 1989 
to 1990 was partly due to special circumstances. It should be remembered, 
however, that a significant increase was expected after 1990. Information on 
the long-term programme, i.e. covering at least five years into the future, 
would be extremely useful for the purposes of financial planning. 
147. With regard to the question of financing the Agency's programme as a 
whole, his delegation strongly supported the Director General's criticism of 
Member States which had failed to pay their contributions on time. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 39 


148. Regarding nuclear energy in Switzerland, there had been little change 
since the previous year. Two anti-nuclear initiatives were to be put to the 
popular vote, probably in 1991. The first called for a 10-year moratorium on 
the construction of new nuclear installations, excluding radioactive waste 
disposal facilities, while the second called for the abandonment of nuclear 
power as soon as possible. The Swiss Government wished to reserve the nuclear 
energy option and was recommending to the public that they reject both 
initiatives. 
149. The future utilization of nuclear energy continued, therefore, to be a 
highly political issue. Since a large part of the Swiss population was either 
sceptical or actually opposed to nuclear power, the decision to abandon the 
nuclear power station project at Kaiseraugst was now final. In view of the 
impossibility of building new power stations, at least in the near future, and 
because of the increase in consumption, the electricity companies had been 
obliged to conclude a number of long-term contracts for the importation of 
foreign nuclear electricity. A parliamentary majority had supported the 
Government in affirming the necessity of pursuing and further developing the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
150. Swiss reactors had continued to have a very good availability rate, 
averaging 83%. The five nuclear power plants had provided almost 40% of the 
electricity produced in Switzerland. Continual efforts were being made to 
improve safety in those plants. For example, additional emergency cooling 
systems were being installed in the oldest power plants at Beznau and 
Mithleberg. The Swiss safety authorities had also requested that a risk study 
be undertaken for each reactor. Containment venting systems for operation in 
the event of accidents were also being designed. The question of how far the 
new Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) codes were already being applied in Swiss 
power plants was currently under study. 
151. His delegation was well aware of the difficulties facing the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and the contribution which it could make with respect 
to long-term changes in the earth's climate. His delegation therefore 
welcomed the fruitful world co-operation which had begun under the Agency's 
auspices. Whatever political differences and conflicts of interests might 
exist between the Member States, the Agency had always succeeded in giving 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 40 


priority to their common goals and pursuing its vital work of promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. , 


152. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that the Director General's 
observation that the environment had been one of the most prominent issues in 
public discussion during the past year had been borne out by the important 
role that topic had played in the elections to the European Parliament in 
March and in the recent elections in the Netherlands. On the basis of a 
national environmental survey for the period 1985-2010, his Government had 
drawn up a National Environmental Plan in which long-term environmental goals 
had been formulated and specific measures for the period 1990-94 proposed. 
Sustainable development was a central concept in the Plan and his Government 
therefore welcomed the introduction of that concept into the programmes of 
international organizations. The Agency should continue its commendable 
efforts related to sustainable development, notably in such fields as enhanced 
nuclear safety, reactor technologies with passive safety features, risk 
limitation and the elaboration of dose commitment concepts, high-level 
radioactive waste management and disposal and, in particular, comparative 
analysis of the environmental effects and associated risks of the various 
options for electricity generation. He noted with satisfaction that many of 
those topics had received adequate attention in the first outline of the 
Agency's work programme for 1991-92. His delegation welcomed the report 
submitted to the United Nations General Assembly on the Agency's contribution 
to sustainable development and appreciated the Agency's technical input to 
international meetings on climate change. 
153. The cornerstone of the Netherlands' foreign policy remained the 
prevention of the further spread of nuclear weapons. The NPT was by far the 
best instrument for that purpose and his Government consequently attached 
great significance to the Fourth Review Conference to be held in 1990. 
Prospects for the Review Conference seemed good. In a climate of much greater 
mutual confidence than a few years previously, the United States and the 
Soviet Union were pursuing negotiations on drastic reductions in long-range 
nuclear weaponry. The destruction of intermediate- and shorter-range missiles 
in accordance with elaborate verification procedures was proceeding smoothly. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 41 


The previous week had seen progress on a verification protocol for American 
and Soviet nuclear weapon tests. Ratification of the threshold treaties could 
pave the way for further limits on testing. 


154. The situation regarding Article VI of the NPT was therefore 
satisfactory. The same was true of Article III, under which the Agency had a 
vital role in applying safeguards to all nuclear installations of 
non-nuclear-weapon States party to the Treaty. The Agency had developed an 
efficient and effective safeguards system which had again enabled it to draw 
the welcome conclusion that no nuclear material had been diverted. 
155. The Agency's role under Article IV was clear and important. A paper 
prepared by the Secretariat for the NPT Review Conference provided convincing 
proof of the relevance of the Agency's work under that Article and 
demonstrated that the record of both the Agency and Member States was quite 
satisfactory. 
156. Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Qatar had acceded to the NPT during the past 
year, and urged all Member States not parties to the NPT to follow their 
example. That applied particularly to South Africa. The recent statement by 
the South African Government had been very interesting, and he welcomed the 
forthcoming talks with the depositary powers. Decisions on the part of that 
Government were now required. 
157. His delegation urged all parties, and especially those with significant 
nuclear programmes, which had not yet done so to conclude a safeguards 
agreement promptly in conformity with Article III of the NPT. The conclusion 
of such an agreement with Viet Nam was to be commended. 
158. His delegation called on nuclear-weapon States to place all their civil 
nuclear installations under safeguards and to consider reporting fully on them 
to the Agency. A further and clear separation between civil and military 
parts of the fuel cycle would make it easier to achieve that. 
159. Although policy differences between NPT parties and non-parties clearly 
existed, there was undeniably a commonality of political and economic 
interests between them and between traditional and emerging suppliers. With 
virtually all Member States accepting the need for effective non-proliferation 
measures on nuclear exports, there was a large measure of agreement on 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.317 
page 42 


principles and practice in that area which it was important to translate into 


a new consensus on practical nuclear export policies. In that context, his 
delegation had noted with great interest the statement made earlier by the 
Argentine delegation. Also, it fully supported the Director General's request 
that all suppliers state that it was their policy to ensure that exported 
nuclear material or equipment would be subject to Agency safeguards and to 


inform the Agency in a timely manner about all intended exports and actual 
shipments. 


160. The previous year-, he had stressed the importance of communicating 
information on a broad range of topics to a wider audience: the new Yearbook 
was precisely the type of publication he had had in mind. The Yearbook 
provided an opportunity to clarify the work of the Agency in areas such as 
radiation protection, nuclear waste disposal and safeguards, where 
misunderstandings continued to occur. 
161. It was gratifying to note that the Emergency Response System had been 
put into operation earlier in 1989. A number of small incidents and accidents 
had occurred over the past year, but the IAEA had been unable to function as a 
focal point in the dissemination of information on those events. The Agency 
would be in a better position to do so if all Member States supplied it with 
sufficient information in a timely manner. 
162. The Netherlands, together with its European Community partners and the 
European Commission, was ready to become a party to the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material later that year. 
163. Alongside nuclear safety and safeguards, technical co-operation was the 
third vital component of the Agency's mandate. His Government would pledge 
its full voluntary contribution of US $741 650 for technical co-operation 
activities, and was also considering funding a biotechnology project. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
13 February 1990 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 27 September 1989, at 3.5 p.m. 
President: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 


Item of the 
agenda* 


[*] GC(XXXIII)/897. 


later: Mr. MAHMASSANI (Lebanon) 


CONTENTS 


General debate and annual report 
for 1988 (resumed) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Egypt 
Mongolia 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
Holy See 
Belgium 
Democratic People's Republic 
Ecuador 
Ireland 
Denmark 
Philippines 
Zaire 
Morocco 
Viet Nam 
Oman 
Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance 
Islamic Republic of Iran 


Paragraphs 


1 - 166 


1 -24 
25 -31 
32 -42 
43 -47 
48 -61 
of Korea 62 -66 
67 -72 
73 -83 
84 -95 
96 -107 
108 -120 
121 -133 
134 -143 
144 -148 


149 -158 
160 -163 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIII)/INF/274/Rev.2. 


89-4709 (6O57e/6O6e) 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 <GC(XXXIII)/873) (resumed) 


1. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) noted that most of the speakers at the present 
session of the Conference had emphasized the need for the Agency to expand the 
role it played, given the contribution that nuclear energy and its various 
peaceful applications could make to world prosperity and to solving problems 
of development. Her delegation welcomed the near-unanimity of views on that 
point, particularly since at the Conference's previous session it had stressed 
the need for nuclear energy to be placed fully at the service of mankind -a 
task which was the real challenge laid down for the Agency by its Statute. It 
was clear from statistics and documents recently published by the Agency, 
including the Annual Report for 1988, that the international community was 
showing increasing interest in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, a 
development which placed a greater responsibility upon the Agency. 
2. Consideration should therefore be given to drawing up (with, of course, 
the Agency's participation) a detailed action plan and comprehensive programme 
to encourage the use of advanced nuclear techniques to help solve the very 
serious economic crises facing developing countries and to speed up their 
development. Through such a programme the Agency could assist in the fight 
against the problems of famine, drought, desertification, water shortages and 
pollution which affected many geographical areas. It was unacceptable that 
the considerable progress being made in science and technology should be 
accompanied by increasing poverty and malnutrition in many countries. 
3. While fully appreciating the Agency's efforts, she wished to underline 
the need for a clearly defined strategy and action plan which would not only 
help resolve the most pressing development problems in the near future, but 
also ensure sustainable development. 
4. Member States should therefore undertake a radical review of the 
financial resources made available to the Agency for both the Regular Budget 
and technical co-operation. In other words, they should reconsider their 
obligations to the Agency with a view to enabling it to fulfil the role 
expected of it. 
5. Egypt was interested in the contribution that nuclear energy could make 
to socio-economic development because that was the very premise on which its 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 3 


own nuclear policy was based. Egypt's atomic energy authorities were 
following world developments in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and were 
actively involved in three main areas. 


6. With regard to nuclear technology, the Egyptian Atomic Energy 
Commission was striving to develop national expertise in the improvement, 
modernization and re-startup of the country's first nuclear reactor; it had 
also begun to operate an experimental plant for fuel element fabrication using 
local raw materials, and to modernize and expand radioisotope production 
plants. 
7. In the field of nuclear applications, there had been a significant 
increase in the use of radiation sources and radioisotopes in support of 
governmental development programmes aimed at improving medical and health 
services and expanding nuclear medicine services. 
8. Finally, nuclear safety and radiological protection principles had been 
established and criteria for their application had been defined, and nuclear 
safety activities had been extended to reactors, nuclear fuel cycle 
installations, other nuclear installations and the transport of radioactive 
material by land and water. Also, Egypt had participated in international 
activities relating to the early notificiation of nuclear accidents and to 
radioactive waste disposal. 
9. A change had taken place in the world nuclear power market: large 
nuclear plants were being replaced by low- or medium-power plants; greater 
emphasis was being placed on inherent safety features, and new advanced 
technological designs better adapted to the needs of developing countries were 
now available. 
10. As a developing country, Egypt was anxious to benefit from those 
innovations and to help other developing countries. Together with the Agency, 
it was currently studying the economic and technical advantages of the new 
types of advanced reactor. 
11. Her country was also carrying out an in-depth analysis of its 
industrial capabilities in order to determine to what extent it could increase 
its participation in the manufacture of nuclear power plant components and in 
the implementation of its nuclear power programme, thereby reducing the amount 
of financing to be raised abroad. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 4 


12. Furthermore, vigorous efforts were being made in uranium prospecting in 
desert areas and in preparing sites for the mining and extraction of uranium 
from local phosphates, the aim being to use local raw materials as far as 
possible in implementing the nuclear power programme. Egypt was now 
completing an airborne prospecting campaign which had not only identified new 
uranium deposits, but also determined radiation levels and their fluctuations, 
which would be useful in ensuring environmental safety. 
13. Her delegation attached particular importance to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). The current session of the 
General Conference was taking place at the same time as the second session of 
the preparatory committee for the Fourth NPT Review Conference. Her 
delegation recalled that the Agency played a vital role in the implementation 
of certain important provisions of NPT and reaffirmed its full support for the 
objectives of the Treaty, whose role as the corner-stone of the international 
non-proliferation regime should be strengthened. Regional non-proliferation 
efforts should also be stepped up: in particular, nuclear- weapon-free zones 
should be established in the Middle East and Africa to help ensure peace and 
stability in those two regions. 
14. The Agency was to be commended for having contributed a number of 
studies to the work of the second session of the preparatory committee for the 
Fourth NPT Review Conference. It was to be hoped that, of the new 
possibilities offered by the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Agency would 
draw attention to those which offered potential for increased co-operation 
between advanced and developing countries, in pursuance of Article IV of the 
Treaty. Where safeguards were concerned, the Agency should concentrate on the 
technical innovations which were important for inspections, surveillance 
operations and the development of the safeguards implementation methods. That 
was essential if the effectiveness of the safeguards system was to be 
maintained. 
15. The safeguards system was the essential basis of the non-proliferation 
regime and had been instrumental in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons 
over the past 20 years. It was essential to support and strengthen that 
system and to ensure that States complied with it. She urged States exporting 
nuclear materials and equipment to ensure that full-scope safeguards were 
applied in importing States which had not adhered to NPT. 

GC<XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 5 


16. She welcomed the study prepared on the modalities of application of 
Agency safeguards in the Middle East and urged the Secretariat to continue its 
efforts in that area. The Director General should embark on consultations 
with States in the Middle East region with a view to applying the modalities 
indicated in the study in accordance with the relevant General Conference 
resolution. 
17. Another matter of concern was Israel's disregard of the appeals 
addressed to it by the international community in various United Nations 
resolutions. It was unfortunate that Israel had failed to associate itself 
with those States which, by working to promote non-proliferation in the 
Middle East, had demonstrated their desire to establish peace and stability in 
the region. Israel should accept full-scope safeguards and place all its 
nuclear installations under safeguards. In that connection, the entire 
international community and particularly the major powers should put pressure 
on Israel to sign NPT and to accept the General Conference resolutions 
requesting it to submit its nuclear installations to safeguards. 
18. It was unfortunate that the attitude of the South African Government 
was so similar to that of the Israeli Government, that South Africa was 
refusing to submit its facilities to safeguards and that it was constantly 
trying to evade fulfilment of its obligations. That attitude was a threat to 
peace and stability in southern Africa and undermined the efforts currently 
being made to establish peace in that part of the world. 
19. The Agency's nuclear safety activities were an integral part of its 
efforts to expand the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Egypt greatly 
appreciated the Agency's work in that area, particularly with regard to the 
disposal of nuclear wastes and the establishment of rules relating to 
transactions involving such wastes. It had participated in meetings of the 
technical working group of experts convened to draw up a code of practice for 
such transactions, and expressed the hope that the group would complete its 
work in 1990. Also, her delegation wished to pay tribute to the International 
Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) for its efforts. 
20. Liability for nuclear damage was a topic of special interest to her 
country. It was convinced of the need to establish an international regime on 
that subject and had therefore signed the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 


page 6 


for Nuclear Damage and ratified the Joint Protocol Relating to the Application 
of the Vienna Convention and the Paris Convention. It had also taken part in 


the working group set up to examine all aspects of liability for nuclear 
damage. In that connection, she praised the outstanding work done by the 
Ambassador of the Netherlands, Mr. van Gorkom, in identifying gaps in the 
current civil liability regime, and expressed the hope that the review of 
State liability for nuclear damage, particularly that arising from 
non-peaceful uses of nuclear energy would continue. 


21. Her delegation greatly appreciated the Agency's efforts, in spite of 
insufficient resources, to assist developing countries in various areas of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Out of the Agency's technical co-operation 
projects in Egypt, one recently completed project on radiotherapy of cancer of 
the cervix deserved special mention since the results achieved had been very 
impressive. That project was exemplary in that it had not only benefited 
Egypt but had also provided training for technical personnel from several 
African countries. A seminar for Africa on organization and training in 
radiotherapy was to take place in Cairo in December 1989. 
22. Her delegation welcomed the attention the Agency was giving to the 
suppression of the New World screwworm and urged it to redouble its efforts to 
protect the African continent from that insect. It was to be hoped that the 
Agency and FAO would further increase their co-operation in that field. 
23. It was important to strengthen mechanisms for regional co-operation in 
nuclear techniques. She hoped that every effort would be made to establish a 
mechanism of that type in Africa, as that was a prerequisite for improving the 
exploitation of the continent's diverse resources. 
24. Finally, her country welcomed the creation by the League of Arab States 
of the Arab Atomic Energy Agency whose objective was to strengthen regional 
co-operation between Arab States in nuclear techniques, and looked forward to 
fruitful co-operation between that organization and the IAEA. 
25. Mr. SODNOM (Mongolia) said that the thirty-third session of the 
Agency's General Conference was taking place at a time of remarkable 
improvement in intergovernmental relations, when confrontation was giving way 
to dialogue. The INF Treaty concluded by the USSR and the United States was a 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 7 


first step towards nuclear disarmament, a process which would undoubtedly 
encourage the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 


26. Much remained to be done, of course, but there were already grounds for 
hoping that mankind would be able to build a nuclear-free world. As the 
international organization with responsibility for nuclear matters, the Agency 
had an important role to play in promoting international co-operation in that 
sphere. For its part, Mongolia was ready to contribute to those efforts. 
27. As a socialist developing country, Mongolia attached great importance 
to the Agency's many technical co-operation activities. In 1988 alone, the 
Agency had implemented over 1000 projects and organized 88 regional and 
interregional courses. 
28. The Agency's assistance was enabling Mongolia to implement a number of 
extremely useful projects in agriculture, medicine, geology and environmental 
protection. Mongolia had benefited from the provision of equipment, the 
services of highly qualified experts and training courses. In 1988, the 
Agency had granted fellowships to about ten Mongolian scientists. He thanked 
the Agency for the assistance already received and expressed the hope that the 
Agency would give favourable consideration to his country's requests for 
technical assistance for the period 1991-92. 
29. The subject of radiological safety received a great deal of attention 
in Mongolia. It had been happy to be visited by a Radiation Protection 
Advisory Team (RAPAT) in 1989 and hoped that the results of that mission would 
lead, with Agency assistance, to the setting up of a national radiation 
protection system. 
30. His delegation approved the Agency's budget for 1990, since it provided 
the necessary financing for the priority activities of the Agency and 
especially for those technical programmes that were of interest to all 
Member States. 
31. His country attached particular importance to nuclear power, nuclear 
safety, environmental protection, safeguards, the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) and technical co-operation. His delegation had 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 8 


taken note of the fact that the slight increase of 0.2% in the Regular Budget 
was largely due to an increase in expenditures in the latter field. 


Mr. MAHMASSAHI (Lebanon), Vice-President, took the Chair. 


32. Mr. EL MADANI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that his country 
greatly appreciated the assistance provided by the Agency and hoped that the 
volume of assistance offered would increase in proportion to the steady 
economic and scientific advances taking place in his and other developing 
countries. Consequently, the principle of zero growth must not be applied to 
the Agency's budget and the decline in the rate of implementation of 
promotional programmes should be reversed. His delegation thanked the Agency 
for its help in combating the New World screwworm, through a joint programme 
with FAO. 
33. As energy played an important role in improving national health, social 
and economic conditions and in making countries more self-sufficient, his 
country had, from the very beginning of its glorious revolution, committed 
itself to eradicating the causes of underdevelopment, to taking advantage of 
the scientific and technological opportunities offered by nuclear energy and 
to equipping itself with the scientific skills and facilities required for 
that purpose by forging co-operation links with a large number of friendly 
countries which had been willing to engage in honourable and mutually 
profitable co-operation. 
34. His country was continuing to base the implementation of its nuclear 
energy programmes on the recommendations made by Agency experts. As a result 
of a visit to the Tajoura Nuclear Research Centre at the beginning of 1988, an 
Agency mission composed of planning experts had recommended that, as all the 
necessary equipment was on hand, the centre should concentrate on the 
production of radioisotopes. The Director General and the Department of 
Technical Co-operation deserved praise for their efforts to increase the 
volume of assistance provided by the Agency and to establish regional 
co-operative arrangements for Africa similar to those existing in other 
regions. African Member States should contribute to and support those efforts 
so that the whole continent could benefit from them. His country was ready to 
make its facilities available for such co-operation. The Tajoura Nuclear 
Research Centre could serve as a regional centre that would benefit the whole 
of Africa. 

GC<XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 9 


35. A number of countries were facing a shortage of drinking water. In 
view of the seriousness of that problem, his delegation had proposed including 
the issue in the agenda of the current session. A close watch should be kept 
on the progress being made with heat-producing nuclear reactors, which could 
be used to desalinate sea water and thus indirectly help to save oil 
resources. The Agency's efforts to develop that technology into an 
economically viable means of satisfying the world's need for drinking water 
should be encouraged. His delegation expressed its gratitude to all regional 
groups and delegates who had supported the humanitarian project proposed by 
his country. 
36. He shared the view of the Director General and some other speakers that 
the gases produced from the combustion of fossil fuels were responsible for 
over half of the damage suffered by the environment and had contributed to the 
thinning of the ozone layer. His delegation had no doubt that nuclear power 
was the least harmful option for the environment, provided that it was used 
only in accordance with very clear criteria and that industrialized countries 
and their firms were forbidden to dump nuclear wastes in Third World 
countries, and especially in those African countries whose economic problems 
could be exploited. 
37. The General Conference had for some time been considering important 
issues such as the inadequate representation of African States on the Board of 
Governors, the number of nationals of developing countries within the Agency's 
Secretariat and the financing of technical assistance. It was to be hoped 
that solutions would be found to those questions that would correct the 
present imbalance within the Board of Governors and the Secretariat and assure 
the financing of promotional programmes, which were one of the reasons for the 
Agency's existence and one of its main objectives. 
38. Since nuclear power was a matter that concerned all States and the 
whole of humanity, it was legitimate to request advanced countries and 
specialized institutions to focus their research work on designing and 
building reactors that offered maximum operational safety, as well as an 
optimal cost-benefit ratio. His delegation proposed that specialized 
committees be set up to study safety criteria, pollution risks and ways of 
making nuclear power acceptable to the public. As far as international 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 10 


co-operation was concerned, the ARCAL and RCA regional co-operation 
arrangements - to which would soon be added a similar arrangement for 
Africa - had clearly shown that countries needed each other's support in such 
an important and sensitive area as the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. He 
was confident that the Agency would succeed in establishing the co-operative 
arrangement being considered for Africa. 


39. Recalling the remarkable nuclear power programme established by the 
Republic of Korea, its potential contribution to other developing States, the 
Republic of Korea's willingness to share the technical experience and skills 
it had acquired over the past 30 years and the assistance and training it had 
provided, he pointed out that that country could act as a link between 
advanced and developing nations in the transfer of nuclear technology. His 
country would be happy to receive such assistance, appreciated the Korean 
attitude, and hoped to see that positive attitude to co-operation spreading to 
other States. 
40. The Brazilian delegation had raised a number of very important points 
concerning the delays that some States were causing in the placement of 
students, fellows and visiting scientists. He wished to join the Brazilian 
delegation in urging the countries concerned to respond to requests in a 
timely manner and not to refuse to accept persons sent by the Agency. Also, 
it was essential that developing Member States participate in and be more 
closely associated with the Agency's programmes. His delegation welcomed the 
expansion of the Agency's activities and would like to see the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy being extended even further. He shared the view of the 
Chinese delegation that Agency projects in developing countries should be 
designed in such a way that they contributed effectively to the socio-economic 
development of those countries. It should also be noted that countries with 
serious financial difficulties were not receiving the support that they were 
entitled to expect. 
41. If a sustained effort were made in respect of renewable energy sources, 
very good results might be achieved. Solar energy was one possibility, 
although the conclusions reached thus far in that field did not justify the 
creation of development programmes. There was no doubt that a great deal of 
work remained to be done in the renewable energy field. The delegation of the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 11 


Federal Republic of Germany had expressed its confidence in renewable energy 
sources such as wind and solar power as a way of meeting the needs of 
developing and advanced countries alike. His country was ready to co-operate 
with the Federal Republic of Germany in that field, for example, through 
participation in research work and by allowing experts to carry out field 
studies in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 


42. The world was fully aware of the military nuclear capabilities acquired 
by the Zionist entity with the assistance of its ally, the racist regime of 
South Africa, and the encouragement and support of certain other States. The 
latest acquisition of the entity in question was long-range nuclear missiles, 
one of which had been damaged in the Mediterranean only a few days previously 
during a test. The Zionist entity and its ally, South Africa, continued to 
ignore the General Conference's requests that they comply with international 
practice and the Agency's Statute, and persisted in their refusal to submit 
all their nuclear installations to Agency safeguards. All Member States 
should therefore stand firm in the face of that challenge and completely 
isolate the two States under suspicion until they bowed to the wishes, and 
particularly the security concerns, of the international community. 
Furthermore, it was important that nations be able - and see that they were 
able - to attain, without being subjected to racism or discrimination, a level 
of scientific and technological development that would allow them to 
contribute to peace and security in the world. Accordingly, he hoped that, in 
line with the decision taken by the United Nations General Assembly on the 
subject, Palestine would be given the right to better representation. 
43. Monsisnor CEIRANO (Holy See), referring to the activities of the 
Agency, said that in recent years the focus of public concern had shifted from 
world peace to the damage being done to the human environment. Since the end 
of the Second World War, the international community had concentrated its 
efforts on preventing another war which would have unleashed the terrible 
destructive forces of modern nuclear weapons. During those 40 years, the 
United Nations Organization had been mainly occupied with settling the armed 
conflicts which had arisen. Although problems remained in some regions, those 
efforts had improved the overall world situation. The improvement in 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 12 


East-West relations had undoubtedly eased certain tensions and had also led to 
some progress being made in the disarmament process, which, of course, the 
Holy See wholeheartedly supported. 


44. During that period of relative calm, mankind had become aware of 
another pressing problem. Scientists had raised the alarm: the planet was in 
danger of being slowly poisoned by the greenhouse effect, atmospheric 
pollution, acidification and the depletion of the ozone layer. The Earth, 
which God had created, was threatened by ecological imbalances and serious 
environmental problems. The World Commission on Environment and 
Development (WCED) had recommended that environmental concerns be included in 
the United Nations Organizations' development activities and that preventive 
measures be given more emphasis. The World Commission had coined the phrase 
"sustainable development" to describe a form of development which would meet 
the needs of the present without creating a situation that would endanger the 
well-being of future generations. 
45. Thus defined, sustainable development had a highly ethical dimension. 
Pope John Paul II had recently stressed the moral responsibility of the 
present generation to future generations. Speaking on the destruction of 
nature and of the squandering of human resources, he had recalled man's 
vocation as the steward of creation. 
46. The issue of sustainable development was of particular importance for 
the Agency. The World Commission was of the view that no form of energy was 
devoid of environmental consequences and risks at present. Where nuclear 
energy was concerned, the World Commission saw a number of unresolved major 
problems: proliferation, the costs and financing of nuclear energy, the risk 
of a nuclear accident and the radioactive waste disposal. In response to a 
request made by the General Assembly, the Agency's General Conference had 
asked the Director General the previous year to submit to it a report on the 
Agency's contribution to environmentally sound and sustainable development. 
That report did not seem to share the fears of the World Commission, and 
appeared to infer that the measures advocated by the World Commission had 
already been taken by the Agency. 
47. He did not deny that laudable efforts were being made by the Agency to 
find adequate solutions to the problem of energy and the environment. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 13 


Nevertheless, much remained to be done to create the conditions necessary for 


sustainable development. That was not a minor problem, but an emergency 


situation which called for an immediate, concerted and worldwide effort. That 


task could not be left to specialists alone; governments must also act, 
whether separately or jointly through the United Nations Organization and 
related bodies such as the Agency. All scientific and technical means 
available must be mobilized to counteract the deterioration of nature. In the 
name of all mankind, the Holy See appealed to all decision-makers, 
politicians, scientists and technicians working on both the national and 


international level to concentrate their efforts, with the help of God, on 
preserving the planet for the sake of present and future generations. 


48. Viscount VILAIN XIIII (Belgium) said that the statement made by 
the French delegation on behalf of the European Community (EC) and its 
Member States basically reflected Belgium's views. However, he wished to make 
a number of specific comments on various aspects of the Agency's activities. 
49. Of all the methods used to generate electricity in Belgium, nuclear 
power plants stood out because of their excellent availability factors. The 
average availability of the country's seven power reactors in 1988 had 
been 84.8%. Those reactors had continued to supply more than 2 kWh out of 3, 
while electricity consumption itself had increased by 3.2%. The financial 
savings achieved through nuclear power had thus continued, as had the 
substantial reduction in wastes harmful to the environment. Belgium had no 
plans for an expansion of its nuclear generating capacity in the immediate 
future. 
50. The outstanding performance of Belgium's reactors had not been attained 
at the expense of safety, which remained the major concern of operators and 
the relevant authorities. The safety review of Belgian nuclear power plants, 
which, in accordance with a decision taken in 1974, was carried out by 
operators together with the regulatory body every ten years, was based not 
only on standards and practices currently in force, but also on concepts 
developed by Belgium on the basis of experience acquired and problems 
encountered both in Belgium and abroad. For the Doel-1 and -2 and 
Tihange-1 units, reports outlining the measures to be taken had been submitted 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 14 


in 1985 and modifications costing an estimated US $200 million were currentlybeing 
carried out. Preparations were already underway for ten-year reviews of 
the Doel-3 and Tihange-2 units, and the resultant reports would be submitted 
in 1992 and 1993 respectively. The reviews would include probabilistic and 
other studies relating to the prevention of beyond- design-basis accidents and 
the mitigation of their consequences. 


51. Belgium continued to share its experience through the EC, OECD/NEA and 
the Agency. Belgian operators were also members of the World Association of 
Nuclear Operators (WANO). His delegation was in favour of the Agency's 
co-operating with WANO with the aim of enhancing the safety and performance of 
nuclear power plants, and noted that such co-operation had been strongly 
advocated by the Director General at the inaugural conference of WANO in 
Moscow on 15 May 1989. 
52. The main objective of radioactive waste management was to protect man 
and the environment against radiological risks in all circumstances that could 
reasonably be foreseen in the very long term. Since 1974 Belgian 
institutions, and in particular the Nuclear Energy Research Centre (CEN), had 
been conducting a major research and development programme aimed at evaluating 
the possibility of using deep geological formations - and specifically the 
Boom clay located directly beneath the Mol nuclear site - for the burial of 
long-lived or very high-level radioactive wastes. The EC had been making a 
significant contribution to those efforts since 1976 through its radioactive 
waste management and storage programme. 
53. An interim report entitled SAFIR (Safety Assessment and Feasibility 
Interim Report) published in June 1989 by the National Organization for 
Radioactive Wastes and Fissile Materials (ONDRAF) outlined the principal 
results achieved by that research programme between 1974 and 1989, which were 
based largely on observations made under real conditions in an underground 
laboratory situated at a depth of 225 m in the clay. From the results of that 
programme, which was open to international co-operation, the main features of 
the design of a deep repository for conditioned wastes of that type had been 
established. Those proposals were the subject of an ONDRAF report entitled 
"Disposal Concept and Overall Costs (June 1989)", which 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 15 


presented a scenario for waste management and an evaluation of the overall 
costs of waste disposal. The report was currently being considered by the 
relevant authorities. 


54. Those actions were evidence of Belgium's interest in the Agency's waste 
management programme. The publication of the Radioactive Waste Safety 
Standards and the establishment of the International Radioactive Waste 
Management Advisory Committee, which the Director General had referred to in 
his statement, would help to demonstrate that coherent systems for the safe 
and economic management of wastes existed and would contribute significantly 
to their harmonization. He wished to point out that the BR3 pressurized-water 
reactor at the CEN site in Mol was one of the four installations chosen by 
the EG for its demonstration programme on the decommissioning of nuclear power 
plants. 
55. Belgium had always attached great importance to the policy of 
non-proliferation and hence Agency safeguards. It welcomed the safeguards 
statement for 1988 and the background information to that statement, which 
highlighted the key element of the safeguards system, namely its voluntary 
nature. 
56. The adoption of new guidelines for the implementation of safeguards was 
an important matter which should be dealt with promptly. International 
competition in that area was fierce, and the future of certain sensitive 
plants in non-nuclear-weapon States could depend on those guidelines and on 
how they were applied. The solution adopted for the uniform implementation of 
safeguards at centrifuge enrichment plants in both nuclear-weapon and 
non-nuclear-weapon States should serve as a model for the plutonium-bearingfuel 
fabrication plants. 
57. Another crucial question was the long-term financing of safeguards. 
Belgium would make its contribution to that issue by resubmitting the 
proposals it had presented together with other Member States in which 
safeguards were applied. 
58. The Agency's Safeguards Implementation Report acknowledged the 
considerable contributions made by Member States' support programmes. The 
Agency had proposed certain guiding principles with a view to drawing up an 

GC(XXXI11)/OR.318 
page 16 


overall programme and defining the activities to be carried out. Within that 
new framework, Belgium would continue to respond to Agency requests for 
assistance in conducting its safeguards research programme. 


59. While his delegation welcomed the progress made in respect of the 
revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole, it remained concerned by the 
absence of a satisfactory solution to that question. Efforts should be made 
to find a solution along the lines of the Italian proposal which provided for 
a moderate and balanced increase in the number of seats on the Board. 
60. As for the future, his country endorsed the general concepts outlined 
by the Director General in the statements he had delivered in Amsterdam and 
Moscow on 3 and 15 May 1989. 
61. Tt was very important to have the clearest possible picture of the 
economic and environmental advantages and disadvantages of all forms of 
energy. Through its programme for the comparative evaluation of nuclear power 
and alternative energy sources, the Agency should be able to provide a useful 
reference data on that subject. 
62. Mr. YUN (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), after endorsing 
the Director General's opening statement and the Agency's Annual Report 
for 1988, said that, as a reliable and economic source of energy, nuclear 
power was attracting ever more attention, especially in developing countries. 
Nuclear energy's share of world electricity generation, which had already 
reached 17%, would continue to increase. There was also increasing awareness 
of the value of nuclear techniques in many sectors, and of their uniqueness in 
certain applications. 
63. The Agency's activities in nuclear safety, radiation protection, waste 
management, nuclear applications and technical co-operation had made a 
significant contribution to the development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in developing Member States. 
64. In order to meet increasing demand for electricity, several 
hydroelectric and thermal power plants were under construction in his country 
and preparations for the construction of a nuclear power plant were under 
way. Various problems concerning the siting of four WWER-440 units had been 
resolved, and the construction of WWER-1000 pressurized-water reactors was 
under consideration. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.318 
page 17 


65. In order to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the capacity 
of the existing TRT-type research reactor had been increased from 2 MW to 
8 MW. That reactor was now being used for studies in physics and on materials 
as well as for analysis and isotope production. Technical assistance provided 
by the Agency had played a major part in his country's achievements in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
66. Today, the nuclear problem was not restricted to science and 
technology, but also concerned world peace and life itself. All peoples 
wanted lasting world peace. His delegation commended the Agency on its 
safeguards activities, which contributed to that goal. His Government had put 
forward a proposal to turn the Korean peninsula into a nuclear-free zone so as 
to help ensure peace and security in the Asian region and the rest of the 
world, and it was making every effort to implement that proposal. All those 
who worked for peace would be aware of the tense situation in the Korean 
peninsula and would support the efforts being made by his country to eliminate 
the threat of nuclear war and to ease tensions. His country would continue to 
co-operate with the Agency and to fulfil its responsibilities as a 
Member State of that organization. 


67. Mr. PAREJA CUCALON (Ecuador) expressed his Government's gratitude 
to the Agency for its untiring work in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy in the interests of peace, health and development in the world. 
Ecuador was becoming increasingly aware of the fact that the attainment of a 
world of peace and solidarity depended on the peaceful use of the atom. His 
country welcomed all initiatives aimed at disarmament and the elimination of 
the threat of nuclear war, and would like to see the vast resources currently 
used for military purposes being made available to support efforts to improve 
social conditions, a task which was vitally important for the developing 
world. Nuclear safety, which could be considered part of those efforts, 
needed strong support from all governments as well as the valuable 
contribution which the Agency could make. Radiation protection, which 
contributed to the goals of nuclear safety, also deserved the attention of 
Member States. 
68. The universal acceptance of safeguards was essential to ensuring the 
peaceful use of all nuclear facilities. It was vital to train the staff of 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 18 


nuclear facilities in that area. That matter had been given particular 
attention by the Secretariat which had, among other things, recruited more 
safeguards inspectors from Latin American countries. It was to be hoped that 
those efforts would continue and be intensified. 


69. A matter which was of great concern to his Government was the 
protection of the environment, not only against deforestation and soil 
deterioration, but also against the more serious threat of the dumping of 
nuclear wastes, which affected the ecosystem for long periods of time and 
endangered the health of generations to come. His country would like to see a 
joint effort aimed at finding strategies for the prevention of transboundary 
radiological risks associated with such practices. Procrastination in the 
environmental area could be very harmful to economic growth and social 
progress. At the regional level, Ecuador was contributing actively to the 
objectives of the Permanent South Pacific Commission, which were vital for its 
own survival. Ecuador also maintained strong interest in the ARCAL programme, 
which was an important instrument for co-operation among Latin American 
countries. 
70. As a Member of the Agency for more than 30 years, Ecuador had received 
a major infusion of technology, which had formed the essential basis for the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in those areas of most 
benefit to the majority of its inhabitants. Aware of the importance of the 
work of the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission (CEEA), the Government had 
tripled the Commission's operating budget and provided it with the necessary 
infrastructure and personnel, thus enabling it to improve its co-operation 
with the Agency. Together with the Agency, projects were being implemented in 
such areas as agriculture, improvement of livestock productivity, genetics, 
animal health, hydrology, production of radiopharmaceuticals, applied nuclear 
physics, radiation technology, industrial applications, monitoring of 
radioactivity in the environment, fruit fly control and nuclear medicine 
services, which were all of great importance for improving the productive 
sector and demographic distribution of the country. However, much remained to 
be done in those and other spheres to bring about a substantial change in 
social conditions in Ecuador and to improve domestic demand and the 
manufacture of export products. 

GC(XXXIiI)/OR.318 
page 19 


71. Another aspect of the CEEA's activities was the establishment of a 
vital nuclear research centre which would provide effective training for the 
country's technicians, ensure proper implementation of projects and, no less 
importantly, facilitate the assimilation of the technology transferred. 
Ecuador wished to thank those friendly countries from different regions which 
had contributed to many of the projects mentioned, thereby demonstrating their 
support for international solidarity and co-operation. 
72. In conclusion, his delegation wished to reaffirm its conviction that 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the strict application of 
international instruments which promoted and regulated such uses would bring 
mankind a calm and peaceful future. It was in that context that his 
delegation expressed its strong support for the work which the Agency was 
carrying out as the body responsible for co-ordinating efforts aimed at 
attaining those objectives, and the hope that the implementation of the 
Agency's programmes would facilitate the worldwide application of the 
international legal regime. 
73. Mr. SMALL (Ireland) said that, as a party to NPT, his country 
attached the highest importance to the international non-proliferation regime, 
of which the Agency's safeguards system was the corner-stone. His Government 
set great store by the Agency's safeguards activities and therefore commended 
the Director General on his efforts to enhance their effectiveness and 
efficiency to the extent possible at a time of acute budgetary restraints and 
increasing demands. Ireland appealed to all Member States to work with the 
Agency to ensure the effective application of the safeguards system. 
74. The convening of the Fourth NPT Review Conference in 1990 was an event 
of major importance. The NPT had been the most effective arms control 
agreement to date and had helped significantly to strengthen international 
peace and security. He welcomed the fact that additional countries had signed 
the Treaty since the 1985 Review Conference. As 90% of the Member States of 
the United Nations Organization were now parties to the Treaty, it was to be 
hoped that it would one day become truly universal in scope. 
75. The Director General and several delegates had referred to the 
greenhouse effect and the warming of the atmosphere. There could be no doubt 
that there was a close link between energy consumption and long-term 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 20 


environmental damage and that carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere posed 
a serious problem. It was generally agreed that there was no single or simple 
solution to the problem. Research must be continued with the aim of more 
clearly defining the consequences of increased emissions and, it was to be 
hoped, of finding technical solutions. However, emphasis should also be 
placed on energy conservation, more efficient use of resources and the 
economical exploitation of renewable or less polluting energy sources such as 
natural gas. 


76. Several countries firmly believed that nuclear energy had an increasing 
role to play in alleviating that situation, but it would be wrong to say that 
nuclear energy was itself totally non-polluting and environmentally benign. 
It was therefore essential for the best technical, regulatory and safety 
practices to be adopted for the nuclear power industry, and for there to be 
greater openness in that area. In the light of the expanding role envisaged 
for nuclear energy, the need to strengthen safety was even greater. Without 
continued improvement in safety standards, nuclear energy would never be 
uni versally accepted by the public nor contribute to its alleviation of 
certain aspects of environmental pollution. 
77. Improving safety in order to make the nuclear industry universally 
acceptable required efforts in three areas. Firstly, more rigorous standards 
and the best available technology should be adopted and implemented for the 
design, construction and operation of nuclear facilities, with all 
installations which no longer met those standards being phased out and closed 
down. That would ultimately lead to safer reactors being designed and 
constructed and to a final solution being found to the problem of waste 
management. 
78. Secondly, effective national regulatory systems should be developed to 
ensure that the highest standards are applied in a transparent manner, and the 
sharing of national regulatory experience should be encouraged. In that 
connection, Ireland wholeheartedly supported the Agency's organization of a 
questionnaire on regulatory practices and safety standards, an initiative 
which had been discussed at a symposium in Munich in November 1988 and which 
he hoped would be developed further. Ireland had proposed two years 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.318 
page 21 


previously that those regulatory authorities which so desired could compare 
their practices and procedure;; using as a model the OSART missions widely 
acclaimed by the operators of nuclear facilities. 


79. Thirdly, even with the best technical and regulatory standards, the 
possibility of an accident could never be entirely excluded. Satisfactory 
solutions that went beyond the limitations of current conventions must be 
found to the problems of liability and compensation. His country welcomed the 
setting up of the Working Group on Liability for Nuclear Damage under the very 
able chairmanship of the Ambassador of the Netherlands. The time had come to 
consider a broader approach to the problem of nuclear liability: it should go 
beyond the level of liability that could be afforded by operators and 
insurers, and apply the principle of State liability and full acceptance of 
the consequences of damage caused to other countries. Other instruments 
relating to the international environment such as the conventions on space and 
satellites could serve as a model in that respect. 
80. In summary, although the greater use of nuclear power could help to 
reduce certain types of atmospheric pollution, such an expanded role could not 
be permitted if it meant accepting other well-known risks which could have 
even more disastrous consequences for the physical, economic and human 
environment. An increased effort was now needed to reduce those risks to a 
mimimum, and it was for the Agency to play the leading role in that essential 
area of international co-operation. In the final analysis, the principle of 
good neighbourliness must prevail if problems of concern to the whole world 
were to be resolved. 
81. His Government was particularly interested in the Agency's co-ordinated 
research programme on radon. That natural source of radiation was causing 
serious problems in a number of countries, including Ireland, and solutions 
were urgently required. 
82. His delegation also welcomed the Agency's efforts to develop basic 
safety principles for the management, transport and storage of radioactive 
wastes. Until political and technical solutions to that serious problem had 
been found and implemented, it would be unwise to contemplate expannding the 
role of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 22 


83. Finally, the technical assistance programme constituted an essential 
part of the Agency's activities. Ireland would continue to take part in 
activities involving the dissemination of up-to-date technology and the best 
practices to all nations; in the past two years, it had hosted training 
courses on various aspects of nuclear safety which had been attended by 
participants from all the regions of the world, and it hoped to continue its 
involvement in that work. 
84. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) said that he shared the Director General's view 
that the scale of environmental problems posed global threats to sustainable 
economic development. The problem of achieving environmentally sound and 
sustainable development was indeed one of the crucial issues of Lhe present 
era. 
85. With the World Commission on Environment and Development, he felt that 
the ecological risks inherent in current consumption patterns were so serious 
that energy consumption would have to be severely limited and supply systems 
changed if long-term sustainable development was to be achieved. 
86. His country also endorsed the following statement made in the World 
Commission's report: 
"The generation of nuclear power is only justifiable if there are solid 
solutions to the presently unsolved problems to which it gives rise. 
The highest priority must be accorded to research and development on 
environmentally sound and economically viable alternatives, as well as 
on means of increasing the safety of nuclear energy." 


87. The atmospheric concentration of CO and other gases was causing a 
greenhouse effect which might, in the longer term, lead to a heating up of the 
planet and climatic changes. However, energy consumption also caused more 
common and better known forms of pollution, as well as safety and waste 
storage problems. It was therefore not possible to compare the ecological 
advantages of various energy sources only on the basis of their atmospheric 
consequences. All the environmental consequences of the complete fuel cycle 
had to be evaluated for each of the energy sources available. 
88. The problems of safety and waste storage had been the main factors 
underlying the decision of the Danish parliament not to use nuclear energy. 
Denmark's energy policy had for some years followed the same lines as those 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 23 


recommended in the report of the World Commission. Since the 1970s it had 
been characterized by increased energy efficiency, strict standards for SO 
and NO emissions, increased use of energy sources which produced lower 


levels of CO and other gases which might contribute to the greenhouse 
effect, and research, development and demonstration work aimed at developing 
new and more satisfactory techniques. 


89. Denmark attached great importance to the Agency's nuclear safety 
activities. During the previous three years the foundation had been laid for 
greater co-operation in key areas of nuclear safety. He noted with pleasure 
the increasing number of Member States which had acceded to the Convention on 
Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in 
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. He also welcomed 
the continued co-operation between the Agency and the World Meteorological 
Organization with regard to the rapid transmission of meteorological and 
radiological data. Nor could the importance of bilateral agreements as a 
complement to multilateral agreements be ignored, particularly where the swift 
notification of nuclear accidents was concerned. Bilateral notification 
systems had operated effectively in a number of specific cases during the past 
year. 
90. The development of universally accepted standards and principles was 
essential in the field of nuclear energy. Denmark therefore welcomed the work 
which had been done on the five NUSS codes, and the updating of several safety 
guides. It would soon be necessary to update the NUSS codes further to take 
into account progress in nuclear technology and science. He expressed his 
strong support for the efforts of the International Nuclear Safety Advisory 
Group (INSAG) to develop basic safety principles for nuclear power plants 
reflecting the most advanced practices and policies. Naturally, the 
development of more effective safety principles and standards was bound to 
lead to a revision or modernization of safety systems in older plants. States 
which used nuclear power should be ready to meet the cost of such 
modernization. His delegation also endorsed the Agency's efforts to establish 
technical criteria and safety principles for the underground disposal of highlevel 
waste. 

GC(XXXilI)/OR.318 
page 24 


91. Safeguards, which were one of Agency's main activities, had made a 
great contribution to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The 
safeguards system ought to be expanded continuously and all nuclear facilities 
without exception should be placed under it. 
92. While his delegation welcomed the increase in the number of States 
which had become party to NPT, it was concerned that 52 of the non-nuclearweapon 
States party to that Treaty had not yet concluded safeguards agreements 
as they were required to do under Article III, and strongly urged those States 
to conclude agreements as soon as possible. 
93. It was encouraging to note that nuclear material under Agency 
safeguards in 1988 had remained in peaceful nuclear activities, or had been 
otherwise adequately accounted for. Equally welcome was the news that 
safeguards agreements covering some civil nuclear installations had now been 
concluded with all five nuclear-weapon States. It was to be hoped that the 
coverage of those agreements might be expanded. An increasing number of 
nuclear facilities would be subjected to Agency inspections during the coming 
years. The introduction of new and more efficient and effective safeguards 
approaches was therefore a very positive development. Nevertheless, it would 
be necessary in the longer term to increase the level of resources allocated 
to safeguards. Denmark had accepted the extension of the current financing 
arrangement for safeguards but it would have preferred a viable long-term 
solution to have been adopted. The General Conference should request the 
Board of Governors to step up its efforts in that regard. 
94. Denmark welcomed the adoption, in September 1988, of the Joint Protocol 
establishing a link between the Paris and Vienna Conventions on civil 
liability for nuclear damage. His Government had already ratified that 
Protocol. His country strongly supported the activities of the open-ended 
working group entrusted with the task of studying all aspects of liability for 
nuclear damage, and hoped that its work would swiftly reach a positive 
conclusion. 
95. Denmark attached great importance to the Agency's technical assistance 
activities, which continued to expand. The target of US $45.5 million 
for 1990 for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund was acceptable, 
and his country would pledge its full share of that target. 

GC(XXXTII)/OR.318 
page 25 


96. Mr. NAVARRO (Philippines) said that the arguments the Director 
General had put forward in his opening statement in support of the nuclear 
option, arguments based on concern for protection of the environment, provided 
much food for thought for national decision makers, including those in the 
Philippines, who were still wary of nuclear energy. Nuclear safety remained 
the key question. Nuclear accidents such as the ones at Chernobyl and 
Three Mile Island were still vivid memories, particularly since the damage 
caused to human beings might go beyond the present generation. Of course, it 
had been stated many times that the risk of a nuclear accident was simply 
that - a risk; however, even if that were true, efforts must continue to be 
made to reduce that risk to a minimum. Only then would the sceptics perhaps 
be fully convinced that nuclear power was the best option after all. 


97. The Agency was to be commended on the contribution it had made to the 
attainment of a high level of nuclear safety. The Philippines supported the 
expansion of the Agency's nuclear safety programme and its emphasis on 
technological change and operational safety. It continued to support the 
programme of Operational Safety Review Teams (OSARTs) and Radiation Protection 
Advisory Teams (RAPATs), and hoped that more emphasis would be placed on 
prevention than on corrective measures. 
98. The Philippines had implemented its own nuclear safety measures which 
were consonant with the Agency's work. His country's legislation and 
regulations on nuclear safety and radiation protection conformed with the 
standards and guidelines laid down in the NUSS codes. 
99. His Government attached great importance to technical co-operation. It 
supported the thrust of the Agency's technical co-operation programme and, 
generally, those activities that promoted the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. When drawing up technical assistance projects, extensive and 
continuous consultation must take place between the Agency and the 
Member State in question in order to ensure that the projects selected made a 
real contribution to the realization of national development objectives and 
that they were in line with those objectives. For States which had no nuclear 
power programme the Agency's technical assistance programme covering other 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy was of equal importance. His delegation would 

GC(XXXTII)/OR.318 
page 26 


like technical co-operation activities to be financed from more secure and 
regular sources and hoped that the Agency would continue consultations on that 
subject. 


100. With regard to administrative support for technical co-operation, he 
wished to express his concern at the splitting of the Division of Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation into two Divisions, one in charge of programming 
and the other in charge of implementation. The old structure had been 
efficient and he was not yet fully convinced that the split had been 
necessary. At all events, it was to be hoped that the new set-up would be 
responsive to the special needs of developing countries. 
101. His country was highly satisfied with the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement (RCA) for Asia and the Pacific, which was an effective instrument 
for improving regional self-sufficiency in the application of nuclear 
techniques in medicine, agriculture and industry. The fact that the Agency's 
share of the funding of RCA activities was steadily decreasing was a 
reflection of the broadening base of RCA resources and the maximum use being 
made of the region's financial and human resources. 
102. It was the Philippines objective to join the ranks of the newlyindustrialized 
countries by the year 2000. The Philippines recognized the 
value of nuclear technology in the industrialization process. The activities 
currently being carried out under the RCA were entirely consistent with that 
objective, since their aim was to improve the quality of health care and to 
meet the food needs of the population. In that context, particular mention 
should be made of the project concerning the application of tracer technology 
in industry and the training programme on non-destructive testing. His 
country continued to support the objectives of the RCA by participating 
actively in its programmes and might be able, in the very near future, to host 
an RCA working group meeting. 
103. With regard to liability for nuclear damage he noted that the working 
group entrusted with the task of determining gaps in the current civil 
liability regime and issues relating to State liability had made some 
progress. Certain issues in the existing civil liability system clearly fell 
within the purview of State liability. The question of the non-peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy was of special importance, and it was to be hoped that the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 27 


working group would examine that matter in depth at its next meeting and would 
make a recommendation concerning the embodiment in a multilateral instrument 
of all principles relating to State liability. 


104. With respect to the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat, there had 
been some improvement in the representation of developing countries. However, 
the Secretariat should redouble its efforts to increase the representation of 
those countries, particularly at the decision-making level. Representation of 
women at that level had not come up to expectations. The Agency should be 
guided in that matter by the numerous resolutions adopted by the United 
Nations General Assembly concerning the improvement of the representation of 
women in United Nations bodies. 
105. The question of the representation of Member States not members of the 
Board at meetings of the Board as observers had provoked intense discussion at 
the preceding session of the General Conference, which had invited the Board 
to examine the matter again and to report Lo it during the current session. 
His delegation had requested that the issue be included in the agenda of the 
current session so that the General Conference might discuss the action taken 
by the Board in response to the Conference's request. 
106. In view of the comments made by other delegations, the Philippines was 
submitting a revised draft resolution in document GC(XXXIll)/881/Add.1, which 
it hoped would meet with the Conference's approval. The aim of the text was 
to give Member States which were not members of the Board official observer 
status at that body and to allow them to participate fully in the 
deliberations of the Board without having the right to vote. The adoption of 
those measures would, moreover, reinforce the principle of sovereign equality 
of States and the universality of the Agency. It would also bring the Agency 
into J ine with other United Nations bodies which granted that privilege as a 
matter of right. 
107. While some changes had been introduced by the Secretariat during the 
current year in the physical arrangements for non-Board member's during Board 
meetings, he would like to see a more liberal interpretation of Article 50 of 
the Rules of Procedure to allow non-Board members to participate fully and 
spontaneously in Board meetings. In view of the noble aims of the draft 
resolution, his delegation hoped that it would be favourably received. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 28 

108. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) said that, with regard to nuclear 
activities in Zaire, he wished only to mention the safety problem posed by the 
corrosion of the tank of the TRIGA Mark II reactor at the Kinshasa Regional 
Nuclear Research Centre, which had been detected in August 1987 with the 
assistance of the Agency. The reactor had been shut down in March 1988 for 
repairs, had been disassembled, repaired and reassembled, and had attained 
criticality in March of the current year using only national human and 
material resources. 
109. As his contribution to the general debate he wished to concentrate on 
the problems currently facing the nuclear industry. The technicians in the 
nuclear industry saw those problems as being more socio-political than 
technical in nature. As far as the public at large was concerned, and 
therefore from a political point of view, the reverse was true. That 
disparity in the perception of the real problems in the nuclear industry had 
given rise to a large number of misunderstandings, which undeniably cast a 
cloud over the industry's future. The question was currently the subject of 
much debate, the general public having become aware of the environmental risks 
associated with a possible greenhouse effect caused by the discharge of 
various gases into the atmosphere. 
110. The report of the World Commission on Environment and Development had 
also provoked extensive comment. That report, which advocated sustainable 
development in the sense of development which allowed current needs to be met 
without compromising the ability of subsequent generations to meet theirs, 
laid particular stress on a minimum energy scenario. Such a scenario did not 
meet with agreement from certain, or even many, specialists in the nuclear 
power generation field, as shown by the somewhat critical document entitled 
"The International Atomic Energy Agency's Contribution to Sustainable 
Development" which the Agency was intending to present to the current session 
of the United Nations General Assembly. The chapter headings of that document 
were classic, as were the theses it maintained. Everything was presented in 
an irreproachable technical form, if the following reasoning were accepted. 
111. That reasoning was very simple: With regard to the application of 
nuclear techniques in agriculture, medicine and related sciences, the Agency 
was at least 80% committed to sustainable development. As far as energy 

GC(XXXiri)/OR.318 
page 29 


generation was concerned, the nuclear option produced the Least pollution, as 
long as there were no further major accidents like Chernobyl; every effort was 
being made to ensure that, as the extremely small number of major accidents 
(two at the most) which had occurred in the course of 5000 reactor- years of 
operation showed. Moreover, only one of those, the Chernobyl accident, had 
had a significant effect on the environment. There remained, of course, the 
problems of nuclear proliferation and waste management. However, there too, 
technical and organizational solutions were not lacking. According to the 
Agency, the safeguards system was functioning well, since no significant 
diversion had yet been detected in countries which had adhered to NPT. 


112. The good report which the Agency had given of itself was justified, 
except for a few fine points which needed to be raised. The reason for those 
reservations was that protection of the environment had become a highly 
politicized common topic that no one could afford to ignore in current times, 
especially when considering the nuclear option. 
113. Given the new political dimension of the environmental topic, the 
stakes were high for all those involved and particularly for the Agency. For 
the latter, the major hurdle to be overcome could be summed up by the 
following statement made by the Secretariate*] in the Nuclear Safety Review 
for 1988: 
"In more than 30 years and more than 5000 reactor-years of nuclear 
power experience there has been only one accident with major 
consequence for public health ... Despite this record, there remained 
widespread public concern that nuclear power is too risky". 


Several incidents, more or less recent, had fed that feeling, and it had been 
further aggravated by the "hollow rhetoric" which had long characterized 
everything to do with the nuclear industry. The Secretariat document cited 
certain of those incidents concerning the management of radioactive waste and 
actual or potential accidents affecting both civil and military nuclear 
facilities. 


114. In the light of such examples and several more besides, it quickly 
became apparent that it would be an ill-advised move to reduce the problem 
[*] Document GOV/2399, paragraph 01, 02. 



GC(XXXIIi)/OR.318 
page 30 


confronting the nuclear power industry to a simple question of poor quality 
information regarding the risk involved and the progress wade in the safety of 
nuclear installations. Indeed, more and more people who exercised an 
influence on public opinion were in a position to make a credible cost-benefit 
analysis of the nuclear industry. Certain among them were coming to the 
conclusion that the risk of a Chernobyl every 30 years and every 5000 reactoryears 
was quite simply unacceptable. It was thus evident that a very 
considerable qualitative jump would have to be made in the nuclear safety area 
if those people who were both well informed and sceptical about the nuclear 
issue, but who were nevertheless prepared to evaluate all the power generation 
options available without prejudice, were to be convinced and reassured. 


115. The scale of the qualitative jump which had to be made in the safety 
area called for a switch in reactor design philosophy to inherently safe 
reactors. He had urged the Agency on previous occasions to adopt that 
approach in its nuclear power programme. Without concerted action to promote 
inherently safe reactors, the reviews of the position of nuclear power in the 
electricity-generating sector which were currently being undertaken by several 
countries would result more and more frequently in the reduction, postponement 
and gradual phasing out of nuclear programmes, despite the incontestable 
advantages of nuclear power, with respect to, for example, the reduction of 
emissions of gases which contributed to the greenhouse effect. In sum, it was 
easier for the informed politician to get the public to accept the concept of 
passive safety than that of active safety. 
116. The concept of passive safety had the advantage that it was 
particularly well-suited to smaller-scale reactors, which was a good thing for 
developing countries. The use of the nuclear power option in those countries 
was restricted by the low capacity of the existing electricity grids and the 
high cost of the installed kilowatt, which made initial investments 
prohibitively high. But that did not apply if the reactor size was reduced. 
Inherently safe small- and medium-power reactors could finally bring about the 
nuclear power breakthrough in developing countries which they had been 
awaiting for the 30 years following the introduction of nuclear power. The 
absence of economies of scale with that type of reactor could be offset by the 
use of standardization, which would allow shop fabrication, and modular 
designs. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 31 


117. In its programme for 1990, two key ideas should guide the Agency in the 
current international situation. The first was the idea of passive safety 
which he had just discussed. The second was that of sustainable development 
as used in the World Commission's report. Those two ideas were, of course, 
closely connected with protection of the environment, which seemed to be the 
dominant factor in the changes proposed by the Secretariat to the 1990 
programme. That was a change of course which his delegation approved of; 
however, it was regrettable that, in order to take part in a scientific 
symposium on electricity and the environment, numerous radiation protection 
and safety-related projects had, according to the Secretariat, to be 
sacrificed. 
118. The Secretariat had made considerable progress with the management of 
the technical assistance and co-operation programme. Multi-year programming 
did not necessarily bring with it only advantages, however. The longer the 
programming period became, the more random the programming process became. 
The risks of changes, the economic difficulties of Member States, the downward 
revision of the growth rate for indicative planning figures, the lack of 
experience with multi-year programming and finally the ageing of research 
reactors all contributed to the his delegation's scepticism about the 
justification for strict multi-year programming. In addition, the room for 
manoeuvre recently introduced in multi-year programming through the 
establishment of a reserve fund did not seem sufficient. 
119. He noted with regret the low level of resources allocated to Africa 
under the technical co-operation programme by comparison with other regions. 
Within Africa itself, the French-speaking countries received less assistance 
than other linguistic zones in the continent. The Secretariat should take 
urgent measures to remedy that situation. 
120. In conclusion, he was confident that Mr. Blix would do everything in 
his power to ensure that in the future nuclear energy would be promoted in a 
more equitable manner, particularly where Africa was concerned. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 32 


121. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) said that his country was proud to belong to 
the Agency, which, after 33 years' existence, could boast of remarkable 
achievements in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In 1988, the installed 
nuclear capacity in the world had increased by about 4.3%, reaching 311 GW(e), 
and nuclear power plants had acccounted for more than 17% of the world's 
electricity output. By the end of 1988, there had been 429 nuclear power 
plants in operation. Table 1 of the annual report for 1988 showed that all 
nuclear power plants in operation were in Europe, America, Asia and 
South Africa. Although developing countries had not made any significant 
progress in that area, the Agency had continued its efforts to help those 
States to establish nuclear infrastructures. Specifically, it had provided 
assistance in the planning and implementation of nuclear power projects, 
organized training courses, carried out expert missions and issued reports and 
information documents. Nevertheless, in order to be able to keep up with new 
developments, developing countries desperately needed more help, especially 
since many of them lacked traditional energy sources such as coal and oil. 


122. His delegation had carefully examined the activities carried out by the 
Agency in 1988 in nuclear safety, including the work done by INSAG, which had 
focused on developing basic safety principles for nuclear power plants, and 
the formulation by the Agency of recommendations relating to basic critera for 
radiation protection, occupational and environmental protection, the transport 
of radioactive materials, emergency planning and preparedness, the control of 
radiation sources, radiation safety of nuclear fuel-related activities, and 
exposure assessment and handling. 
123. His delegation noted with satisfaction that no accident with 
radiological consequences for health or the environment had occurred at a 
nuclear power plant in 1988. That achievement was proof of the perseverance 
and seriousness with which the Agency pursued its work, and of the success of 
its nuclear safety programme. None the less, developing countries were still 
in urgent need of assistance to strengthen their nuclear capabilities and to 
train their staff in nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
124. The Agency was to be commended on its activities in waste management, a 
subject which required full attention if nuclear safety were to be assured. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 33 


Particularly welcome were the establishment of the International Radioactive 
Waste Management Advisory Committee (INWAC) and the activities of the Waste 
Management Advisory Programme (WAMAP), under which 12 missions had been 
carried out in developing countries and assistance had been provided with the 
implementation of national radioactive waste management programmes. Support 
had also been given to technical co-operation projects in 19 Member States. 
In the light of the economic difficulties facing developing countries and the 
fact that certain irresponsible groups were trying to take advantage of those 
difficulties, he trusted that the Agency would continue its efforts in that 
area and give priority to requests from developing countries for assistance in 
the waste management field. 


125. The Department of Technical Co-operation deserved praise for the 
assistance it had given developing countries and for encouraging them to 
pursue their nuclear power programmes. Planning methods and tools had been 
made available by the Agency to those countries, and training had been 
provided in their use. Morocco was particularly pleased with the work done by 
advisory groups, which had contributed, among other things, to the preparation 
of a reference book which contained information on conventional and innovative 
methods of financing nuclear power projects in developing countries and which 
also discussed the experience acquired in that area. 
126. His delegation greatly appreciated the fruitful co-operation between 
his country and the Department of Technical Co-operation, and thanked the 
Agency's staff for the assistance given to Morocco in such areas as nuclear 
power, the drafting of nuclear legislation, the application of nuclear 
techniques in studies relating to animal production and disease diagnosis, and 
training in nuclear medicine and other disciplines. With regard to regional 
co-operation between developing countries, Africa was still in need of a 
constructive regional mechanism in the field of nuclear energy. Morocco, 
which had much experience in the subject as well as the necessary human and 
material resources, was prepared to co-operate with the States of the region 
in regional projects that would allow those countries to exchange the 
information and skills they had acquired in such areas as the use of nuclear 
techniques in medicine, agriculture, physics and chemistry. It was as part of 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 34 


regional co-operative efforts that Morocco had attended a conference of 
African plenipotentiaries in Addis Ababa in May 1989, the aim of which had 
been to establish a technical advisory committee for nuclear sciences and 
techniques. 


127. Morocco's nuclear power programme was moving forward. A decision had 
been taken to establish a National Nuclear Energy Council whose task would be 
to promote and develop nuclear technology in the country and to liaise between 
the various national bodies in the nuclear sector. The preparatory studies 
for the El Mamoura Nuclear Research Centre (CEN), which would be ready at the 
end of 1992, had been completed. Furthermore, nuclear legislation was about 
to ratified. Studies relating to the nuclear power plant that was to become 
operational at the beginning of the next century were being continued. The 
fact that Morocco had succeeded to some extent in laying the foundations of 
its future nuclear programmes and in increasing and upgrading its human and 
material resources, was broadly due to its co-operation with the Agency and 
friendly Member States. 
128. Morocco would soon take the measures necessary to ratify various 
conventions established under the Agency's auspices. 
129. His delegation could not refer to the expansion of the safeguards 
system and the non-proliferation regime without condemning Israel's stubborn 
attitude and irresponsible behaviour with regard to the recommendations made 
by the General Conference and the resolutions of the United Nations Security 
Council and the General Assembly. The Israeli Government was persisting in 
its refusal to respect the United Nations Charter and the decisions of all 
international bodies. It was regrettable that the report submitted by the 
Director General contained nothing which might move Israel to change its mind 
and to accept the Agency's decisions. His delegation very much hoped that the 
General Conference would do everything in its power to ensure that Israel 
complied with resolutions GC(XXXII)/RES/487 and GC(XXXI)/RES/470. With 
respect to the comparison made between the Middle East and other regions in 
the Director General's note on the modalities of the application of safeguards 
in the Middle East, his delegation considered that the circumstances in the 
Middle East were completely different from those to be found elsewhere, as it 
was a zone of conflict where territories were occupied and the Arab people 
were the victims of a policy of aggression and oppression. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 35 


130. His country condemned the co-operation between the Israeli entity and 
the South African Government, since that represented a grave threat to peace 
and security in Africa and the Middle East. It also condemned the attitude of 
the racist Government of Pretoria, which refused to comply with various 
General Conference resolutions calling on it to place its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. His delegation hoped that the South African 
Government would be made to abandon its diversionary tactics and stubborn 
attitude, and urged Member States to take the necessary decisions on that 
matter and to settle, once and for all, the question of the implementation of 
the Board's recommendation contained in document GC(XXXI)/807, which called 
for South Africa to be suspended from exercising its rights and privileges of 
membership under Article XIX.B of the Agency's Statute. The Conference should 
take a definitive decision on that recommendation at its current session. 
131. As the United Nations General Assembly had decided by resolution 43/177 
of 20 December 1988 that the designation "Palestine" should be used in the 
United Nations system instead of the designation "Palestine Liberation 
Organization", the Agency should make the same change and should make it 
possible for Palestine to participate effectively in its work, whether in the 
Board of Governors, the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee or 
scientific and technical meetings. His delegation therefore appealed to all 
Member States to support the resolution on that matter. 
132. His delegation wished to inform the General Conference that the 
Moroccan Government had decided to make a voluntary contribution of US $18 200 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1990. 
133. In conclusion, his country reaffirmed its wholehearted support for the 
work of the Agency. 
134. Mr. NGUYEN DONG HAI (Viet Nam) recalled that it was the Agency's 
statutory objective "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". Faithful to 
that lofty ideal, the Agency, an organization of high prestige, had played an 
important role in promoting international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and was thereby contributing to the realization of a dream of 
mankind: a nuclear-weapon-free world. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 36 


135. The transfer of experience and technology and the assistance given in 
research and development, training, energy planning and other areas had helped 
developing countries to use nuclear science and technology to develop their 
economies and improve the welfare of their people. He hoped that developed 
countries and the Agency would always be able to understand the aspirations of 
developing countries in that respect and would meet their just demands. 
136. His country had been a Member of the Agency since 1979 and had 
benefited from its technical assistance programme, to which it attached great 
importance. That programme had helped Viet Nam to improve the physical and 
technical conditions that were essential for the development of nuclear 
science and technology and to improve the skills of the country's scientific 
and technical personnel. 
137. Nuclear power was still at a preparatory stage of development in his 
country, and activities were focused on the non-power applications of nuclear 
energy. As in other developing countries, medicine and agriculture were the 
main areas in which nuclear science and technology were applied. Furthermore, 
as a tropical country where post-harvest losses were high, Viet Nam was very 
interested in the technique of preserving food by irradiation and was planning 
to put a multipurpose 220 kCi cobalt-60 irradiation facility into operation by 
the third quarter of 1990. 
138. Where the industrial applications of nuclear techniques were concerned, 
Viet Nam was preparing to introduce non-destructive testing and radiotracer 
techniques and nucleonic control systems. It had officially participated in a 
UNDP-supported regional co-operative project on the industrial applications of 
nuclear techniques. 
139. With the help of the Agency and the Soviet Union, the Dalat reactor had 
been restarted in 1984 with an increased power of 500 kW. It had been 
operating satisfactorily for the past five years and was being used for 
research, training, radioisotope production and activation analysis of 
geological, biological and environmental samples. In order to increase the 
efficiency of the reactor, Viet Nam wished to integrate it into the region's 
nuclear reactor network and to take part in the RCA training and research 
programme. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 37 


140. Viet Nam was contributing both to the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities and to other activities aimed at ensuring the safe utilization of 
nuclear energy. It had signed the Convention on Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency in 1988. His Government was party to the 
RCA and to the Asian regional project on food irradiation. 
141. His country intended to use nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. It strongly supported all international efforts aimed at the 
progressive elimination of the threat of a nuclear war, and welcomed any step 
that would ensure the safety of non-nuclear-weapon States. Consequently, 
having signed a safeguards agreement in 1981 concerning the Dalat research 
reactor, it was now prepared to sign a safeguards agreement pursuant to NPT, 
to which it was a party. 
142. The peoples of the world wanted peace, international independence and 
economic progress. Viet Nam's foreign policy was one of peace, friendship and 
co-operation. The withdrawal of all Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea had just 
been completed and would undoubtedly contribute to peaceful coexistence in 
South East Asia. 
143. Mankind was now on a path which would lead it to a world free of 
nuclear weapons, a world of mutual understanding and genuine co-operation. 
His delegation was confident that the Agency would make a valuable 
contribution to the attainment of that noble objective. 
Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) resumed the Chair. 


144. Mr. AL-WAHAIBI (Observer from Oman) said that his country, 
although not a Member of the Agency, followed its activities and programmes 
with increasing interest. The transboundary consequences of any nuclear 
accident and the issue of nuclear safety in all its aspects were problems 
which concerned the entire world. That made it imperative to establish a 
non-proliferation regime in the Middle East and to prevent an arms race in 
that region. Furthermore, nuclear power, which posed no risks for health and 
the environment, was a reliable long-term energy option. 
145. Countries which opted for nuclear programmes should accept the 
responsibility and consequences which such a choice entailed and, more 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 38 


specifically, should make every effort to resolve the problem of nuclear waste 
disposal. It was of paramount importance that nuclear energy be used without 
jeopardizing the safety and security of man's environment. 


146. His delegation welcomed the effective work carried out by the Agency in 
training technical staff from developing countries, the increase in the number 
of training courses since 1980, and the achievements attained under the 
technical co-operation programme. It also appreciated the significant 
contribution made by the safeguards system in preventing nuclear proliferation. 
147. Oman was deeply troubled by the grave threat posed by the expansion of 
Israel's nuclear capabilities, by the fact that Israel refused to implement 
the resolutions of the General Conference and of the United Nations 
organization calling for it to place its nuclear facilities under 
international safeguards, and by the fact that Israel and South Africa were 
co-operating closely in order to increase their military nuclear 
capabilities. Those actions posed a great threat to a large area of the 
world. His delegation therefore called on the General Conference to take due 
account of what was happening and to adopt the only attitude that was possible 
towards those two regimes. 
148. The recent peace initiatives, the international climate of detente and 
the agreement signed between the Soviet Union and the United States on the 
elimination of certain categories of medium-range nuclear weapons in Europe 
all offered new hope and confidence in the possibility of achieving the noble 
humanitarian goal of placing nuclear energy at the service of mankind and 
ridding the world of all nuclear weapons. Oman would welcome and support any 
measure enabling nuclear technology to be exploited as quickly and widely as 
possible for the creation of a peaceful and more prosperous world. 
149. Mr. BUCHOWIECKI (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA)) 
said that the Agency's achievements in 1988 had made a major contribution to 
resolving the economic and energy problems facing the world. Special mention 
should be made of the steps taken to create an international regime for the 
safe development of nuclear power and the work done in the nuclear safety and 
radiation protection area. Those actions had only been made possible because 
of the favourable climate prevailing in international relations. 

GG(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 39 


150. The growing role of nuclear power in the economy of CMEA countries was 
attributable to their desire to have relatively inexpensive electricity, to 
reduce consumption of fossil fuels and to avoid environmental pollution. The 
installed capacity of nuclear power plants in CMEA countries exceeded 
45 000 MW. Those plants produced some 280 billion kW/h of electricity per 
year, which represented about 13% of those countries' total electricity 
generation and resulted in savings of more than 90 million tons of fossil 
fuels. 
151. At its forty-fourth session, CMEA had stressed the importance it 
attached to increased co-operation in nuclear energy, and had confirmed that 
most of the increase in its electricity requirements would be met by expanding 
nuclear power programmes. By the end of the century, nuclear power would 
account for 30-40% of total electricity output in CMEA countries. Also, a 
decision had been taken to draw up a design for a nuclear power plant of the 
next generation, which would have water-cooled and water-moderated WER-1000 
reactors that ensured a high level of safety and offered better technical and 
economic performance. It was planned to complete the design work by 1992 and 
to put the first units into operation by the year 2000. 
152. CMEA countries were showing considerable interest in such promising 
applications of nuclear energy as its use for district heating, in which they 
had already acquired a great deal of experience. The Soviet Union was 
currently constructing nuclear plants for district heating equipped with 
500 MW reactors. A number of other CMEA countries wished to build nuclear 
plants of the same type, but with a capacity of between 30 and 200 MW. 
153. The CMEA was committed to helping create an international nuclear 
safety and had drawn up measures to strengthen the safety of nuclear power 
plants in its Member countries. Those measures, which were aimed at creating 
the physical, technical and scientific basis for the safe development of 
nuclear power in Member countries, included theoretical and experimental work 
on quality assurance in plant design, construction and operation; monitoring 
and diagnostic systems during plant operation; manpower training, protection 
of workers, the public and the environment; and the elaboration of 
international legal instruments pertaining to nuclear safety. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 40 


154. The CMEA was finalizing a draft intergovernmental agreement on mutual 
assistance between its Member countries in the event of a nuclear accident. 
That draft, which was to be signed in October, provided for both the immediate 
notification of any accident and mutual assistance in eliminating its 
consequences. It was also planned to build up a stock of equipment to be used 
in clean-up operations and for protecting workers and the public. 
155. As the third millenium approached, mankind was increasingly aware that 
the protection of the environment was a vital social and economic issue. CMEA 
countries had co-operated in that area for 25 years and were currently 
implementing a comprehensive programme of co-operation for the period 1986-90 
in the areas of environmental protection and the rational utilization of 
natural resources. Part of the programme dealt with radiation protection, 
including the assessment of the effectiveness of personnel protection systems, 
with the development of waste management and disposal technologies, and with 
the strenthening of nuclear power plant safety. In addition, the GMEA 
countries were preparing a draft strategy for the protection of the 
environment up to the year 2010. 
156. The CMEA co-operated with the Agency under an agreement signed in 1975, 
the main form of co-operation being the exchange of scientific, technical and 
legal documents. The results had been good and the contacts between the two 
international organizations had become a tradition. However, that 
co-operation could be extended to many other activities. 
157. The joint meetings held as part of the co-ordinated research programme 
on the probabilistic modelling of accident sequences in nuclear power plants 
were a good example of mutual understanding. Under that programme, which had 
brought together scientists from about 16 countries (of which 7 were members 
of the CMEA), specific research activities were being carried out and 
technical reports prepared. Within the regional programme, recommendations 
had been made to five CMEA countries on the probabalistic safety assessment of 
VVER-440 reactors. 
158. The CMEA would continue to intensify international co-operation and to 
work towards improving public confidence in nuclear power and towards greater 
openess in that area. To that end, it would make every effort to work with 
other countries and international organizations, especially the Agency. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.318 
page 41 


159. The PRESIDENT invited the representative of the Islamic Republic 
of Iran to exercise his right of reply, but requested all delegations to keep 
statements of a political nature to a mimimum so that the debate could 
continue in the spirit of reconciliation which he had urged when accepting the 
presidency of the Conference. 
160. Mr. AYTOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that certain parts 
of the statement which he had made the previous day seemed to have been been 
misinterpreted by the Iraqi delegation. To avoid any unnecessary discussion, 
he therefore wished to make a number of comments. 
161. The Islamic Republic of Iran had never been opposed to United Nations 
resolution 598, but had accepted it in good faith and genuinely sought its 
full implementation. Contrary to the allegations made by the Iraqi 
delegation, it was not putting any obstacles in the way of peace 
negotiations. It was Iraq which still held a large part of Iranian territory, 
in violation of the first item of resolution 598. 
162. With regard to the inspection of shipping in the Persian Gulf, his 
country was acting in accordance with its rights under international maritime 
law. With regard to the Arvand River and, indeed, all other boundary disputes 
between his country and Iraq, those had all been clarified in the 1975 treaty 
between the two countries, which was still in force. 
163. In conclusion, his delegation wished to stress once again its commitment 
to United Nations resolution 598 and to its full implementation. 
164. The PRESIDENT, observing that the Iraqi delegation had asked to 
exercise its right of reply and after consulting the Secretariat, said that 
that right could not be exercised indefinitely. He therefore requested the 
representative of Iraq to show understanding by forgoing his right of reply. 
165. Mr. AL-MATOOQ (Iraq) said that he would forgo his right of reply. 
166. The PRESIDENT thanked the representative of Iraq for his 
co-operation. 
The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 



6C(XXXIII)/OR.3I9 
11 October 1989 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


ENGLISH 


THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 28 September 1989, at 10.10 a.m. 


President: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 
later: Mr. CLARK (United Kingdom) 
Mr. CARR (United States of America) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
anda* 


General debate and annual report for 1988 (resumed) 


Statement by the delegate of: 


Austria 


Report by the Chairman of the Special Scientific Meeting 
on the New Generation of Power Reactors 


General debate and annual report for 1988 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Australia 
Sweden 
Kenya 
Bangladesh 
Tunisia 
Greece 
Cote d'Ivoi re 
Sudan 
Colombia 
Peru 
Cyprus 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
and the Caribbean 
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions 


[*] GC(XXXIII)/897. 


Paragraphs 


I -9 


I -9 


10 - 17 


18-90 


18 - 26 
27 - 36 
37 - 41 
42 - 48 
49 - 55 
56 - 57 
58 - 63 
64 - 69 
70 - 74 
75 - 79 
80 - 81 


82 - 85 


86-90 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXIII)/INF/274/Rev.2. 


89-4759 
(5579e/58le) 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (resumed) 


1. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) pointed out that* the development of 
nuclear power during the past year demonstrated a conviction on the part of 
Member States that nuclear energy provided what they considered to be a viable 
alternative to environmentally more hazardous forms of energy production. 
2. The decision of the Austrian Parliament in 1978, following a 
referendum, not to utilize nuclear fission for the purposes of generating 
power, was an expression of the apprehension felt by Austria of the latent 
insecurity in the utilization of nuclear power. All technical facilities had 
some risk of malfunctioning. Even the highest possible level of safety could 
not eliminate the risks of human error. 
3. In discussions in the Agency on the subject of nuclear safety, there 
was strong support for the concept of exclusive national responsibility for 
the safety of nuclear facilities on national territory, as opposed to the 
concept of internationally binding safety standards and international control 
of the safety of nuclear facilities, as favoured by a number of countries, 
including Austria. If the concept of the operator State's exclusive 
responsibility for nuclear safety within its territory was accepted, then 
logically, any defect in the safety of nuclear facilities on national 
territory should consequently engage the liability of the operator State for 
the damaging consequences. There was, therefore, an essential connection 
between national responsibility and liability in the field of nuclear safety. 
4. The costs of providing for potential or actual compensation for damage 
caused by incidents resulting from nuclear power generation should be included 
in the evaluation of the cost of that type of energy production and should 
obviously be borne by the national economy deriving the benefits of that 
activity, namely the national economy of the operator State. It was therefore 
unjust when, in the case of a nuclear incident with transboundary damage, 
States other than the operator State were obliged to cover the cost of the 
ensuing damage - including the cost for preventive measures - and thus to make 
an economic contribution to nuclear energy production carried out in the 
operator State for the benefit of its own national economy. 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 3 


5. Such a situation existed in the case of operator State and victim 
States which were not mutually bound by either of the existing civil liability 
conventions. Raising State-to-State claims for nuclear damage under customary 
international law appeared to be extremely difficult owing to a certain lack 
of clarity regarding the legal basis for such claims, Which was often combined 
with the absence of an agreed forum for litigation. 
6. Even when the operator State and the victim State were bound by one of 
the existing civil liability conventions and a certain amount of compensation 
for transboundary damage caused by a nuclear incident could be expected, that 
amount was likely to be inadequate, since one of the aims pursued in the 
elaboration of the two civil liability conventions was to provide economic 
support to the expansion of nuclear power generation by channelling and 
limiting liability for transboundary damages caused by incidents in nuclear 
facilities. 
7. His delegation welcomed the establishment and constructive first 
meeting of the open-ended Working Group on Liability for Nuclear Damage. 
However, it regretted that some States represented in the Working Group 
believed that it was not possible to include the consideration of the 
elaboration of a complementary instrument to the existing civil liability 
conventions in the agenda of the second session of the Working Group. It was 
high time that a new and comprehensive convention on nuclear damage was 
drafted, giving due regard to the liability of the operator State for 
transboundary nuclear damage caused by nuclear facilities on its national 
territory. 
8. During the first session of the Working Group a large number of 
delegations had identified flaws in the law of the existing civil liability 
conventions. Apart from the question of limited adherence to those 
conventions, delegations had referred to their limited coverage of nuclear 
damage, excluding damage inflicted to the environment and excluding losses 
resulting from preventive and protective measures taken by Governments in the 
event of a major nuclear accident; the inadequacy of the financial limits of 
liability; the inadequacy of the time limits for the submission of claims; 
the potentially unfavourable position of claimants for nuclear damage in 
individual proceedings in foreign courts; the fact that in the event of a 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page A 


severe nuclear accident, the high number of individual claims under the 
present conventions would overburden the competent civil court and lead to 


interminable proceedings. 


9. In conclusion, in order to arrive at an international nuclear liability 
regime doing justice to the legitimate interests of all parties involved and, 
in particular, the victims of transboundary nuclear damage, it would not be 
sufficient to amend the present conventions; what was necessary was a new 
comprehensive instrument on liability for nuclear damage which took into 
account the liability of the operator State. 
Mr. CLARK (United Kingdom) took the Chair. 


REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING ON THE NEW GENERATION 
OF POWER REACTORS 


10. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had recommended that 
the outcome of the Special Scientific Meeting on the New Generation of Power 
Reactors should be reported to the Plenary meeting. He would therefore ask 
Mr. Schlesinger, Chairman of the Special Scientific Meeting, to address the 
Conference. 
11. Mr. SCHLESINGER said that the first session of the Special 
Scientific Meeting on the New Generation of Power Reactors had provided an 
insight into plant owners' expectations and requirements regarding the new 
generation of nuclear power plants. For the most part, owners seemed 
satisfied with the advances that were being made in nuclear power plant 
designs, including those involving the simplification and improvement of the 
current generation of nuclear power plants, as well as those involving more 
innovative designs with development features. Greater enthusiasm was perhaps 
shown for those types based on existing designs owing to the breadth of 
available experience, although all concepts were declared to have a valid 
purpose. Institutional barriers associated with licensing, public acceptance 
and fair recovery of costs were seen to constitute a major obstacle to the 
revival of nuclear power. Investors were not prepared to just underwrite 
those risks. It was thought that increasing concerns about the environmental 
impact of fossil fuel burning would provide the impetus for solving those 
problems. 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 5 


12. The second session concerned regulatory issues and provided some 
suggestions on how some of those difficulties might be resolved. Emphasis was 
placed on the need to establish acceptable standards, as for example in the 
case of siting criteria, and the need to standardize the designs in such a 
manner as to achieve a type of certification process which would make it 
possible to streamline and shorten the licensing process. An interesting 
perspective on restoring confidence in nuclear power was also presented. The 
major points concerned the use of terminology and references which were a 
source of confusion to the public. It was necessary to provide clear 
statements about the impact of low-level radiation and comparative health and 
environmental effects to show that nuclear power was both safe and clean. The 
need for simpler and safer nuclear options was also discussed. 
13. During the third session on "Views on Suppliers' Readiness", it became 
clear that the advances in nuclear power plant design were proceeding along 
two different paths. The evolutionary type plants were considered to be more 
reliable, to make better use of existing and additional passive safety 
features and to be smaller than those in the existing generation. Generally 
they were expected to require minimal further research and development efforts 
and deployment by the middle of the 1990s appeared possible for those advanced 
systems. On the other hand, the innovative designs, in most cases, 
incorporated certain entirely new features, included primarily to enhance 
passive safety, and were typically smaller. The need for the construction and 
testing of prototype plants prior to their being made available as 
standardized commercial products was indicated. Deployment in the early part 
of the twenty-first century seemed possible for those advanced designs. 
Reactor models and design concepts that were described in the third session 
offered an attractive variety of nuclear applications, including electricity 
generation, process steam and heat production and fuel breeding. In 
conclusion, the suppliers gave the impression of being prepared to meet market 
requirements. 
14. During the last session, "Need for Governmental Support", a wide range 
of views was presented. In general it was understood that governments were 
expected to play an active role in the further development of nuclear power. 
Proposals for government support included measures to create a more favourable 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 


page 6 


climate for new nuclear power plants, such as better public information 
policies and support for long-term research and development programmes, 
particularly safety-related programmes. Most speakers concluded that 
evolutionary improvements of current reactor types would have to be financed 
by vendors and/or users. However, governmental support would be necessary for 
the development and testing of longer-term innovative reactor concepts, since 
their commercial viability could not be assured at the current early stage of 
their development. All speakers stressed the importance of continued 
international information exchange and co-operation. Various ways of 
intensifying international activities were discussed. Some support was given 
to the idea of establishing an international study on new generation reactors, 
which would include a summary of international requirements, screening of 
available technologies and co-operative efforts for the joint development of 
the next generation power reactors. The Agency had some experience of such a 
study from its International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) 
project, which had proved to be an example of outstanding effective 
international co-operation. 


15. The prevailing concern about the environment could stimulate a revival 
of nuclear power and new reactor concepts discussed at the scientific meeting 
could serve to reassure the public by providing a source of power which would 
avoid atmospheric contamination and which would not contribute to the 
greenhouse effect. However, technological answers were not sufficient, there 
also had to be a satisfactory institutional environment, because nuclear power 
required not only that those who understood the technology be satisfied, but 
also that the politicians and the general public be satisfied. Care should be 
taken in referring to the next generation of nuclear power reactors as 
"inherently safe", since it might be assumed that the present generation of 
reactors was not "inherently safe" and it was important not to undermine 
acceptance of the five hundred reactors, already operating or about to start 
operating. 
16. There was also the additional problem of the cost of nuclear power 
plants. In the United States, for example, the cost of nuclear power plants 
per installed kilowatt was two or three times higher than in France. As far 
as the new generation of reactors was concerned, it was important for 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 7 


governments to provide resources to enable vendors to proceed with the 
prototypes which were a prerequisite to large-scale development. The 
promotion of international research, as in the case of the TTER project, would 
be one possible solution to the problem. 


17. The concerns about nuclear power which had developed during the past 
decades would not disappear overnight. Current technological developments 
would help to eliminate many of the concerns which had existed in the past, 
but large-scale deployment of nuclear power reactors, which would solve 
mankind's energy problems without disturbing the environment was not a 
certainty. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (continued) 


18. Mr. KERIN (Australia) said that fossil fuel exports were very 
important to his country's economy. In addition to being the largest exporter 
of coal in the world, Australia also exported liquefied petroleum gas and 
petroleum products. Furthermore, it had about 470 000 tonnes of uranium in 
proven economically recoverable reserves and its exports of uranium in 1988 
had amounted to 4327 tonnes. Being an energy exporter was a privileged 
position in an energy-hungry world, but the privilege carried with it 
responsibilities. 
19. Australia's responsibilities as a uranium exporter had been well 
recognized by successive Australian governments. Central to its uranium 
export policies was its continuing strong support for the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Agency's safeguards 
system. His country believed that an effective non-proliferation system was 
an essential condition for continued nuclear trade and co-operation between 
nations and his Government was anxious to ensure that Australia did not 
contribute to the spread of nuclear weapons through its exports of uranium. 
20. More recently, the world had become aware of environmental problems 
arising from the use of fossil fuels and Australia, as a major exporter of 
fossil fuels, had recently announced major new policy initiatives in that 
area. It intended to host a conference in 1990 on the greenhouse effect with 
a Pacific regional focus; to provide strong diplomatic support to the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and assistance in the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 8 


development of a new convention to facilitate the adoption of international 
and regional measures connected with climate change; and to make available 
US $5.9 million for a national two-year high priority programme for greenhouse 
research and policy support. 


21. Whilst it was important to take measures to halt the greenhouse effect, 
the issues should be kept in perspective. There was in fact no consensus 
among scientists about the cause of the greenhouse effect. There was clear 
evidence that the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases had been 
increasing over the past two hundred years and that there had been a small 
increase in global temperatures during the twentieth century. It was not 
clear, however, whether the two phenomena were in a cause-effect relationship 
and whether the global warming would result in climate change. There had been 
calls for reductions in CO emissions. However, since fossil fuels 
accounted for almost 90% of the world's energy consumption, it would be 
unrealistic to expect a marked reduction in that figure in the short term. 
Whilst it was true that nuclear reactors were capable of producing large 
amounts of electricity without producing any greenhouse gases, the greenhouse 
effect was not just an energy issue. There were technological, economic and 
political obstacles which made it impossible to abandon the use of fossil 
fuels on a large scale. It would be unfair to attempt to deny developing 
countries the benefits which industrialized countries had gained from 
large-scale energy consumption. It was important to pursue a policy of making 
more efficient use of energy and of improving energy conservation. There was 
a clear case for co-operation between the Agency, Member States and other 
international organizations to ensure that environmental concerns were 
addressed and that duplication of effort was avoided. 
22. One of the tasks of the Australian Safeguards Office was to conduct a 
continuous review of the effectiveness of Agency safeguards. It was at 
present studying concepts relating to the safeguarding of large reprocessing 
plants, the evaluation of containment and surveillance techniques for spent 
fuel storage ponds, and methods for the evaluation of safeguards performance. 
23. The NPT and Agency safeguards were essential means of preventing the 
spread of nuclear weapons. The Treaty remained the most widely adhered to 
arms control agreement in existence and a vital force for international 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 9 


security. Agency safeguards were, of course, the means by which the 


fulfilment of States' obligations under the Treaty not to misuse nuclear 
material were verified. Both the NPT and Agency safeguards were entering a 
period of change and challenge: technological developments were likely to 
reduce the cost and difficulty of developing nuclear weapons; a small number 
of States, including some with significant nuclear facilities, continued to 
refuse to join the Treaty; and some Treaty members had not yet concluded 
NPT safeguards agreements with the Agency. Those developments made it 
extremely important for the Conference to be successful in terms of providing 
a strong declaration of support for the Treaty. 


24. Difficult challenges also lay ahead for the Agency and its safeguards 
system. One such challenge was associated with the strict financial restraint 
which Member States demanded of the Agency. His country was committed to 
zero-real-growth budgets in the international organizations to which it 
belonged and believed that efficiency gains had to remain a permanent feature 
of the administration of those organizations. However, in the case of the 
Agency there might be grounds at some point for some further real growth in 
the safeguards part of the budget. Another area of challenge to safeguards 
was the increasing quantity of material subject to safeguards, the growing 
complexity of the nuclear fuel cycle and rapid technological changes in fuel 
cycle processes. Advances into automated processes, particularly in bulk 
handling facilities, and aspects of the back-end of the fuel cycle, 
particularly the increasing stocks of spent fuel and separated plutonium, 
posed considerable technical challenges to safeguards. A further challenge 
was the need to gain public confidence in safeguards. Explanations of 
safeguards operations must be accurate, clear and convincing. 
25. As far as the Agency's technical assistance activities were concerned, 
his country had pledged full payment of its assessed share of the target for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1990. In addition, it would continue to make a substantial extrabudgetary 
contribution to the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the 
Pacific (RCA). Australia had recently expanded its commitment to the RCA by 
agreeing to support a series of new RCA projects, which would continue 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 10 


until 1992, in areas such as the industrial applications of radioisotopes and 
radiation and the strengthening of the region's radiation protection 
infrastructure. 


26. The Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO) had 
successfully developed a programme that applied nuclear science and technology 
in the areas of industry, medicine and agriculture. ANSTO's research and 
development programmes centred on the applications of radioisotopes and 
radiation, applications of nuclear physics, biomedicine and health, 
environmental science and advanced materials such as ceramics. It also had a 
major programme on the development of disposal methods for high-level 
radioactive waste. Apart from promoting the social and economic development 
of Australia, that work also provided a basis for the provision of technical 
assistance and co-operation in many areas of the Agency's activities including 
training courses, fellowship training and the provision of experts. 
27. Mr. ANHERBERG (Sweden) said that the need to protect the 
environment was a fundamental responsibility for all States, in general, and 
for the industrial countries in particular, since they used the major share of 
the world's resources. For its part, the Swedish Government was attempting to 
adapt its national energy policy so as to reduce the damage which Sweden 
caused to the environment. 
28. The Swedish Parliament had decided to phase out the Swedish nuclear 
capacity by the year 2010, starting in the mid-1990s. It believed that 
extended use of nuclear power was not a long-term solution to the world's 
energy needs, nor was it a long-term solution to growing environmental 
problems. Future energy systems should be based to a much greater extent on 
renewable energy sources which harmonized better with the global ecological 
system. The concept of sustainable development should, therefore, be given 
special emphasis in the detailed preparation of the Agency's programme 
for 1991-92. 


29. In March 1988, Sweden had signed the Basel Convention on the Control of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal and the 
Declaration on the same subject. In that connection, Sweden welcomed the work 
of the Agency initiated at the previous year's General Conference on an 
internationally agreed code of practice for international transactions 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 11 


involving nuclear wastes. A symposium on waste disposal was to be held in 
Stockholm in May 1991, the aim of which was to contribute towards a 
harmonization of the international work on criteria and standards for all 
types of hazardous wastes. 


30. His country also attached great importance to the safety of nuclear 
energy production. It had enforced all technically feasible improvements to 
reactor safety arrangements, but it was concerned that such improvements had 
not been made at all of the more than 500 power reactors in operation or under 
construction around the world, many of which were ageing and had obsolete 
safety features. His country supported the Agency's work in developing 
internationally acceptable safety principles, regulations and guidelines to 
include the whole of the fuel cycle and all categories of nuclear wastes and 
urged Member States to make further use of the Agency's experience to enhance 
the safety of their reactor installations and operations. 
31. Safeguards constituted the politically most important part of the 
Agency's programme. His country had proposed at the 1984 General Conference 
that the Agency's safeguards system should be extended to cover all peaceful 
activities in all countries, including the nuclear-weapon States. At the 
Third Review Conference in 1985 it had been possible to agree on a number of 
recommendations for actions aimed at the universal application of Agency 
safeguards to all peaceful activities in all States. Some progress towards 
that goal had been made since the Third Review Conference. The preparations 
for the Fourth Review Conference were now well advanced and it was hoped that 
further progress would be made at that Review Conference. 
32. Sweden, like a number of other countries, made full-scope safeguards a 
condition for any transfer of relevant nuclear supplies to non-nuclear-weapon 
States and urged all other States to apply the same principle. Application of 
full-scope safeguards made the verification process more effective and thus 
contributed significantly to international security. Adherence to NPT 
remained the best way of assuring the world community of the purely peaceful 
nature of nuclear activities. The nuclear-weapon States should also follow 
the example of the United Kingdom in separating their peaceful nuclear 
activities from the military ones and should subject them, without exception, 
to Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 12 


33. The agreement in 1987 between the United States and the Soviet Union to 
eliminate land-based intermediate-range nuclear missiles represented a first 
step towards nuclear disarmament. However, such a step could not be regarded 
as a real nuclear disarmament action, unless the nuclear warheads were also 
dismantled and destroyed. Sweden had proposed at the General Conference 
in 1988 that all transfers of weapons material to peaceful use should be 
verified by subjection to Agency safeguards. If the nuclear material could 
not be used immediately within the peaceful programmes, the Agency's Statute 
provided an instrument for storage under its custody. Similarly, all 
production of new nuclear materials for military purposes should cease. If 
any undertaking to discontinue production was to be credible, it should be 
possible to verify such an undertaking through inspection and constant 
surveillance. The experience of the Agency's safeguards system could be used 
for such a purpose. The Agency's safeguards programme represented a legal 
obligation on the part of the Agency and a failure to carry out its safeguards 
commitments effectively would be disastrous not only in itself, but also in 
terms of the Agency serving as a mechanism for international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
34. The resources of the Agency's Safeguards Department would have to be 
strengthened considerably. Any extension of Agency safeguards, for example in 
the nuclear-weapon States, would make the need for additional resources even 
more acute. Such demands were, however, impossible to accommodate under a 
zero-real-growth budget. His delegation had therefore introduced a draft 
resolution on the financing of safeguards requesting the Board to establish a 
working group open to all Member States and hoped that the draft resolution 
would receive the widest possible support. 
35. As far as the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme 
was concerned, Sweden had not only paid its full assessed share of the target 
for voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund, 
but had also made considerable extrabudgetary contributions. In response to 
urgent needs in developing countries, those contributions had mainly been 
directed towards joint programmes with the FAO in the areas of agriculture and 
environmental protection. 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 13 


36. Lastly, with regard to the future planning of the Agency's programme 
and budget, his delegation believed that while maintaining the present 
two-year periods, the Agency should also introduce medium-term planning. An 
added perspective of five-year periods would facilitate long-term planning for 
Member States and help the Secretariat to improve its allocation of resources 
and the organization of its work. 
37. Mr. OGADA (Kenya) said that a number of institutes, hospitals, 
universities and industries in Kenya were making increasing use of 
radioisotopes in their work. Three hospitals had full radiotherapy facilities 
and it was expected that radioisotopes would play an increasing role in 
medical diagnosis and treatment in Kenya. The co-operation between Kenya and 
the Agency had also enabled a number of projects to be set up in the areas of 
agriculture, medicine, material testing, radiation protection, hydrology and 
radioactive waste management. The country was already reaping the benefits of 
projects in plant mutation breeding in wheat and horticultural crops. 
38. His delegation supported the remarks made by the delegate of Algeria, 
who was speaking not only on behalf of his country but also on behalf of the 
whole of Africa. He had outlined some of the problems faced by African 
countries when implementing Agency projects and had very ably highlighted the 
actions which had to be taken in Africa so that the peaceful uses of applied 
nuclear technologies could best be exploited. 
39. Unlike many developing countries, Kenya had no known deposits of oil, 
coal, iron or gas and limited hydroelectric and geothermal potential. In view 
of the rapid increase in energy consumption since the start of major rural 
electrification and industrialization programmes, it was likely that the 
potential of existing energy sources would be exhausted in two decades and the 
only rational option left would be nuclear generation of electricity. As a 
result, training in applied nuclear technology would have to be increased. 
Since a large proportion of that training would have to be done locally in 
Nairobi, the Nuclear Science Centre at the University of Nairobi would need to 
be expanded. The Agency-supported radiochemistry laboratory was to be 
incorporated in the Centre and would be able to produce short-lived 
radioisotopes for research and therapy in the near future. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.319 
page 14 


40. Many countries in Africa were suffering tremendous hardship. In 
addition to the calamities caused by the weather, such as the droughts of 1979 
and 1984, the young economies of a number of countries were strained by the 
millions of refugees flowing across borders to escape from armed conflicts. 
Most African economies were sinking deeper and deeper into debt. Rich 
industrialized countries were planning to provide economic assistance to the 
countries of Eastern Europe as a result of recent political changes, but 
Africa had been asking for assistance since 1979 to ease its debt burden. So 
far it had received very little assistance. Given the economic and social 
difficulties in Africa where there was difficulty in affording the basic 
necessities of life, it seemed rather meaningless to discuss the peaceful uses 
of nuclear technologies before solutions were found to those basic problems. 
41. On a more positive note, Namibia was due to hold elections in November 
before eventual independence early in 1990 and could be expected to take a 
seat at the General Conference in 1990, as an independent sovereign State. 
Kenya was also watching with a great deal of interest the steps being taken by 
countries which had earlier refused to endorse or ratify NPT. 
42. Mr. EUSUF (Bangladesh) pointed out that Bangladesh seemed to be 
one of the sad victims of the so-called "greenhouse effect". In 1988, 
Bangladesh had suffered a severe flood, which had submerged nearly 
three-fourths of the country, and in 1989 it had suffered a severe drought. 
The alternation of drought and flood had become a chronic and crippling 
problem for his country. Concerted measures at international level were 
necessary to combat the deterioration of the climatic conditions resulting 
from activities related to energy production. One such measure might be the 
preparation and adoption of an international convention on the protection and 
conservation of global climate which had been proposed by the President of 
Bangladesh. The nuclear community, for its part, had an important role to 
play in the preservation and conservation of the world climatic conditions by 
promoting safe nuclear power, which appeared to be environmentally cleaner 
than other forms of energy production. 
43. Activities related to the production of energy were undoubtedly the 
major causes of the deterioration of the environment. However, the concept of 
"low energy path" should not be regarded as a universal solution and it should 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 15 


be recognized that it was not realistic for many developing countries, where 


there was a high demand for energy to enhance economic growth, to adopt a 
policy of "low energy path". Unless an alternative source of energy was 


available, those countries would have to burn more fossil fuel to meet their 
energy needs. As a result the pollution of the environment would continue 
unabated. 


44. On the other hand, many countries, because of their limited fossil fuel 
resources, had to turn to alternative sources of energy. Bangladesh, for 
example, had very limited indigenous primary energy resources and in the 
foreseeable future, nuclear power seemed to be the only commercially viable 
source of energy. There were, however, major obstacles to the development of 
nuclear power, such as limited grid capacity, high capital cost and lack of 
financial resources. The Agency's study on small- and medium-sized power 
reactors had identified a number of designs suitable for grids in developing 
countries but most of those designs were not expected to be available before 
the end of the century. By that time, the capacity of grids in many 
developing countries was expected to be sufficient for larger plants. 
Therefore, the short- and medium-term solutions for energy needs still 
remained uncertain and the Agency should study those issues as a matter of 
urgency. Bangladesh's nuclear power programme was technically and politically 
well justified, but owing to a lack of suitable financing, it had not been 
possible to start construction on the planned nuclear power plant in Ruppur. 
The Conference should seriously consider the establishment of a special fund 
within the Agency to assist in the financing of power plants in developing 
countries. 
45. While safeguards was an important area of the Agency's activities, 
nuclear safety and nuclear waste management programmes were no less important 
in order to improve public confidence in nuclear power and, therefore, the 
Agency should correct the balance of emphasis on those two programmes. 
46. About half of Bangladesh's national economy was derived from 
agriculture. It was therefore, important to assess its water resources and 
their potential for large-scale use during periods of drought in order to 
determine the water reserves and the movement of ground water and its 
variation with season and to determine the movement of silt and the resulting 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 16 


influences on the seasonal and long-term changes in the river bed profiles in 
the whole country. Nuclear techniques would be an invaluable tool in carrying 
out such studies. 


47. His Government was grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance 
which it was providing to Bangladesh. A number of research programmes were 
being satisfactorily conducted using the research reactor which had gone 
critical in 1986. Technetium-99m was being produced in the reactor and 
nuclear medicine specialists of the Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission were 
using it on clinical patients. The shielding characteristics of locally 
produced polyboron and heavy concrete used in the reactor had been tested 
against primary and secondary gamma radiation using a californium-252 
radioactive source. The environmental radioactivity monitoring programme, 
including monitoring of radioactive contaminants in imported food materials, 
was progressing very well. In addition, the Analytical Chemistry Group was 
providing useful technical services in determining toxic elements in 
foodstuffs and drinking water. 
48. Lastly, his delegation wished to draw attention to its concern about 
the gross imbalance in the representation of the Middle East and South Asia 
(MESA) Group in the Board of Governors. In view of the number of countries 
with large populations in the region and their existing and planned nuclear 
energy and technology programmes, a proper allocation of seats to the MESA 
Group countries was essential. The distribution of seats of the Board of 
Governors among the various regional groups should therefore be rationalized. 
For that reason, his delegation had co-sponsored a resolution seeking revision 
of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute as soon as possible. 
49. Mr. HAMMAR (Tunisia) observed that the past year had witnessed 
improvements in international relations, reflected by a softening of relations 
between the military Super Powers, political willingness to solve some of the 
toughest regional conflicts, greater confidence in the United Nations system 
and renewed hope in multilateral co-operation and the activities of 
specialized organizations. However, such developments could still be 
undermined by the introduction or proliferation of nuclear weapons in certain 
areas of tension, particularly in the Middle East and South Africa, which 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 17 


continued to pose serious threats to peace and security in the world. For its 


part, Tunisia had been one of the first countries to accede to NPT and had 


signed a safeguards agreement with the Agency in January 1989, thereby 
demonstrating its commitment to international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 


50. Tunisia was grateful for the technical assistance provided to it by the 
Agency in areas such as nuclear power planning, radiation protection, 
agriculture, animal production, industrial applications and hydrology. All 
the Agency-assisted projects formed part of Tunisia's economic development 
programme. His delegation believed that the existing bilateral arrangements 
in Africa should be complemented by a regional co-operation agreement for 
Africa based on the RCA and the Regional Go-operative Arrangements for the 
Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America (ARCAL). Since 
nuclear safety was a matter of universal responsibility, his delegation 
be]ieved that the Agency should strengthen the infrastructure set up in 
developing countries to enable them to fulfil their obligations under the 
Conventions on Early Notification and Emergency Assistance, two Conventions of 
which Tunisia was a signatory. 


51. Despite its financial difficulties, Tunisia believed that the 
applications of nuclear techniques, particularly in the areas of agriculture, 
industry and medicine, would contribute to its economic development and the 
social welfare of its people. That was why Tunisia, which was planning to 
acquire a research reactor, requested the Agency to provide assistance in the 
form of infrastructure, equipment, expert services, training and fellowships. 
It also needed Agency assistance for national projects which were planned or 
being implemented in its universities, research institutes, hospitals and 
specialized centres. 
52. The question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had been 
on the General Conference's agenda since 1977. It was therefore high time 
that the under-representation in the Board of Governors of Africa and the 
Middle East or South Asia regions was corrected. 
53. The participation of the State of Palestine in the Agency's activities, 
as an observer, was merely the expression of a legitimate right recognized by 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 18 


various United Nations resolutions and, in particular, General Assemblyresolution 
43/177 of 15 December 1988 and General Conference resolution 
GC(XX)/RES/334 of 24 September 1976. 


54. Several speakers had suggested that the chances had improved of a basic 
change taking place in South Africa leading to an end to the unjust apartheid 
regime. His delegation, which noted that South Africa still refused to comply 
with Agency resolutions, associated itself with the general consensus on the 
draft resolution submitted by the African group on that subject. 
55. His delegation was grateful to the Director General for the proposals 
contained in document GC(XXXIIl)/887 on the modalities of the application of 
safeguards in the Middle East. The Israeli nuclear capability and threat 
continued to be a subject of concern to the international community. 
Since 1981, the United Nations Security Council and the Agency's General 
Conference had been calling upon Israel to accede to NPT and to place all its 
nuclear facilities under the Agency's safeguards system. In order for the 
non-proliferation regime to inspire confidence, the Agency should be able to 
take initiatives to prevent the introduction and dissemination of nuclear 
weapons, particularly in regions which were a threat to international peace 
and security. The longer it took to prevent the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons in the Middle East and to initiate genuine peace negotiations, the 
greater the danger was that the situation would become explosive. 
56. Mr. COUNTAKIS (Greece) encouraged the Agency to continue its 
efforts to strengthen international co-operation in the field of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, in general, and in the field of safety, in 
particular. The Agency's safeguards activities were also of great importance, 
since they made a substantial contribution to non-proliferation. 
57. His country was both a donor and a recipient of technical assistance 
and it greatly appreciated the technical assistance provided by the Agency in 
the areas of uranium exploration, research reactor safety, radiological 
protection, the development of radiopharmaceuticals and many others. His 
Government would continue to extend its support to the Agency's activities 
and had already pledged to meet in full its assessed share of the target for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1989. 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 19 


58. Mr. KOUASSI (Cote d'Ivoire) noted that although 1988 had witnessed 
an increase in nuclear power generation, which at present represented 17% of 
world electricity production, the majority of Member States were prevented 
from starting nuclear power programmes by the very high investment costs. In 
view of the importance of energy for industrialization, strategies should be 
considered to enable developing countries to use nuclear power. In that 
connection, his country welcomed the meetings which had been held between 
Agency experts and officials of the World Bank in order to examine the 
problems and possibilities of financing nuclear power programmes in developing 
countries. It was to be hoped that through such meetings a solution would be 
found to those problems. 
59. His delegation was very satisfied with the assistance provided by the 
Agency to developing countries in the areas of food and agriculture, medicine 
and the biological, physical and geological sciences. His delegation welcomed 
the increase in the number of projects made operational in 1988 and the 
success of the International Conference on the Acceptance, Control of and 
Trade in Irradiated Food held in Geneva in December 1988. The principles 
governing the acceptance of irradiated food, adopted by consensus at that 
Conference, would undoubtedly enable many developing countries to reduce their 
post-harvest losses. 
60. Despite its efforts, the Agency was unable to meet all the needs of 
developing countries which wished to benefit from its promotional activities. 
Therefore, his delegation believed that the principle of a zero-real-growth 
budget should not be applied to the Agency's promotional activities. 
Moreover, it seemed highly desirable that at a time when developing countries 
were experiencing increasing economic difficulties, countries which were able 
to do so should increase their voluntary contributions to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
61. The Agency's activities in the area of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection were extremely important. The visit by the Radiation Protection 
Advisory Team (RAPAT) to Cote d'Ivoire had been greatly appreciated. The team 
had reviewed the radiation protection infrastructure and recommended long-term 
strategies for assistance and co-operation in the use and control of ionizing 
radiation. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 20 


62. The fact that the Secretariat, in carrying out the Agency's safeguards 
obligations, had not detected any event which would indicate the diversion of 
a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material, was a matter of great 
satisfaction. No nuclear programme could inspire public confidence unless 
there were assurances of its peaceful nature. The Agency played an essential 
role in that respect. However, the financing of safeguards should take into 
account the economic situation of the Agency's Member States, particularly the 
developing countries, and it was to be hoped that a solution to the financing 
of safeguards would be found within the three-year time limit established by 
the Board of Governors. 
63. Lastly, his delegation was grateful to the Director General for the 
speed with which he had implemented General Conference resolution 
GC(XXXII)/RES/490, which had requested him to establish a technical working 
group of experts with the objective of elaborating an internationally agreed 
code of practice for international transactions involving nuclear wastes. A 
number of countries, including Cote d'Ivoire, had adopted laws rejecting 
transactions involving such wastes, but in order to make them effective, those 
laws should be complemented by international conventions. His delegation, 
therefore, awaited with interest the draft code of practice for transactions 
involving nuclear wastes which it hoped would be submitted to the 
thirty-fourth regular session of the General Conference. 
Mr. Carr (United States of America) took the Chair. 


64. Mr. ELAGIB (Sudan) welcomed the fact that the Agency had continued 
to strengthen its assistance to developing countries in the area of nuclear 
power production and the application of nuclear techniques. It was important 
to ensure that environmental concerns did not hamper the development of 
developing countries. For its part, Sudan was very satisfied with the 
technical assistance which it had received; that assistance had included the 
provision of equipment, fellowships and training. However, it was necessary 
to increase the resources made available for technical co-operation activities 
in order to meet the growing needs of developing countries, and consideration 
should be given to the possibility of financing those activities from the 
Regular Budget. 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 21 


65. At the previous year's General Conference, his delegation had referred 
to the problem of the dumping of nuclear wastes. Scientists agreed that there 
were no technical obstacles to the disposal of nuclear wastes, but guidelines 
still had to be drawn up, and his delegation hoped that the group of experts 
studying the disposal of nuclear wastes would be able to draw up a code of 
practice on the subject in the near future. 
66. His delegation supported the activities being conducted within the 
Agency on the subject of liability for nuclear damage; on the development and 
implementation of principles governing the siting and design of nuclear power 
plants; and on the development of guidance to assist Member States in various 
aspects of emergency response. 
67. The Agency's safeguards activities were intended to reassure public 
opinion about the peaceful nature of the uses of nuclear energy. His 
delegation welcomed the new agreements signed with the Agency and urged States 
which had not yet concluded safeguards agreements to do so as soon as 
possible. In that connection, it was deeply concerned about Israel's refusal 
to submit its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards, since its nuclear 
facilities constituted a threat to peace not only in the Middle East but 
throughout the world. It was regrettable that no progress had been made in 
that area. Despite its support for safeguards activities, his delegation had 
reservations about the priority given to the Agency's safeguards activities 
over its promotional activities. It accepted the provisional solution reached 
by the Board of Governors regarding the financing of safeguards over the 
following few years, but stressed that a permanent solution had to be found 
which would take into account Member States' capacity to contribute. 
68. The problems of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 and the revision of 
Article VI as a whole should be resolved in an equitable manner, so as to 
enable all countries and regions to play a full part in the work of the Board 
of Governors. As far as the staffing of the Secretariat was concerned, his 
delegation was grateful to the Director General for his efforts to increase 
the number of staff from developing countries, but would like to see more 
staff from developing countries occupying important posts. 
69. The Agency was a technical organization and his delegation regretted 
that there was a tendency for political issues to intrude into its work. It 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 22 


should concentrate its efforts on studying advances in nuclear technology, 
particularly research in the areas of nuclear power and waste disposal, and 
should make additional efforts to reassure public opinion about the safety of 
nuclear power. 


70. Mr. LASERNA PINZON (Colombia) said that his country's Atomic 
Energy Commission had celebrated its 30th anniversary on 1 September. The 
present Institute for Nuclear Affairs was founded in 1959, after a number of 
years of decision-making and organization, following the signing of an 
agreement on the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes with the 
United States. In 1957, Colombia had participated in the establishment of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and in 1960 had become a member. Shortly 
afterwards it acceded to the Tlatelolco Treaty and to the agreements on the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
71. Colombia had also participated in regional projects within ARCAL to 
which Colombia had contributed since 1985. Those programmes strengthened 
relations between Latin American countries and needed encouragement and 
support in order to promote the progress and scientific development of the 
countries concerned. 
72. Due to the support of some countries, Colombia's Institute for Nuclear 
Affairs had been able to upgrade its nuclear reactor with the help of the 
United States, carry out operational programmes in its secondary standards 
laboratory with the help of the United Kingdom, hydrological programmes with 
the help of Germany and non-destructive tests with the help of Italy. Special 
thanks were expressed to all of those countries. 
73. The greenhouse effect was a subject which cropped up at every meeting 
on the future of the planet and always resulted in warnings and schemes to 
avoid a disaster which, because of its magnitude and irreversibility, was 
claimed to be comparable to a nuclear war. The Director General himself had 
warned that dirty energy would contribute to such a disaster; a photographic 
exhibition on the ground floor of the Agency building highlighted the Amazon 
region and its problems; Austria's Environment Minister at a recent 
conference on the problem of the relentless destruction of the tropical 
forests had completed her analysis with a warning that action had to be 
taken; and the previous day the delegates of Mexico, Switzerland and 

GC(XXXI1I)//OR.319 
page 23 


the Netherlands, amongst others, had said that the need to act was imperative 
to our survival. Colombia agreed that there was a threat and that something 
had to be done quickly and decisively, but not before thoroughly analysing and 
understanding the underlying problem. The call for clean nuclear power was 
indeed a valid one, as was the call for an international meeting on the 
disappearance of the tropical forests, provided their causes were studied. 
The world was going through an ecological age in which people were becoming 
aware that their actions had a "knock-on" effect, within a global technical 
and economic system, and were responsible both for the greenhouse effect and 
for the destruction of the tropical forests. People had likewise become aware 
that the escalation of a cold war could result in the final disaster. Yet 
peace could only be achieved if the system of relations between countries were 
changed and the conflicts between them solved. Until only a short time ago, 
the two Super Powers had agreed that they both sought peace, yet their efforts 
had led them to prepare for war. So the problem now was to seek peace with 
nature, in keeping with ecological harmony - in other words, to modify the 


system which led some to wage ecological war, to destroy the balance of nature . 


But there were no frontiers in either ecological or nuclear disasters:everyone was the loser, 
the victim was mankind itself. Colombia held the view that in ecological 
matters the peaceful goal was not as firm, intelligent and sincere as 
proclaimed. Peace would be sought, provided that someone else paid the 
price. In 1955 a magazine article written by a leading member of the United 
States Atomic Energy Commission had warned of a greenhouse effect, yet that 
warning had gone unheeded in spite of the author's outstanding achievements in 
physics, mathematics and computer science. What, then, could explain the loss 
of 30 years, particularly in view of the number of national and international 
agencies whose brief was to watch over everything which might threaten the 
well-being of mankind? To use the language of the writer of the article, 
taken from another work on the "Theory of Games and Economic Behaviour", it 
might be said that as long as mankind did not play the survival game 
seriously, the possibilities for survival were zero. The games engaged in by 
mankind took place within an existing framework, namely a set of rules which 
mankind itself established. The rules of the economic game between north and 
south, which were "everything for me, nothing for you", had inspired the 
ecological war, particularly where the tropical forests were concerned. Their 



GC(XXXI1I)/OR.319 
page 24 


destruction was largely due to the game: "the struggle to survive for some 
versus the struggle to gain more for others". While the world price of coffee 
was lower now than a decade ago, the price of Coca-Cola, agricultural 
machinery, transport and fertilizers had tripled. As long as the powerful 
nations used robots in their factories, substitutes for raw materials, or paid 


for raw materials at prices which caused massive unemployment, the Amazon 


forests would burn. Such were the rules of the international game. In the 


industrialized countries profits were shared and the dictum "to each according 
to his needs" was paramount. But that was not true of the international game, 


in which everyone would end by being the loser unless the rules were changed. 
As long as those rules were said, at the international level, to be nature's 
creation rather than man's, there would be more carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere from Amazonian fires, and more drugs produced in the Andean 
countries in spite of outside efforts to destroy the plantations. Finally, in 
the collective death that would result from losing the ecological war, 
everyone would be equal. 


74. If, therefore, there was to be a road to ecological peace, there would 
have to be changes in the system which threatened it, and which was the 
product of the interdependency of nations and lack of organization of the 
global system, as the 1955 magazine article had stated. The same author, 
in 1951, had proposed the establishment of an institute for Amazonian research 
to prevent the immense resources of all kinds given to mankind by nature from 
being destroyed by the effects of the lack of technical and economic 
organization. Neither the Greens nor the Worldwide Fund for Nature had made 
any new discoveries. The important thing therefore was not to waste time on 
the symptoms but to identify a proper system in which the cost would be shared 
by all, bearing in mind that the game, according to the current world 
technical and economic model, each day raised the greenhouse temperature in 
which man not only had to live but, with luck, survive his own inventions. 


Mr. Chung (Republic of Korea) took the Chair. 


75. Mr. SAN MARTIN CARP (Peru) welcomed the recent progress made 
towards the reduction and partial elimination of nuclear weapons. While the 
rapprochement between the Super Powers was very welcome, there were still 
areas of conflict which were threatened by the introduction of nuclear 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 25 


weapons. The General Conference should adopt measures to ensure the effective 
control of horizontal proliferation and the Agency should play a major role in 
that area by making its safeguards system universal and ensuring that there 
were no double standards. Nuclear-weapon States were very well placed to 
facilitate effective non-discriminatory measures to prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 


76. Development was just as an important objective as peace, and his 
delegation welcomed the Agency's activities to promote research in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in areas such as food and agriculture. 
However, to make such activities still more effective, those studies should be 
directly related to the real needs of the recipient countries. 
77. His delegation was pleased to announce the completion of the design, 
construction and fitting up of the Nuclear Research Centre at Huarangal which 
had benefited from generous international co-operation and which could also be 
regarded as a model of horizontal co-operation between Peru and Argentina. 
Peru had initiated negotiations with other countries, such as Bolivia, for the 
implementation of co-operation projects, thereby making the Huarangal Centre 
available to the whole scientific community in the region. The Agency's 
assistance in such south-south co-operation and in the implementation of a 
programme for the sale of radioisotopes would be very much appreciated. 
78. Peru had initiated an active policy to improve and update the technical 
knowledge of its personnel. Furthermore, it had taken steps to strengthen its 
office for liaison with the Agency related to technical co-operation matters 
connected with the ARCAL programme and its participation in the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS). 
79. Peru continued to be firmly committed to the Conventions on Early 
Notification and Emergency Assistance. However, his delegation had 
reservations about the application of the Tlatelolco Treaty which had in some 
cases tended to favour vertical proliferation, to promote the application of 
selective safeguards and to hamper co-operation. 
80. Mr. PAPADEMAS (Cyprus) pointed out that the Agency had developed 
from a little-known organization to a well-known one which made a tremendous 
contribution to the welfare of mankind. In the years following the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 26 


Second World War, the production of nuclear weapons had inspired great fear 
which the Agency had been able to alleviate through the promotion of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The chief concern at present was fear about 
damage to the environment. Nuclear energy could help to alleviate that fear 
and should be regarded, not as a means of destruction, but as a means of 
saving mankind. 


81. Cyprus was grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance which it 
had provided in the fields of medicine, hydrology, agriculture and animal 
husbandry. Cyprus had ratified the two Conventions on Early Notification and 
Emergency Assistance and would continue to provide its full support to the 
Agency's work. 
82. Mr. STEMPEL PARIS (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America and the Caribbean) said that the eleventh regular session of 
the General Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL) had reached a number of important 
conclusions, some of which related closely to the co-operation between the 
IAEA and OPANAL. 
83. Resolution 243/(XI) requested OPANAL*s General Secretary to resume 
negotiations on the holding of a technical and legal seminar-workshop to 
analyse formulas to help set up the control system provided for in the 
Tlatelolco Treaty, which would not restrict the peaceful development of 
nuclear energy, but which would exclude the possibility of nuclear weapons 
from other States being introduced into Latin America and the Caribbean. The 
Agency had expressed its willingness to co-operate with OPANAL in the 
organization of such a workshop. More specifically, in connection with 
Article 13 of the Tlatelolco Treaty relating to IAEA safeguards, OPANAL 
requested its General Secretary, in its resolution 246(XI), to carry out a 
study to consider whether a safeguards agreement based on the model 
implemented by the IAEA should be used or a standard safeguards agreement 
specific to the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
84. Other areas of co-operation with the IAEA had been highlighted in 
resolutions 239(X) and 265(XI) relating to nuclear explosions for peaceful 
purposes; resolution 249(XI), in which OPANAL requested its General Secretary 
to carry out consultations with the IAEA with a view to enabling OPANAL 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 27 


to participate as an observer in ARCAL co-ordinating meetings; and 
resolution 252(XI), which requested the OPANAL Council, with the support of 
the competent international organizations, to identify technical and legal 
methods of preventing radioactive contamination of the waters within the zone 
of application of the Tlatelolco Treaty. 


85. The IAEA and OPANAL shared common objectives in important areas 
associated with peace and security and it was to be hoped that, through 
co-operation with the IAEA, all States parties to the Tlatelolco Treaty would 
enter into safeguards agreements with the IAEA. 
86. Mr. GREEN (International Confederation of Free Trade Unions) 
recalled that the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), 
together with many of its affiliates and other trade union centres, had 
already had a very productive two-day meeting with the Agency Secretariat in 
April 1989. The trade union views had been outlined in considerable detail in 
the ICFTU Policy Report "Nuclear Safety: ICFTU Proposals for the 
International Control of the Nuclear Energy Industry". 
87. The ICFTU believed that the Agency had a key role to play in ensuring 
effective control of the nuclear energy industry. Within that work, however, 
workers and their trade unions in the nuclear energy industry could and should 
play a more important role. Accordingly, the ICFTU also believed that the 
Agency should collaborate more closely with the International Labour 
Organisation (ILO) to ensure the guaranteed involvement of trade unions in 
nuclear safety policy-making and implementation at all levels. In particular, 
workplace trade union safety representatives should be allowed to inspect the 
workplace regularly; to investigate accidents and incidents; to require 
safety committees to be set up and to attend meetings; to receive information 
and training to enable them to carry out their health and safety role; to 
participate in the putting into operation of all types of nuclear facility in 
order to ensure that they complied with rules and safety standards; to 
inspect the progress of construction with the aim of detecting violations of 
norms and standards and to issue binding recommendations to rectify them; and 
to be a member of the body which had to approve the commissioning of any 
nuclear energy facility. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.319 
page 28 


88. Apart from greater trade union participation, the ICFTU believed that 
there were a number of other measures necessary to improve nuclear safety. 
Those included tighter standards for the design, construction, commissioning, 
operation and eventual decommissioning of nuclear power plants to prevent 
major radiological accidents; improving control of radiation doses to all 
workers (including uranium miners) and members of the public - including lower 
dose limits; securing reductions in discharges of radioactivity during normal 
operation of a plant to the lowest levels practicable, and developing 
internationally accepted criteria for the siting of nuclear power plants, as 
well as minimum standards for emergency plans; developing international 
criteria for radioactive waste management strategies, including minimum 
standards for high-quality engineered solutions for the permanent isolation of 
radioactive wastes in a monitorable form; and minimum permitted safety 
training standards for all workers in nuclear power plants, including those 
who might be engaged on a temporary or sub-contract basis. 
89. Whilst an international system for nuclear safety standards, 
information exchange and assistance already existed under the auspices of the 
Agency, the ICFTU believed that the Agency could enhance effective control 
over civil nuclear activities in all States by: considering the improvement 
of generic safety standards for nuclear plant, including siting criteria, 
which should be made binding in all contracts and agreements between the 
Agency and Member States; providing full information to the public on all 
safety-significant events; developing a stronger role for the Agency together 
with the ILO and the International Commission on Radiological Protection in 
the area of radiological protection, including lower dose limits and provision 
for full trade union involvement in radiological protection policy-making; 
ensuring minimum Agency standards for high-quality engineered facilities to 
manage radioactive wastes; expanded international inspection of nuclear power 
plants, including the right for Agency inspectors to make "prompt challenge" 
inspections; a review of measures necessary to protect nuclear power plants 
from the effects of war and terrorism; tighter control over all fissionable 
materials and key nuclear processes, including the separation of civil and 
military nuclear activities; strengthening work on the safe transport of 
nuclear materials; and expanding existing Agency work on emergency response. 

GC(XXXIII)//OR.319 
page 29 


90. The ICFTU considered that those recommendations represented a minimum, 
realistic international programme of action to improve the control of the 
risks Which nuclear power generation presented to workers, the public and the 
environment. In view of widespread legitimate public concern about the safety 
of nuclear energy, the ICFTU believed that the Agency and the ILO should 
convene regular consultative meetings to discuss those issues with trade union 
representatives at an international level. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 


THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Thursday, 28 September 1989, at 3.10 p.m. 
President; Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 
later: Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 


agenda* 
General debate and annual report for 1988 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 


Kuwait 
Ghana 
Arrangements for the Conference 


(c) Review of the Conference's working practices (resumed) 
Request for the restoration of voting rights 


General debate and annual report for 1988 (resumed) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Jordan 
Qatar 
Costa Rica 
VenezueIa 
New Zealand 


t*3 GC(XXXI ID/897 


GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
18 December 1989 


GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 
Original: FRENCH 


Paragraphs 
I - II 


1 5 



12 


12 


18 


30 


30 41 
46 
57 
68 



4 


II 


17 


17 


29 
81 


40 
45 
56 
67 
81 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXII)/INF/274/Rev.2. 


89-4765 
5926e/589e 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 2 


Item of the


7T Paragraphs 


agenda* a  


9


 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 82-9 6 


7


 General debate and annual report for 1988 (resumed) 97 - 130 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Zambia 97 - 106 
Sri Lanka 107 - 118 
Afghanistan 119 - 125 
Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy 126 - 130 


26 Appointment of the External Auditor 131 - 134 


9 Election of Members to the Board of Governors (resumed) 135 - 141 



GC(XXXII1)/OR.320 
page 3 


GENERAL DKBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (GC(XXXJ.Il)/873) (continued) 


1. Mr. AL-SAEID (Kuwait) said that his Government was following with 
great interest the Agency's activities and efforts to widen the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It had accordingly contributed, jointly with 
the Agency, to the financing of technical co-operation projects in friendly 
countries. It was also co-operating with the Agency in the field of nuclear 
medicine - its Medicine Centre received many trainees sent by the Agency - and 
was participating actively in regional courses organized by the Agency in 
various regions of the world. Kuwait shared the concerns of other countries 
about two problems affecting the whole world, namely environment pollution due 
to the build-up of gases released into the atmosphere, and deforestation which 
were leading to a global warming of the atmosphere. He agreed with those who 
believed that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be expanded, but felt 
that such an expansion must be accompanied by adequate precautions to guard 
against the dangers of the release of radioactive substances, which concerned 
all States. 
2. Israel's refusal to place its nuclear installations under international 
safeguards constituted a serious threat to the whole Middle East region and 
was of grave concern to his delegation. Israel, which had nuclear 
capabilities that could endanger peace and security in the whole world, 
ignored all the calls by the international community and all the General 
Conference resolutions requesting it to place its nuclear installations under 
Agency safeguards. Kuwait therefore urged Member States, particularly the 
major powers which were responsible for maintaining international peace and 
security, to put pressure on the Israeli Government to make it comply with the 
requests of the international community. The technical study on the 
modalities of application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East 
(GC(XXXlll)/887) did not contain anything new and he was surprised that, in 
paragraph 75(b) of that document, the name of Kuwait was associated with that 
of Israel. Kuwait, as was well Icnown, had no nuclear activity and had no 
plans at present to use nuclear energy. Document GC(XXXIII)/887 should rather 
have focused on Israel, which was posing an increasingly serious threat to the 
Middle East region. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.320 
page A 


3. The participation of the State of Palestine in the Agency's activities 
as an observer should be regarded as a legitimate right. The Palestinian 
people had demonstrated their commitment to international law and their desire 
to participate in international meetings. It would therefore be just and 
equitable to give Palestine the right to participate, as an observer, in the 
Agency's scientific and technical meetings, as well as in meetings of the 
Board of Governors and sessions of the General Conference. 
A. His delegation was very interested in the amendment of Article VI.A.2 
of the Statute, since it considered the representation of the regions of 
Africa and the Middle East and South Asia in the Board of Governors to be 
inequitable and inadequate. He therefore appealed to Member States to devote 
the necessary attention to that matter, which had been under review for 
13 years, in order to correct the existing imbalance. 
5. Mr. AMOO-GOTTFRIED (Ghana) expressed satisfaction with the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities, to which Ghana had contributed by 
setting up a conference centre at the National Nuclear Research Institute and 
making it available to the Agency for regional courses. He was pleased that, 
despite the limitations imposed by a zero-growth budget, there had been a 
slight increase in resources for technical co-operation. Ghana appealed to 
those Member States which were in a position to do so to increase their 
contributions so as to ensure a genuine transfer of nuclear know-how to 
developing countries. For its part, Ghana undertook to pay a voluntary 
contribution of US $6000. The low implementation rate for the technical 
co-operation programme in Africa (of the order of 30%) was alarming. His 
delegation urged the Agency to make every effort to speed up the placing of 
fellows and the supply of equipment needed for the implementation of 
projects. For their part, Member States should attempt to expedite the 
acceptance of Agency experts in order to ensure the success of such missions. 
6. Ghana attached great importance to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
for national development and was currently concentrating its efforts in the 
areas of agriculture and medicine. In the agricultural sector, its research 
activities covered irradiation of food and medical products, mutation 
breeding, insect control using the sterile insect technique, animal production 
and disease, biological nitrogen fixation, pesticide residues and tissue 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.320 
page 5 


culture combined with radiation- induced genetic mutation. In the field of 
medicine, nuclear techniques were used daily for diagnostic scanning. Ghana 
also attached great importance to radiation protection and regularly measured 
the monthly radiation doses received by all X-ray machine operators and other 
users of ionizing radiation. The Government was currently studying a 
radiation protection law and regulations which might be promulgated before the 
end of 1989. In that connection, his delegation thanked the Agency and the 
KAPAT mission for their help in drafting that legislation. 


7. The delays associated with the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute were disturbing. Ghana supported that amendment, which would correct 
the under-representation of the regions of Africa and the Middle East and 
South Asia and enhance still further the Agency's efficiency. Mention should 
also be made of the debt problem, which hampered Ghana's ability to 
participate effectively in the Agency's work and undoubtedly accounted for the 
absence from the General Conference of many third-world countries. 
8. Ghana appreciated the Agency's role in connection with the regional 
co-operation agreement for Africa. It hoped that negotiations would soon be 
concluded so that the necessary framework could be set up before the next 
session of the General Conference. That agreement would undoubtedly be of as 
much benefit to Africa as the analogous agreements were for Latin America and 
for Asia and the Pacific. On a different subject, his delegation condemned 
the apartheid regime of South Africa and trusted that the changing 
international climate would result in positive developments. 
9. Public concern about the development of nuclear power could not be 
ignored. The risk of accidents was only too obvious if effective preventive 
measures were not adopted. It was also regrettable that State liability for 
nuclear damage resulting from transboundary pollution was not yet covered by 
an international treaty. At the previous session of the General Conference, a 
resolution adopted by consensus had stressed that it was essential to the 
development and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes to strengthen the 
liability regime for nuclear damage. Ghana was in favour of a ban on the 
movement of hazardous wastes from developed to developing countries and 
believed that it was up to exporting countries which had better 
infrastructures to monitor the enforcement of such a ban. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 6 


10. As a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), Ghana commended the 
Agency for its activities in the area of safeguards. It also welcomed the 
guidelines drawn up by the Agency on the underground disposal of high-level 
radioactive wastes. 
11. It was up to each country to ensure that the world was rid of wastes 
and other substances that degraded the environment and threatened the quality 
of life. The world was a village whose inhabitants should all work together 
to make it habitable for themselves and for future generations. Ghana 
supported the Agency's relentless efforts to restore public confidence in 
nuclear power. 
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(c) REVIEW OF THE CONFERENCE'S WORKING PRACTICES (GC(XXXIII)/GEN/77) (resumed) 
12. The PRESIDENT said that for its consideration of the present 
agenda item, the General Committee had had before it the report of the 
inter-sessional working group set up to review ways of streamlining the 
Conference's working practices (GC(XXXIII)/GEN/77). 
13. The General Committee had expressed its appreciation of the excellent 
work done by the working group under the chairmanship of Ambassador 
Halim bin Ali (Malaysia), had endorsed the report and had decided to recommend 
that the General Conference adopt the working group's report and all of its 
recommendations, some of which had already been implemented successfully on a 
provisional basis. During discussion of the report, a suggestion had been 
made that the recommendations be reviewed after five years in the light of the 
experience gained in their implementation. 
14. Thus, if there were no objections, he would take it that the General 
Conference wished to approve the working group's report and the 
recommendations which had been endorsed by the General Committee. 
15. It was so decided. 
16. The PRESIDENT also assumed that the elections to the Board of 
Governors could take place on the basis of the recommendations made by the 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 7 


working group, meaning that a ballot would be necessary only for those areas 
where there was no agreed list of candidates. 


17. It was so decided. 
REQUEST FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS (GC(XXXIII)/INF/27 7) 


18. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee recommended that the 
General Conference should not accede to the request made by Niger that the 
last sentence of Article XIX.A of the Statute be invoked in order that Niger 
might be permitted to vote during the current session of the General 
Conference. 
19. Ms. DIAROUMEYE (Niger) appealed to the General Conference to 
reconsider the request made by her country. Of the States which were to lose 
their voting rights at the current session, Niger was the one with the lowest 
level of arrears, and the non-payment of its contribution was not the result 
of unwillingness, negligence or forgetfulness. Niger was in the process of 
taking the necessary steps to pay its arrears. Circumstances were such that 
the Agency had not yet received the outstanding funds, but it would do so in 
the very near future. For those reasons, her delegation hoped that the 
General Conference would not follow the General Committee's recommendation. 
20. Mr. MBODJ (Senegal), Mr. HAMZA (Cote d'Ivoire) and Mr. OGADA 
(Kenya) supported the appeal made by the delegate of Niger, believing the 
failure to pay in that particular case, was due to conditions beyond that 
country's control. 
21. Mr. MGBOKWERE (Nigeria) recalled that his country was a member of 
the General Committee and it was therefore difficult for him to oppose a 
decision taken by that Committee. However, as Chairman of the African group, 
he wished to highlight the financial problems facing many African countries 
which had not even been able to send representatives to the current session. 
He urged the General Conference to reconsider Niger's request, bearing in mind 
the economic situation of the African countries. He would also ask the 
President to inform the General Conference briefly of what had taken place in 
the General Committee. 
22. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco), Mr NDJOKO (Zaire), Mr. RAMTANI (Algeria) and 
Mr. MELAGA (Cameroon), considering that, like many African countries, Niger 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 8 


was faced with circumstances beyond its control, and taking into account the 
pledge of payment made by the delegate of that country, supported the request 
made by Niger for the restoration of its voting rights. 


23. The PRESIDENT, in response to the request made by the 
representative of Nigeria, reported that the General Committee had studied the 
wording of Article XIX.A, of the Statute and had decided that the reasons put 
forward by Niger in support of its request were insufficient to justify its 
failure to comply with its statutory commitments. 
24. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan), Mr. AMMAR (Tunisia), Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), 
Mr. SAETI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) and Mr. SILANGWA (Zambia) associated 
themselves with previous speakers who had supported Niger's request. 
25. The PRESIDENT said that he was impressed by the support received 
by Niger and asked whether any delegations had different views. 
26. Mr. SMITH (United Kingdom) said that he was not taking the floor 
in order to express an opposing view, but to make a few comments before a 
decision was taken. It was very rare for a country in arrears with the 
payment of its contributions to request to be allowed to keep its voting 
rights, presumably because such requests were generally rejected on the 
grounds that they were not justified by circumstances beyond the control of 
the Member State concerned. 
27. Although it was obviously necessary to adhere to the principles laid 
down in the Statute, a new element had arisen of which the General Committee 
had not been aware when it had considered the matter. The delegate of Niger 
had clearly stated that her country intended to pay its arrears in the very 
near future. It was very likely that if the General Committee had been 
informed of that fact it would have decided differently. In view of that new 
fact, he felt that the request submitted by Niger should be accepted. 
28. The PRESIDENT, noting that all speakers were in favour of 
restoring Niger's voting rights, took it that the General Conference wished to 
accede to Niger's request, since that country had pledged to pay its arrears 
in the very near future. 
29. It was so decided. 

GC(XXXJI1)/OR.320 
page 9 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (GC(XXXIII)/8 73) (resumed) 


30. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) said that the thirty-third regular session of 
the General Conference was taking place in a climate of international detente 
which had begun four years previously and gave reason for hope and optimism. 
In that new era, in which the international community was determined to face 
up to the dangers threatening the whole of humanity, it might be possible to 
solve many problems through international efforts linking developing and 
industrialized countries. 
31. The first of those problems was to find out how energy could be 
obtained at a reasonable cost so that countries, particularly poor countries, 
could continue their economic development. It now seemed clear, especially 
since the World Energy Conference held in Montreal, that world energy demand 
could be expected to double over the next 30 years and that electricity demand 
would double within 15 years. It was therefore necessary to increase the use 
of nuclear power and the transfer of nuclear technology to developing 
countries, since new energy sources, although important, would not in the 
foreseeable future be able to cope with the considerable increase in energy 
demand which would accompany the world's population growth and economic 
growth. The new climate of confidence prevailing in international relations 
might very well extend to the nuclear sector and encourage nuclear technology 
producers, including manufacturers of small reactors, to take an interest in 
developing countries; it might also encourage international financial 
institutions to conduct equitable negotiations in order to resolve the 
financing problems which posed considerable obstacles to the progress of 
developing countries in the use of nuclear energy. 
32. Comparison of the environmental impact of fossil fuels and that of 
nuclear power had led Jordan to the conclusion that the only way of protecting 
the environment was to develop nuclear power on a large scale to replace 
traditional energy sources and thereby to prevent discharges of harmful gases 
into the atmosphere, while also taking other new clean energy sources into 
account. At present, if they were to cope with their increased energy needs, 
developing countries had no other alternative but to burn more fossil fuels, 
thereby considerably adding to atmospheric pollution. It was impossible to 
imagine the scale and nature of the potential damage to the environment that 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.32O 
page 10 


would result if developing countries were not allowed to acquire nuclear 
technology more quickly, especially since those countries had high population 
growth rates and a per capita energy consumption which was less than 7% of 
that in industrialized countries, but which would inevitably increase. 


33. It was therefore important to consider new ways of finding a common 
solution to that problem. His delegation proposed that assistance should be 
provided for the development of regional nuclear power systems; that 
industrialized countries should, in accordance with appropriate technical and 
financial arrangements, construct nuclear power plants in developing countries 
in order to help those countries meet their energy needs; that an 
international system of incentives should be established to facilitate the 
transition from traditional systems to nuclear systems; that efforts should be 
stepped up to solve the political, economic and technical problems associated 
with nuclear technology and that an open-ended working group should be set up 
to discuss the problems of funding with international financial institutions. 
34. Alongside the development of nuclear power, there should be a 
strengthening of existing radiation protection systems, constant attention 
should be given to nuclear safety and security, and international codes of 
practice should be established, particularly in the areas of radioactive waste 
management and disposal. Furthermore, it was important to expand the 
international safeguards system; to strengthen measures to avoid the 
horizontal and vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons; to develop new 
models with inherent safety characteristics; to prepare, under the Agency's 
supervision, codes of practice and an international agreement defining the 
liability of producers in terms of nuclear safety and security; and to 
continue international efforts to reach an agreement between the major powers 
on the limitation of nuclear weapons and, in the long term, the elimination of 
those weapons. All those measures would make it possible to establish an 
international nuclear culture which would promote public acceptance of nuclear 
power. His delegation welcomed the Agency's efforts in that area and, in 
particular, its public information policy. 
35. Despite the favourable international climate, certain regions of the 
world remained exposed to pressure and threats which endangered peace. The 
Middle East and Africa were at the top of the list of those regions. The 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.32O 
page 11 


Middle East, which for more than 40 years had not known peace, lived 


continuously under the Israeli threat, while South Africa endangered the whole 
African continent. It was more necessary than ever that Israel should submit 


its nuclear facilities to international safeguards in accordance with the 


resolutions adopted by the Security Council, the United Nations General 
Assembly and the General Conference, that it should accede to NPT and that it 


should undertake not to threaten the peaceful installations of neighbouring 
States. Such initiatives would be perfectly fitting in the present climate of 
mutual understanding at the international level and would enable a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone to be established eventually in the Middle East. His 
delegation therefore urged the international community to make every effort to 


induce Israel and South Africa to change their policies on that issue. 


36. His delegation supported the State of Palestine's perfectly legitimate 
request to participate as an observer in the scientific and other meetings of 
the Agency. 
37. It was important to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute in 
order to permit better representation of developing States, particularly of 
the regions of the Middle East and South Asia and Africa. The 
counter-proposals which, in an attempt to perpetuate the inequitable 
representation of those two regions, were turning the question into a complex 
international problem would not help to improve the working climate and spirit 
of co-operation between Member States. 
38. His delegation welcomed the considerable efforts undertaken by the 
Agency in its provision of technical assistance to developing countries. He 
noted that during the last few years, the methods used for providing that 
assistance had developed considerably and improved noticeably, and that the 
requests submitted were being dealt with more rapidly. He commended the 
Department of Technical Co-operation on those results and hoped that efforts 
would continue to integrate the assistance provided with national programmes 
aimed at achieving a transfer of technology within a given time. Jordan also 
welcomed the Agency's emphasis on regional projects, the supply of expert and 
consultant services and the holding of regional seminars. However, in order 
for those activities to develop, the Agency should abandon the principle of 
zero growth in the budget which it had applied for several years and which 

GC(XXXIII/OR.320 
page 12 

prevented it from providing full assistance to developing countries in 
acquiring nuclear technology. 


39. His delegation approved the reappointment of Mr. Hans Blix for a 
further term of office and was grateful to him for the way in which he had 
guided the Agency's work. It also approved the Agency's Annual Report 
for 1988. 
40. In conclusion, he stressed that the future of the international 
community would depend increasingly on co-operation between peoples and 
between States and that nuclear power was at the top of the list of activities 
iti which there should be genuine co-operation based on confidence in the 
future of mankind. 
Ms. Tallawy (Egypt) took the Chair. 


41. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) said that, in the more than z5 years of its 
existence, the Agency had never failed in its principal mission, which was to 
seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world. That was without doubt a far from 
easy task and a heavy responsibility in the face of expansionist and 
aggressive policies pursued by certain members of the international community 
on the strength of the military use of atomic energy. It would seem that some 
States had still not learned the lessons of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. However, 
there were some early signs that gave grounds for optimism. Thus, the recent 
rapprochement between the United States and the Soviet Union would undoubtedly 
contribute to strengthening international peace and security, and would also 
affect the safeguards system, which played an essential role in promoting 
nuclear non-proliferation throughout the world, in particular in regions where 
conflicts were in danger of breaking out at any moment. Furthermore, the fact 
that the Secretariat had once again been able to conclude that the nuclear 
material under Agency safeguards in 1988 had remained in peaceful nuclear 
activities, the results achieved by the Agency in connection with liability 
for nuclear damage, the adoption by the General Conference of the Joint 
Protocol linking the Vienna and Paris Conventions on civil liability, and the 
adoption by the General Conference of a resolution requesting the Board to 
establish an open-ended working group to study all aspects of nuclear 
liability were all positive elements which should be welcomed. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 13 


42. In spite of all the Agency had done to preserve nuclear safety 
throughout the world and to ensure that nuclear energy was used exclusively 
for peaceful purposes, there remained a dangerous obstacle to the successful 
performance of its noble mission, namely the continued development of the 
nuclear capabilities of Israel and South Africa and the resulting threat to 
the security of the Middle East and the African continent. States everywhere 
in the world, including Europe, recognized that their security was closely 
linked to that of the Middle East, for various political, geographical and 
economic reasons. However, by obstinately refusing to accede to NPT and to 
place its facilities under Agency safeguards, Israel was posing a threat to 
that region. Its intention to produce and possess nuclear weapons was nothing 
new or fortuitous. Indeed, for 20 years Israeli leaders had been pursuing a 
systematic policy of attempting to monopolize the nuclear option for their own 
exclusive benefit while denying it to the other States in the region, even if 
doing so made it necessary to resort to force and violence, as Israel had done 
in 1981 by destroying an Iraqi reactor. That operation had been intended, on 
the one hand, to show that Israel was capable of striking at any target, Arab 
or non-Arab, near to or far from its border, and on the other hand, most 
importantly, to warn advanced countries against supplying nuclear technology 
to Arab countries, even if it was intended for exclusively peaceful uses. In 
that connection, he recalled that Israel and South Africa were co-operating in 
the military uses of nuclear energy and that their efforts had reached a stage 
where they constituted a very serious danger for the whole of the African 
continent. It was regrettable that the States which had supplied the racist 
regimes of Tel Aviv and Pretoria with the nuclear equipment and technical 
know-how were advanced States which called for democracy, peace and respect 
for human rights. Those States should henceforth assume a great moral 
responsibility and exert pressure upon the Israeli and South African regimes 
to force them to meet the Agency's demands by acceding to NPT and placing all 
their nuclear installations under safeguards. 
43. The fact that, in 1988, the world's total installed nuclear capacity 
had increased, that nuclear power stations had provided more than 17% of world 
electricity output, and that there had been 429 nuclear power plants in 
operation, clearly demonstrated the importance of the peaceful nuclear 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 14 


option. However, that growth was accompanied by negative aspects, one of 
which in particular affected developing countries, namely the dumping of 
nuclear wastes. 


44. The disposal of radioactive wastes had become one of the main problems 
facing countries which used nuclear energy to generate electricity, and in 
order to solve that problem, those countries used processes which were very 
harmful to the environment. All countries had a responsibility to future 
generations, and they should act without delay before the territories of 
Third-World countries were transformed into dumping grounds for radioactive 
wastes and their atmosphere was polluted by harmful radioactive substances. 
Concerted efforts should be made to safeguard present and future generations 
from the hazards which the wastes presented. The Agency's role should be to 
make the peoples of the developing countries aware of the risks to which they 
were being exposed. 
45. In conclusion, he reaffirmed that Qatar would continue to support the 
Agency's efforts to attain its objectives of peace and progress. 
46. Mr. PRZEDBORSKI (Costa Rica) said that, thanks to the support 
provided by the Agency, his country had continued its programmes in hydrology, 
radiation protection, applied nuclear physics and nuclear medicine, and they 
were starting to produce results which would have positive effects for the 
population. However, Costa Rica wished to expand those activities, as it was 
convinced that the peaceful use of nuclear energy could contribute 
considerably to improving its population's standard of living. 
47. Moreover, his Government was concerned at the fact that the country's 
hydroelectric reserves, although considerable, would be used up by the 
year 2015, if present electricity consumption trends continued. Consequently, 
it wondered whether Costa Rica should not take up the nuclear option in the 
near future, given that the other option, the large-scale use of fossil fuels, 
seemed less promising in view of the scarcity of those resources and of the 
consequences for the environment. Choosing nuclear power would force 
Costa Rica to make the relevant decisions soon, as it would have to start 
providing itself with all the necessary resources, manpower and technical 
infrastructure. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR..3 20 
page 15 


48. Costa Rica deplored the situation of the Inter-American Nuclear Energy 
Commission (IANEC) of the Organization of American States. That body had been 
compelled to suspend its activities for budgetary reasons, even though all 
were aware of the need to share the progress made by each country in 
Latin America. The IANEC had been the organization which embodied that will. 
Costa Rica sincerely supported 1ANEC and hoped that, through its co-ordinating 
activity, it might be possible to combine efforts in areas where nuclear 
techniques could help solve the development problems of the countries in the 
region. 


49. Costa Rica took part in and supported the ARCAL programme, which 
contributed to progress in the areas of common interest to the participating 
countries. A very important event in that context had been the Fifth Planning 
and Technical Co-ordination Meeting of the ARCAL programme, held in 
Costa Rica. That meeting had made it possible to analyse projects, government 
priorities and the position of participating countries on the international 
scene, and had examined formulas for international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the financing strategies required for 
projects under that programme. 
50. The National Atomic Energy Commission had intensified and diversified 
its activities, and six new technical assistance projects had been proposed to 
the Agency. The steps taken to enable Costa Rica to participate in the 
regional project on non-destructive testing in Latin America had also been 
successful. 
51. Costa Rica wished to emphasize that sustainable development must 
necessarily include the prevention of accidents with consequences for the 
environment, the controlled disposal of wastes and the prevention of 
contamination. It recommended that the Agency support the Permanent South 
Pacific Commission's proposal to establish a regional centre for monitoring 
and evaluating the radioactive contamination of the sea. 
52. His Government approved of the initiatives taken during the year in 
connection with the Agency's technical co-operation, in particular those 
relating to fellowships and training courses. Countries which, like Costa 
Rica, had focused their nuclear development on medicine and agriculture needed 

GG(XXXII1)/OR.32O 
page 16 


to train specialists who could combine efforts to carry out national projects 
successfully. Meanwhile, both the Agency and the countries concerned could 
strengthen the technical co-operation programme. 


53. The great responsibility which the Agency's national counterparts in 
each country bore for the proper implementation of the programme could not go 
unmentioned. However, the Agency could also speed up formalities, especially 
where fellowships and training were concerned, for example in the selection 
and placement of candidates. His Government encouraged the Agency to make 
more use of training centres in the region for its courses. Furthermore, it 
urged the Agency to investigate the possibility of intensifying technical 
co-operation with developing countries, especially in the area of training and 
fellowships, firstly by upgrading interregional courses in the light of the 
common interests of different regions, and secondly by adapting the level and 
characteristics of regional courses to the interests and specific needs of the 
region concerned. That would give the Agency the assurance that it was 
responding to the particular needs of each region and give governments the 
assurance that their specialists were receiving training commensurate with the 
available resources, and would thus enhance the contribution of technical 
assistance projects towards economic and social development. 
54. His delegation wished to take the opportunity of expressing its 
satisfaction to all the staff of the Department of Technical Co-operation, who 
had, throughout 1989, shown themselves eager to co-operate with the permanent 
missions in Vienna. 
55. His delegation approved the Agency's Annual Report for 1988 and 
commended and sincerely thanked the Agency's staff for the work they had 
done. At the same time, it hoped that the Agency would not waste its energy, 
time and resources or compromise its prestige by taking up problems of a 
political nature which could be discussed and, if necessary, resolved in other 
forums. It reaffirmed its support for the universality of the Agency and 
continued to feel that it was harmful and extremely negative for all to treat 
any State in a discriminatory fashion. 
56. In conclusion, his delegation reaffirmed its faith in the important 
role of the Agency, which effectively contributed to the well-being of peoples 
through the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 17 


i>7. Mr. PABON (Venezuela) expressed satisfaction with the activities 
carried out by the Agency in 1988, which once again had confirmed the Agency's 
vital importance in the current international context. Its contribution to 
reducing the technological imbalance between developing and industrialized 
countries was of great importance for peace. Many of the world's serious 
economic and political problems stemmed from that technological imbalance, 
which brought with it poverty, hunger and bad health care and education. That 
was why international co-operation and technical assistance were valuable, in 
particular the assistance provided by the Agency in the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy, which was an effective instrument for raising people's 
standard of living. His Government had always urged that technical 
co-operation should enjoy broader support, should be allocated more resources 
and, in fact, should be considered the Agency's principal activity. 


58. Venezuela's support for the Agency's work had always been firm and 
resolute, especially since it had benefited from valuable technical assistance 
services aimed at accelerating its development in the area of nuclear 
technology applications. That was profitable not only from the economic but 
also from the social point of view. Venezuela could state with satisfaction 
that it applied nuclear techniques successfully. It implemented, with the 
Agency's help, programmes in the fields of dosimetric calibration, nuclear 
analytical chemistry and use of isotopic methods for improving agricultural 
production, soil fertility, animal nutrition and the diagnosis of animal 
diseases. It had also benefited from regional technical assistance programmes 
which had enabled it to gain experience in radiation protection, dosimetric 
calibration and other areas of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, 
and to implement programmes related to those areas. 
59. Venezuela had been one of the countries that had supported the 
establishment of the ARCAL programme, which had become an excellent instrument 
of co-operation for all the Latin American region. His delegation therefore 
wished to take the opportunity of reiterating its Government's support for the 
activities conducted under that programme, commending the Agency for the way 
in which it had carried out those co-operation activities, and urging it to 
make every effort to ensure that the programme received the required 
financing. It would also be desirable for countries outside the region to 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.320 
page 18 


increase the financial contribution which they had so far been making to 
regional co-operation in Latin America, for which his delegation heartily 
thanked them. 


60. Since Venezuela had natural resources such as oil and hydroelectric 
power, it did not for the moment need to resort to nuclear energy. Thus, 
Venezuela's nuclear policy had always been oriented towards the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, with special emphasis on teaching, training 
and research. It had nevertheless not been uninterested in research and 
efforts at the international level to increase the efficiency, safety and 
reliability of power reactors. Indeed, it was paying close attention to 
fusion experiments and to research into new energy sources. 
61. Venezuela shared the concerns raised by the "greenhouse effect". It 
already had an environmental protection policy which was being implemented by 
the Ministry for the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources. Under a 
decree issued by the Executive, the electrical utilities had to allocate a 
substantial percentage of their net profits to protecting the environment. 
Venezuela supported the activities which were being carried out in that area 
by the international organizations, and it kept abreast of the results of 
comparative studies on the effects of the different energy sources on the 
natural environment and on health; however, such results were useful only to 
the extent that purely scientific criteria were applied and economic interests 
which might favour one energy source over others were totally excluded. 
62. Conservation of the environment required that the problem of 
contamination be dealt with in a global way and that the necessary corrective 
measures be applied. It was undeniably the progress made by industrial 
societies that hitherto had caused the most damage to the environment. 
However, that same industrial development had also permitted those societies 
finally to free themselves from hunger and to satisfy their basic needs. That 
truth was not always taken into consideration. Certain Third-World countries 
had a nascent industry for the production of plastics, refrigerants and 
aerosols. The industrialized countries consumed 84% of the world's output of 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), the potential of which for destroying the ozone 
layer was internationally recognized, but they were now asking those Third-
World countries, in the name of environmental protection, to stop using CFCs 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.32O 
page 19 


in their production. It was unacceptable so unfairly to deny developing 
countries their legitimate right to pursue industrialization and to seek 
economic independence. Furthermore, the resources which were currently 
accessible to man went far beyond those offered by the simple natural order. 
Given the research instruments and innovation capabilities which science and 
technology now offered, in the field of energy and in others, it could be 
asserted that pursuing human development was possible at an acceptable cost 
and risk. Science and technology could supply man with practical solutions 
for environmentally sound development. 


63. He welcomed the fact that the group of experts entrusted with 
elaborating a code of practice for transactions involving nuclear waste had 
begun its work. Measures taken at the national level were insufficient, and 
international agreements should be concluded to prevent the dumping of nuclear 
waste and other toxic wastes in developing countries. He hoped that the group 
of experts would be able to present a draft code which could be accepted by 
Member States to the Board of Governors the following year. 
64. His delegation was also pleased with the activities carried out by the 
Agency in co-operation with FAO and WHO in the area of food irradiation, and 
in particular with the results of the International Conference on the 
Acceptance, Control of, and Trade in Irradiated Food. 
65. With regard to the open-ended working group established to study all 
aspects of civil liability for nuclear damage, his delegation felt that its 
work on international liability for damage caused by nuclear activities should 
be directed towards elaborating a convention on State Liability. 
66. Venezuela attached great importance to technical co-operation and noted 
with satisfaction that the implementation rate had increased in 1988 in 
comparison with 1987, although it was still too low. That was no doubt due in 
part to a certain slowness on the part of the countries receiving assistance, 
but also to bureaucratic obstacles. His delegation therefore urged the 
Secretariat to consider the possibility of revising its administrative 
procedures so as to eliminate everything that hindered a more satisfactory 
utilization of the available resources. 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.320 
page 20 


67. His delegation regarded as extremely positive the change in the 
provisions relating to equipment purchases whereby the maximum authorized 
amount for purchases for which the competent committee did not need to give 
its approval had been raised to US $40 000. That would facilitate equipment 
purchases, a very important component of technical assistance programmes. In 
addition, he hoped that the development of preparatory assistance would lead 
to the Agency rejecting fewer proposals. 
68. Mr. FORTUNE (New Zealand) said that his country, as a founder 
Member of the Agency, was satisfied that it had met its principal challenge of 
accelerating and enlarging the peaceful uses of nuclear energy while ensuring 
that the processes developed were not used to further any military purpose. 
With its activities, the Agency had made a significant contribution to the 
maintenance of international security. From the outset, it had emphasized 
environmental protection, but there remained much more to be done. The threat 
of pollution caused universal concern. The potential risks of radioactive 
materials and nuclear waste disposal remained in existence. Recent accidents 
in non-military nuclear facilities had served to reinforce global concerns 
which could not be ignored. Nuclear power now accounted for 1/% of total 
world electricity production and was expected to increase. It was vital that 
the nuclear industry should apply the most rigorous safety standards and that 
all by-products should be disposed of in an environmentally sound and safe 
manner. The credibility of nuclear technology and the contribution that its 
peaceful use could make demanded proper regulation. 
69. The Agency's task of verifying compliance with NPT was one of its prime 
objectives. The safeguards functions established under NPT and the Agency's 
Statute were an essential part of the wider nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
Preparations for the fourth NPT Review Conference, which was to take place 
in 1990, were well advanced. That conference would again place NPT and the 
safeguards regime deriving from it under the international spotlight. 
70. New Zealand was disappointed and concerned that some 50 non-nuclearweapon 
States parties to NPT had not yet concluded safeguards agreements 
pursuant to the Treaty. Many of those States had no nuclear activities, and 
therefore posed no urgent problem. However, several of them did operate 
nuclear facilities of significance for safeguards. New Zealand appealed to 

GC(XXXilI)/OR.320 
page 21 


those countries to comply with the terms of NPT and to conclude safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. Such action was essential to maintain the 
effectiveness of the non-proliferation regime and to dispel suspicions which 
could be aroused by non-compliance with the verification aspects of the Treaty. 


71. New Zealand believed that all peaceful nuclear installations in all 
States should be brought under the Agency's control, and was pleased to note 
in that context that all five nuclear-weapon States had now concluded 
voluntary-offer safeguards arrangements of varying scope with the Agency. He 
hoped that those States would further extend the scope of those arrangements, 
during the NPT review, so as both to contribute towards limiting the 
production of material for nuclear weapons and to boost confidence in the 
non-proliferation regime. The NFT was the most successful and most widely 
supported arms control treaty yet concluded in the nuclear age. It 
represented a dynamic balance of obligations and commitments. For its future 
success, it was important that commitments made by parties were seen to be 
met. His country welcomed the progress made by the superpowers in the area of 
disarmament and arms control, with the conclusion of the INF agreement and the 
continuation of strategic arras negotiations. It also welcomed the progress in 
conventional arms talks. Those achievements, and the prospect of further 
progress on arms control and disarmament, helped to provide a sound basis both 
for the NPT Review Conference and for the extension conference in 1995. 
72. However, there was still much to be done, and not only by the nuclearweapon 
States. States with significant fuel cycle activities which remained 
outside the non-proliferation regime were undermining its future credibility. 
New Zealand called on the threshold States to place their facilities under 
Agency safeguards and to give a legally binding commitment to renounce the 
nuclear option. In the view of the New Zealand Government, an ambiguous 
nuclear policy undermined regional and global security. 
73. The Agency had additional safeguards responsibilities beyond those of 
its Statute and NPT. Under the Treaty of Rarotonga, which had established the 
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone, the Agency had assumed additional safeguards 
functions. Under that Treaty, the parties were required to conclude a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. In scope and effect, those agreements 
should be equivalent to an NPT safeguards agreement. The Treaty of Rarotonga, 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.320 


page 22 


which had entered into force in December 1986, was an important South Pacific 
regional initiative which augmented the global non-proliferation regime. It 
supplemented NPT and also extended the non-proliferation concept in the region 
further by excluding the stationing of nuclear explosive devices on the 
territories of the States Parties. New Zealand was pleased to note that in 
the previous year a further two members of the South Pacific Forum, the 
Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea, had ratified the Treaty, bringing the 
number of States Parties to eleven. 


74. If the Agency was to carry out its safeguards mission, it must have 
adequate resources and be efficiently managed. As more sophisticated nuclear 
facilities and larger reprocessing plants came on stream, the Agency's ability 
to carry out its role would be further strained. All Member States had a 
strong interest in exploring ways to assist the Agency in carrying out its 
duties, whether through improved and streamlined procedures or by other 
efficiency gains. 
75. The NPT offered a basis for co-operation between States on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. It was of course necessary to balance the 
non-proliferation objectives of the Treaty with the right of States to use 
nuclear technology. The Agency and its Members could make an important and 
valuable contribution in that area. 
76. The use of nuclear energy as a source of electricity carried with it 
the responsibility of ensuring that the highest safety standards were 
observed. As had been seen, the consequences of a nuclear disaster were an 
international problem. The Agency was to be congratulated for further 
strengthening safety standards through the work of the International Nuclear 
Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) and for updating the Agency's Regulations for 
the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials. 
77. Satisfactory progress had also been made in co-operation with the World 
Meteorological Organization on the use of the Global Telecommunication System 
for the rapid transmission of data for the purposes of the Early Notification 
Convention. His country was pleased to be associated with those arrangements. 
78. New Zealand and the other countries of the South Pacific were extremely 
conscious of the fragility of the marine environment. They were particularly 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 23 


concerned that the vast reaches of the Pacific should not be used as dumping 
grounds for nuclear waste. Under the Treaty of Rarotonga and the Convention 
for the Protection of the Natural Resources and Environment of the South 
Pacific Region, those countries had undertaken not to dump nuclear wastes and, 
as far as possible, to prevent others from doing so in the region. 


79. New Zealand was firmly convinced of the need for a stronger 
international regime against the dumping of radioactive waste and for a code 
of conduct governing all disposal activities. Accordingly, it was pleased to 
note that the Agency was continuing to emphasize waste management issues and 
that an International Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee was 
providing advice on that subject. It also welcomed the establishment of a 
technical group of experts to consider the basic principles of a code of 
practice for international radioactive waste transactions, which would be 
aimed at preventing illegal transactions and dumping operations including 
radioactive wastes. 
80. The Agency had an impressive record as a centre for the exchange of 
information on nuclear technology, safety and radioisotope applications. 
New Zealand, like all Member States, was a beneficiary of those services. 
Agency fellowship holders had trained in New Zealand, and New Zealand experts 
had assisted with training courses and seminars in Asia and the Pacific, where 
the Regional Co-operation Agreement played a very useful role. New Zealand 
experts also contributed to technical projects in various areas. During the 
year, New Zealand had continued its close involvement with the work of the 
International Consultative Group on Food Irradiation and it would carry on 
participating in the work of that group. 
81. Over the next 12 months, the members of the international community 
would be focusing their attention very closely on the operation of the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime, including the Agency's safeguards responsibilities. 
New Zealand would continue to give full support to the Agency's work in that 
area. It was essential that as the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were 
developed and extended, a sound and viable international safeguards regime 
should remain firmly in place. 
Mr. Chung (Republic of Korea) took the Chair. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 24 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXIII)/898) 


82. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference had decided 
earlier during the present meeting to modify the procedure for elections to 
the Board of Governors and to hold a secret ballot only for those areas for 
which there was no agreed list of candidatest*3. 
83. The elective places on the Board which were to be filled were indicated 
in document GC(XXXIII)/898. Paragraph 2 of the document gave the number of 
Member States which must be elected for each geographical area so as to ensure 
that the Board would be constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the 
Statute. Paragraph 4 listed the twenty-four Member States which had been 
either designated by the Board of Governors in June to serve on the Board in 
accordance with Article VI.A.I of the Statute or elected by the General 
Conference in 1988 in accordance with Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, and which 
would therefore serve on the Board in 1989-90. 
84. As the Member States of the areas Latin America, Western Europe, 
Eastern Europe and the Far East had agreed on their candidates, a secret 
ballot was unnecessary in their case and Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure 
could be suspended. 
85. The PRESIDENT asked the General Conference whether it wished to 
elect Chile and Venezuela to the two seats for Latin America. 
86. Chile and Venezuela were duly elected. 
87. The PRESIDENT asked the General Conference whether it wished to 
elect Belgium and Italy to the two seats for Western Europe. 
88. Belgium and Italy were duly elected. 
89. The PRESIDENT asked the General Conference whether it wished to 
elect Czechoslovakia and Poland to the two seats for Eastern Europe. 
90. Czechoslovakia and Poland were duly elected. 
91. The PRESIDENT asked the General Conference whether it wished to 
elect the Philippines to the seat for the Far East. 
[*] See paras 16 and 17 above. 



GC(XXXI1I)/OR.320 
page 25 


92. The Philippines were duly elected. 
93. The PRESIDENT said that four seats remained to be filled for which 
there was no agreement on the candidates, namely two seats for Africa, one for 
the Middle East and South Asia, and one for the Middle East and South Asia or 
South East Asia and the Pacific or the Far East (the so-called "floating 
seat"), which would on the present occasion go to the Middle East and 
South Asia area. 
94 A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect four members to the Board of 
Governors. 


95. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Finnish delegation 
and a member of the Hungarian delegation acted as tellers. 
96. The PRESIDENT, noting that the counting of votes would take some 
time, suggested that the general debate be resumed meanwhile. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1988 (GC(XXXIIl)/873) (resumed) 


97. Mr. SILANGWA (Zambia), emphasizing once again his country's 
interest in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, assured the Agency of 
his full support in carrying out its statutory tasks. Zambia thanked the 
Agency for the assistance it gave developing countries by strengthening their 
nuclear infrastructure, promoting training, and providing consultant's 
services. 
98. The technical co-operation programme, from which Zambia had benefited 
in various ways, continued to play an important role in the social and 
economic development of Member States. All the projects implemented in Zambia 
were continuing to make progress. The expert services received in 1989 had 
made it possible to strengthen radiological protection and to make more 
effective use of the installations at the national nuclear analytical 
laboratory. The Agency had also helped Zambia to set up a plant tissue 
culture laboratory which was important for agricultural research. The 
infrastructure set up with the Agency's help had also enabled Zambia to 
participate in the Agency's regional activities and to host several seminars 
and training courses. Inadequate or non-existent nuclear instrumentation 
maintenance capacity continued to be a major setback in the implementation of 

GC(XXXI11)/OR.32O 
page 26 


projects in Africa. The two courses held in Lusaka had therefore been 
particularly useful. 


99. Zambia continued to participate in the Agency's regional projects for 
Africa and supported the initiatives by African Member States and the Agency 
Secretariat to establish an African regional co-operation agreement for 
research, development and training. It hoped that the Board of Governors 
would give favourable consideration to that question. The setting-up of a 
regional network for nuclear instrumentation would also be a positive step. 
100. His delegation had taken note of the excellent report on technical 
co-operation activities in 1988, in which the Agency had attempted to define 
more clearly the contribution of nuclear programmes to the development of 
Member States, and in particular to sustainable socio-economic development. 
Those initiatives contributed greatly to the effective use of the Agency's 
resources, and the Agency's evaluation missions had an important role to play 
in that connection. 
101. For all those reasons, Zambia urged the Board of Governors to find a 
permanent solution for the financing of technical assistance. It supported 
the proposals aiming to ensure reliable and predictable resources, as 
reflected in resolution GC(XXV)/RES/388. Zambia had pledged its full 
contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1990. Its 
commitment to the Fund was demonstrated by the timely manner in which it had 
paid its voluntary contribution in past years. 
102. In connection with the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, his 
delegation maintained that the statutory principle of equitable geographical 
representation should be applied to the areas of Africa and the Middle East 
and South Asia. His delegation was disappointed that the Board had not made 
more progress on that issue, and reiterated that the issue of amending 
Article VI.A.2 was separate from that of revising Article VI as a whole. 
103. Zambia noted the action taken by the Director General pursuant to 
resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/490 on the dumping of nuclear wastes, namely the 
establishment of a representative working group of experts, and hoped that it 
would soon complete its work. 

GC(XXKI1I)/OR.32O 
page 27 


104. International co-operation on the sharing of safety-related information 
should be strengthened. It was essential that the suppliers of nuclear 
technology and the industrially advanced countries should provide developing 
countries with up-to-date information on the safety of nuclear installations. 
Zambia welcomed the initiatives which the Agency was continuing to take to 
assist Member States in training, and thus to help them derive greater benefit 
from the International Nuclear Information System (INIS). 
105. It was encouraging to note that the Agency's safeguards programme was 
continuing to be implemented efficiently and that again during 1988 all 
nuclear material under safeguards had been duly accounted for. The quality of 
inspections had been maintained in spite of the reduction in the number of 
on-site inspections. The Agency was also continuing its work on training 
personnel from Member States in the Department of Safeguards. 
106. With regard to the nuclear capabilities of South Africa, his delegation 
was disappointed that, despite the many efforts made by the Director General 
to persuade South Africa to submit aLl of its nuclear installations to Agency 
safeguards, and despite the many pressures exerted to force that country to 
abide by resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly, South Africa had 
done no more than make promises. The Pretoria regime continued to maintain a 
militarized political climate which was a grave danger to peace not only in 
southern Africa, but also in the world as a whole. The international 
community should not relax in the face of apparent change, but on the contrary 
should increase its pressure on South Africa for it to abandon its apartheid 
policy and to submit all of its nuclear installations to Agency safeguards. 
The Zambian delegation was deeply concerned by the alliance between 
South Africa and Israel, aimed at developing their nuclear military 
capabilities and destabilizing southern Africa and the Middle East. It fully 
shared the concerns of countries of the Middle East at the nuclear capability 
of Israel and its aggressive military activities, which were endangering peace 
in that region. 
107. Mr. NETHSINGHE (Sri Lanka), himself a former Agency staff member, 
said that one of the Agency's main assets was its staff, which any national or 
international organization might envy. Every effort should be made to deal 
with the problems of zero-budgetary growth, expanding programmes and unduly 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.32O 
page 28 


heavy workloads in certain sections, so as not to erode the Agency's morale 
and hence efficiency. 


108. His country did not have any major nuclear facilities; it had no power 
or research reactors and was not planning to build any in the near future. So 
far, its activities had focused on applications in the areas of agriculture, 
medicine, industry and hydrology. The Atomic Energy Authority provided the 
necessary support through various channels: teaching and training programmes 
in nuclear sciences, radiation protection and monitoring services, services 
for the repair and maintenance of nuclear electronic equipment and nuclear 
analytical services. All those activities would not have been possible 
without the Agency's technical co-operation programme, the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement (RCA) and its research contract programme. 
109. In the area of agriculture, significant contributions had been made in 
developing superior varieties of rice and mung bean, establishing better soil, 
water and fertilizer management practices, enhancing biological fixation of 
atmospheric nitrogen by plants, and improving animal production and health. 
In the medical sector, greater use was being made of in vitro radioimmunoassay 
methods and in vivo nuclear imaging techniques for diagnostic purposes and 
improved techniques had been introduced for radiation therapy of cancer 
patients. Radioimmunoassay techniques had also successfully been applied in 
the mass screening of donor blood for hepatitis B. 
110. In the industrial field, nuclear techniques were widely used for 
non-destructive testing, both in the public and private sector. The Atomic 
Energy Authority was establishing the necessary capability to provide 
non-destructive testing services to firms which were too small or which did 
not need to establish their own capability for such activities. Research and 
development work was continuing on radiation vulcanization of natural rubber 
latex, following the successful demonstration of that process in Indonesia, 
Malaysia and Japan under the RCA/UNDP/IAEA Industrial Applications Project. 
The private sector was establishing a commercial irradiation facility for the 
sterilization of surgical rubber gloves made locally and, in the public 
sector, the National Paper Corporation had decided to install a nucleonic 
control system to improve quality paper production in one of its factories. 
In the area of hydrology, methods using radioactive tracers and environmental 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.320 
page 29 


isotopes had been used successfully to solve practical problems related to the 
exploration of groundwater resources and seepage from irrigation canals and 
water reservoirs. Studies on the fallout of caesium-137 had been successfully 
carried out in order to solve the twin problems of soil erosion and 
siltation. Unfortunately, the current disturbances in Sri Lanka had hampered 
the progressive development of the country's activities relating to nuclear 
energy and its applications, particularly in the areas of agriculture and 
hydrology where field work was important. 


111. It was essential to increase the production of primary energy from all 
sources in order even to maintain, let alone improve the quality of life for a 
growing world population. National productivity could only be improved and 
increased by using scientific and technological applications, including 
nuclear techniques, at the level of local infrastructures. All the country's 
human resources had therefore to be made productive, so as to bridge the gap 
between the privileged and the underprivileged and to reduce, if not 
eliminate, the conflicts in Sri Lanka. 
112. The problem of public acceptance of nuclear power which, understandably, 
had taken a turn for the worse after the accidents at Three Mile 
Island and Chernobyl now seemed to have improved, judging from the increase in 
the number of nuclear power plants which had been constructed or were under 
construction in the world. That change must be attributed to the effective 
response by the Agency, whose programmes had done much to improve public 
opinion of nuclear power, including the programmes to promote the development 
of safer nuclear power plants, both in terms of construction and operation, 
the programmes related to radiation protection and environmental safety and to 
radioactive waste management and disposal, and the Conventions on Early 
Notification, on Emergency Assistance, and on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Materials. The proposed convention on civil liability would 
strengthen public confidence still further. 
113. Sri Lanka was not planning to launch a nuclear power programme in the 
immediate future. However, if an economically viable small- or medium-sized 
nuclear power plant were developed, that goal might be brought nearer. The 
country was largely dependent on hydroelectric power, but its economically 
exploitable sources of such power were fast dwindling. In order to meet its 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.320 
page 30 


future energy needs, Sri Lanka would have no option but to depend more on 
fossil fuels and new or renewable sources of energy. Nevertheless, it 
encouraged countries which were ready and prepared to do so to use nuclear 
power in order to help reduce the greenhouse effect and to preserve the 
dwindling fossil fuel resources for those who were not in a position to embark 
on a nuclear power programme. 


114. The recent reports in the media about India's plan to construct two 
power plants in the southern part of its territory, very near to Sri Lanka, 
had given rise to exaggerated fears among the general public about the 
consequences for Sri Lanka should any accident occur at those power plants. 
While recognizing that, in view of the safety precautions taken in the 
construction and operation of new-generation power plants, such an accident 
was extremely improbable, Sri Lanka was taking steps to allay public concern 
and intended to accede, in the near future, to the Conventions on Early 
Notification, on Emergency Assistance and on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material. It also hoped that the convention on civil liability which 
was currently being prepared would soon be finalized, since it would help to 
improve public acceptance of nuclear power. His country was proposing to 
establish a national environmental radiation monitoring programme and to 
participate in the activities of the IAEA/WHO global environmental radiation 
monitoring network and the Agency's regional technical co-operation programme 
on marine radioactivity. 
115. As a matter of high priority, Sri Lanka was planning to update its 
regulations governing the use of nuclear energy and to strengthen its 
infrastructure for implementing those regulations, particularly with regard to 
licensing, radiation protection of workers and the public, as well as 
radioactive waste disposal. 
116. Sri Lanka was planning to embark upon an accelerated programme on the 
commercial application of radiation techniques for the vulcanization of 
natural rubber latex, food preservation and the sterilization of medical 
supplies. His delegation hoped that, under the RCA programme, it would also 
be possible to consider the feasibility of transboundary transmission of 
electrical power, transboundary monitoring of environmental radioactivity and 
activation analysis of geological and other samples in research reactors 
located in countries of the region. 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.320 
page 31 


117. In order to meet its objectives, his country urgently needed to develop 
its human resources. Despite the difficulties at home, young Sri Lankan 
scientists and technicians were working with dedication and showing innovative 
capabilities. Sri Lanka would seek all possible assistance from the Agency 
and other sources in order to train its scientists in the various areas of 
nuclear science and technology which it considered necessary for the 
implementation of its programme. 
118. In conclusion, he said that his country supported the resolution aimed 
at enlarging the Board of Governors. 
119. Mr. OMAR (Afghanistan) said that his country, which had been an 
active Member of the Agency for more than 30 years, appreciated all the 
activities undertaken by that unique international organization to promote 
international co-operation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy, to prevent 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to guarantee future energy supplies. 
Apart from constituting a bulwark for world peace, those activities, together 
with the Non-Proliferation Treaty and safeguards, had created an atmosphere of 
confidence among Member States and had raised the hopes of nations. The 
experience gained by the Agency in dealing with a nuclear accident had been 
valuable and had helped it to provide useful assistance. 
120. The applications of nuclear energy were essential for the development 
of all countries and substantial efforts should therefore be made in that area 
by all members of the international community. The Agency, for its part, was 
responsible for taking steps to ensure that nuclear energy was used properly. 
Afghanistan believed that effective nuclear safety and radiation protection 
could only really be guaranteed if all countries, collectively and 
individually, took account of the measures taken. 
121. The Agency's efforts in the area of the applications of nuclear energy 
were very laudable, particularly those under its successful technical 
co-operation programme, which provided considerable support to developing 
countries. Although it did not have modern nuclear techniques, Afghanistan 
was aware that the peaceful use of nuclear energy was necessary in order to 
solve the problems of economic and social development. Despite having 
decreased during the last few years, the assistance provided by the Agency in 
the areas of medicine, agriculture, scientific research and training of 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.320 
page 32 


national personnel was still very important and valuable. Frequent use was 
made of the many equipment items which had been provided by the Agency and 
which were the only ones Afghanistan possessed. It was to be hoped that that 


support would again be increased in order to help Afghanistan, which had been 
seriously affected by the war imposed from outside, to cope with the most 
pressing needs in its reconstruction process. 


122. The applications of nuclear energy in agriculture and food played a 
very important role in the development process. Afghanistan therefore 
attached great value to the FAO/IAEA co-operation programme, from which it 
thought it could benefit still more. 
123. Regional co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
particularly between neighbouring countries, was very useful and constituted 
an important aspect of mutual assistance. It was to be hoped that nuclear 
technology would always be used for peaceful purposes in the region to which 
Afghanistan belonged. His delegation continued to support the idea of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia, with the voluntary participation of 
Member States. 
124. He also welcomed the substantial progress made in the field of 
disarmament and the world-wide reduction of nuclear weapons. He strongly 
supported the statement relating to total disarmament issued during the last 
summit meeting of non-aligned countries in Belgrade. 
125. The successful work carried out by the Agency during the past year, the 
excellent climate which existed between the Member States of that prestigious 
international organization and their willingness to co-operate gave grounds 
for satisfaction. In conclusion, Afghanistan was grateful for the assistance 
received and reaffirmed its support for the Agency's activities. 
126. Mr. BOBAK (Trade Unions International of Workers in 
Energy - TUIWE), after warmly thanking the Agency for having given him the 
opportunity to attend the thirty-third session of the General Conference as an 
observer, said that the documents submitted to that session, the proposals and 
opinions expressed there, and the decisions which would be taken, were of 
great interest to the TUIWE and the trade union movement as a whole. 

GC(XXXI1L)/OR.32O 
page 33 


127. In April 1989, for the first time, heads of trade union organizations 
of countries having nuclear power plants and representatives of international 
trade unions had had the pleasure of meeting the officials and experts of the 
Agency in Vienna. That consultative trade union/IAEA meeting had shown that 
the development of nuclear energy created many social and economic problems 
which could only be solved by co-operation between trade unions and 
governments on the one hand, and trade unions and the Agency on the other. In 
his view, the General Conference should take the results of that meeting into 
account in its work. 
128. Nuclear power involved special technologies which differed from all 
others and for which absolute safety was above all essential. For that 
reason, and in view of the present degree of its internationalization, nuclear 
power demanded highly developed and open co-operation between all countries in 
the world. Such co-operation would help to promote and assure the balanced 
development of electricity industries so as to meet the needs of mankind in 
the late twentieth century and to provide the essential conditions, 
particularly in countries of the Third World, for implementing suitable 
programmes to meet their pressing national requirements. 
129. Although international nuclear safety standards were very strict, 
participants in the consultative meeting had urged the Agency to strengthen 
the practice of monitoring and control of civil nuclear activities in all 
countries. In the majority of cases where co-operation had been established 
between the management of a nuclear undertaking and the trade union or unions, 
there had been a steady improvement in the personnel's living and working 
conditions. However, many problems remained, particularly with regard to the 
economic and social position of workers. Those problems had a significant 
effect on the human factor and could have a direct and serious adverse impact 
on the operation of a nuclear power plant or have serious consequences in 
emergency situations during an accident. 
130. The TUIWE was currently preparing for its second statutory conference, 
which was to take place in November 1990 in Paris and would be attended by 
trade unionists from the energy sector of the majority of the world's 
countries. The present and the future, energy requirements and options, and 
the safety of work in the nuclear field would be considered in detail. He was 

GC(XXXLII)/OR.32O 
page 34 


sure that the Agency would also pay attention to those issues and be 
represented at that conference. The TUIWE, whose main objective was to defend 
the interests of workers and their trade union organizations, was firmly 
convinced that a spirit of understanding would prevail between it and the 
Agency to the mutual advantage of both parties. 


APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 


131. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's present External Auditor 
had been appointed in 1981 by the General Conference at its twenty-fifth 
session. Having been extended three times, his term of office expired at the 
end of the year. The General Conference therefore had to appoint an External 
Auditor for 1990 and 1991. In the light of consultations which had taken 
place, he proposed that the General Conference appoint the Auditor General of 
Canada as the Agency's External Auditor for 1990-91. 
132. The President's proposal was accepted. 
133. Mr. SHENSTONE (Canada) thanked the General Conference for the 
honour which it had done his country by entrusting the auditing of the 
Agency's accounts to Canada's Auditor General and said that, like his 
predecessor, the Auditor General of Kenya, Canada's Auditor General would 
carry out his tasks to the best of his ability. 
134. The PRESIDENT thanked the Auditor General of Kenya for the skill 
with which he had carried out the duties entrusted to him by the General 
Conference. 
The meeting was suspended at 6.20 p.m and resumed at 6.30 p.m. 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXIII)/898) (resumed) 


135. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the results of 
the voting. 
136. The results of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was 
as follows: 
Abstentions: 16 
Valid votes: 164 
Required majority: 42 


GC(XXXL11)/OR.320 
page 35 


Votes obtained: 
Nigeria 60 
Tunisia 61 
Zaire 21 
Zambia 22 


137. Having obtained the required majority, Nigeria and Tunisia were elected 
to the Board. 
138. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 87 
Required majority: 44 
Votes obtained: 


Islamic Republic of Iran 30 
Iraq 1 
Saudi Arabia 55 
Syrian Arab Republic 1 


139. Having obtained the required majority, Saudi Arabia was elected to the 
Board 
140. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific or of the Far East 
(the so-called "floating seat") was as follows: 


Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes: 79 
Required majority: 40 
Votes obtained: 
Bangladesh 1 
Indonesia 1 
Islamic Republic of Iran 2 
Iraq 5 7 


GC(XXK11I)/OR.32O 
page 36 


Jordan 1 
Lebanon 1 
Philippines 1 
Saudi Arabia 1 


Syrian Arab Republic 14 


141. Having obtained the required majority, Iraq was elected to the Board. 


The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
25 October 1989 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 29 September 1989, at 10.30 a.m. 


Presidentt Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat 
I- 64 


Oral report by the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole 
on the fo11ow i ng i terns: 65 - 111 


- The Agency's accounts for 1988 
86 
- Measures to strengthen international co-operation in matters 
relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection 87 
(a) Dumping of nuclear wastes 
88 
(c) 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material 89 
(d) 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency 90 
(e) 
Prohibition of all armed attacks against nuclear 
installations devoted to peaceful purposes whether 
under construction or in operation 91- 94 
[*] GC(XXXIII)/897. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXIII)/INF/274/Rev.2. 


89-4771 (56l2e/0557e) 



GCCXXXII I)/OR.32I 
page 2 

Item of the 
~~Z Paragraphs 

agenda* 
The financing of safeguards 95 
The financing of technical assistance 96 - 98 
Plan for the production of low-cost potable water 99 
The Agency's budget for 1990 100 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1990 101 
Voluntary contributions to the Agency 102- 104 


(a) 
Rules Regarding the Acceptance of Voluntary 
Contributions of Money to the Agency 102 


(b) 
Confirmation of the acceptance of a voluntary 


contribution of money 103 -104 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 105 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 106 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole 107 
Proposed amendment of Rule 89 of the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference 108 -109 
Representation of IAEA Member States not members of the 
Board at meetings of the Board as observers 110 III 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 3 


ISRAELI NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES AND THREAT (GC(XXXlII)/886, 887 and 895) 


1. The PRESIDENT noted that the present item had been included in the 
agenda pursuant to resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/487 adopted by the General 
Conference the previous year. 
2. Pursuant to operative paragraph 5 of that resolution, the Director 
General had submitted the report appended to document GC(XXXIII)/886, and 
pursuant to operative paragraph 6, the Conference had before it, in 
document GC(XXXlII)/887, a technical study on different modalities of the 
application of safeguards in the Middle East. Both of those documents had 
also been submitted to the Board of Governors. The Conference further had 
before it, in document GC(XXXIII)/895, a draft resolution which had been 
submitted by Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Rebulic, Tunisia 
and the United Arab Emirates and which would be introduced by the delegate of 
Morocco. 
3. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) said that the aim of the Arab Member States 
in submitting the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIII)/895 was to 
create a climate in all countries of the Middle East conducive to the 
development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy and nuclear power free of 
the danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
4. It was clear from paragraph (a) of the preamble that the resolution 
applied to the Middle East only. In view of the exceptional circumstances 
prevailing in that region and the threat posed by Israeli nuclear armament, 
the Arab States hoped that delegations from all other regions would understand 
and support the resolution, too. It was well known that Israel was developing 
or had already developed medium-range ballistic missiles which could be fitted 
with nuclear warheads and aimed at areas neighbouring the Middle East region. 
5. With regard to preambular paragraph (b) concerning the threat posed to 
peace and security in the area by Israel's growing nuclear capability, he 
noted that the great fear felt by the Arab countries on that score was also 
reflected in resolutions adopted in Fez and Casablanca and in the historic 
decision taken by the Palestine National Council in November 1988, when 
Palestine had expressed its willingness to strive for a just peace in the area 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.321 
page 4 


in accordance with United Nations Security Council resolutions 242 and 338. 
Israel's response to that decision had been to continue occupying Arab 
territories. Its refusal to submit all of its nuclear installations to Agency 
safeguards, its hinting at the possibility of acquiring nuclear weapons, and 
its rejection of efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the dispute had 
led the area to the verge of armed confrontation. 


6. Paragraph (c) had been prompted by the consideration that there were 
seven Arab countries in the African region and that any threat to that region 
as a whole would be matched or even surpassed by the threat to those 
particular Arab countries. Even if that were not so, the Arab peoples would 
still wish to show their solidarity with the peoples of the African continent 
in rejecting the threat posed by co-operation between Israel and South Africa 
in the nuclear field. The expansion of Israel's nuclear capability only 
served to deepen the concern aroused by such collaboration. 
7. Paragraph (d) recalled Security Council resolution 487, adopted in 1981 
by the body acknowledged throughout the international community as being 
primarily responsible for international peace and security. That resolution 
requested Israel to submit all its nuclear installations to the Agency's 
safeguards system. In the eight years which had since elapsed there had been 
no response from Israel - despite repeated international calls for such a 
response. He wondered how the permanent members of the Security Council, in 
full knowledge of their responsibilities under the United Nations Charter, 
could remain silent on the matter. Unless Israel accepted Security Council 
resolution 487 the aspirations of the Arab countries for peace, security and 
economic and social progress in the Middle East would remain mere dreams. 
8. The operative part of the draft resolution not only called upon Israel 
to comply with the Security Council resolution already mentioned, but also 
requested the Agency to take practical steps towards solving the problem. In 
that regard, the recommendations contained in paragraph 75 of the technical 
study in document GC(XXXIII)/887, while not fully satisfying the Arab 
countries' desires, none the less offered countries in the region different 
modalities for applying IAEA safeguards. If those recommendations were 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 5 


applied, all the nuclear installations in the Middle East, including Israeli 
ones, would be subject to Agency safeguards. If Israel wished to prove its 
good intentions towards the peoples of the area and its sincere desire for 
peace, it should announce its decision to submit all its installations to the 
Agency's safeguards system, and if the Member States participating in the 
present Conference wished to prove their concern about the nuclear threat in 
the Middle East and their desire to safeguard that region's prospects for 
peaceful development, they should support the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXlII)/895. 


9. Some would say that the matter was a political one, outside the 
Agency's mandate, and not a proper subject of discussion by the General 
Conference. It should be remembered, however, that those advancing that 
argument were likely to be the very same people who had forced the Agency to 
take a political stand when it had been in their own interest. 
10. In conclusion, he said that the sponsors of the draft resolution were 
convinced that, if approved, it would represent a significant contribution 
towards the peaceful development of nuclear energy for the benefit of 
mankind. If the Conference decided to take a vote on the draft resolution, 
whether on parts of it or on the resolution in its entirety, the Arab States 
would prefer that vote to be by roll-call. 
11. Mr. YASSIN (Sudan) expressed his delegation's regret that no 
progress had been made in persuading Israel to submit all its nuclear 
installations to safeguards. His delegation continued to believe that actions 
to stop the Israeli nuclear threat did indeed fall within the Agency's 
mandate, since they assisted the Agency in promoting the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and facilitated the application of safeguards. The majority of 
countries in the Middle East, far from seeing the safeguards system as some 
kind of punishment, recognized its vital importance for the peaceful 
development of nuclear energy. Only Israel had failed to adhere to the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to submit its nuclear 
installations to the safeguards system. 
12. Since it was the international community's responsibility to promote 
the cause of non-proliferation, it was absolutely essential that the Agency be 
aware of the quantity and type of nuclear armaments in Israel's possession. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 6 


He therefore appealed to delegations to support the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXIII)/895. 


13. Mr. SAMIEI (Islamic Republic of Iran) recalled that his delegation 
had supported the draft resolution from its conception. There could be no 
doubt that Israel represented the only threat in the area concerned. No other 
State in the Middle East region could even remotely match Israel's nuclear 
capabilities. As his delegation had stated on several occasions previously, 
Israel constituted a global threat and should be dealt with accordingly. The 
text of the resolution should reflect that fact. 
14. His delegation therefore had certain reservations concerning the draft 
resolution in its present form, because it shifted the focus from the main 
issue, namely the serious threat posed by Israel's nuclear capabilities and 
the necessity of its submitting all its nuclear installations to Agency 
safeguards. 
15. His delegation none the less fully supported the proposed resolution 
and considered that it represented the very least the Agency could do to 
counter the Israeli threat. 
16. Mr. SAETI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that since Israel 
persisted in its refusal to abide by Security Council resolution 487, the 
present Conference should not only approve the draft resolution under 
consideration, but also adopt sanctions to dissuade Israel from its policy of 
extending its nuclear military installations, which constituted a threat to 
the security of the entire world, let alone the Middle East. Moreover, those 
States which provided Israel with assistance in that field should cease to do 
so until it had complied with Security Council resolution 487. The question 
of Israel's nuclear capabilities and threat should be retained on the agenda 
of the Agency's General Conference for its thirty-fourth regular session. The 
question was not a political one outside the Agency's mandate, since the issue 
at stake was not Israel's violation of human rights or its treatment of the 
Palestinian people, but its refusal to submit to Agency safeguards. 
17. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that introducing nuclear arms in the 
Middle East and pushing the region into the nuclear arms race would represent 
a threat to international security. Iraq had repeatedly urged Israel to 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 7 


adhere to the NPT and to abstain from acquiring nuclear weapons. It had also 
consistently asked the Agency to apply safeguards to all Israeli nuclear 
installations, thereby discharging its full responsibilities under its Statute 
and at the same time responding to Security Council resolution 487 and various 
resolutions adopted by the Agency's General Conference, including resolution 
GC(XXXIl)/RES/487 of 1988. 


18. His delegation considered that the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXlII)/895 was very balanced and should therefore be voted on as 
a whole - rather than paragraph by paragraph, which would weaken it 
dangerously and deprive it of its full meaning. The vote should be taken by 
roll-call, as requested by the delegate of Morocco. In fact, he would like 
any votes taken under the current item to be roll-call votes. 
19. Mr. AL-NUWAISER (Saudia Arabia) associated himself with the 
remarks made by the delegate of Morocco and urged the Conference to adopt the 
draft resolution by consensus immediately. 
20. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) pointed out that all neighbouring States of 
Israel had placed their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards; his 
delegation therefore supported the draft resolution. 
21. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said that in view of the technical study on 
modalities of application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East submitted by 
the Director General in document GC(XXXIII)/887, his delegation would have 
expected the draft resolution to reflect a more positive attitude. 
22. The draft resolution misrepresented Israel's policy towards nuclear 
non-proliferation and failed to recognize that Israel supported the principle 
of non-proliferation; indeed, it affirmed the need to establish a nuclearweapon-
free zone in the Middle East, along the lines of the Tlatelolco and 
Rarotonga Treaties, which was why it welcomed the fact that the Director 
General's technical study included the proposal that States of the region 
should base their safeguards agreements with the Agency on a nuclearweapon-
free zone agreement following the example of those two Treaties. 
23. However, the sponsors of the draft resolution had ignored the Director 
General's recommendation and had made false accusations against his country. 
Allegations of co-operation between South Africa and Israel had been dismissed 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.321 
page 8 


as unsubstantiated speculation in the report of the United Nations 
Secretary-General contained in document A/36/431 of 18 September 1981. Israel 
had consistently denounced racism and apartheid at all times in all 
international forums and did not intend to co-operate with South Africa in the 
nuclear field. 


24. In General Conference resolution GC(XXIX)/RES/443, the General 
Conference had acknowledged that statements by Israel contained "undertakings 
on behalf of their [the Israeli] Government in response to resolution 
GC(XXVIII)/RES/425", thereby accepting Israel's statements on the 
inviolability of nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes. All the 
same, that issue had been unnecessarily revived in preambular paragraph (d) of 
the draft resolution now before the Conference. 
25. In operative paragraph 1 of that draft resolution, Israel was called 
upon to submit all its nuclear installations to Agency safeguards. However, 
the conclusion of safeguards agreements was a voluntary matter, as provided 
for in Article III.A.5 of the Statute and as recognized in the technical 
study. There were many States which were not party to NPT and not subject to 
full-scope safeguards, and it was therefore unjustifiable to single out 
Israel. 
26. Operative paragraph 2 introduced proposals which would involve the 
Agency taking the initiative in the conclusion of safeguards agreements, 
thereby disregarding the statutory principle that safeguards were a matter for 
the voluntary decision of States. 
27. United Nations General Assembly resolution 43/65, which had been 
adopted without a vote, inter alia requested the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations to undertake a study on effective and verifiable measures which 
would facilitate the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle 
East and to submit that study to the General Assembly at its forty-fifth 
session in 1990. The involvement of the Agency at the present stage could 
complicate that study and would also be tantamount to prejudging the outcome 
of negotiations between States on the modalities of establishing the 
nuclear-weapon-free zone. Upon completion of the United Nations study, the 
technical study contained in document GC(XXXIII)/887 could serve as an 

GG(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 9 


important guide to the States of the Middle East in agreeing on safeguards 
procedures for the zone. The Agency could then play a role at the request of 
all States concerned, but only as a measure supplementary to mutual 
arrangements agreed upon by the members of the zone. 


28. Israel urged all States in the region to start free and direct 
negotiations to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. His 
delegation could not accept a procedure whereby Israel alone was called upon 
to accept full-scope safeguards. Furthermore, it considered that it would be 
inappropriate to include the present item again in the agenda for the next 
session, since it was extraneous to the Agency's real work and discriminatory 
against Israel, and Member States were weary of the repetitive debates on the 
subject since 1981. He therefore appealed to all delegations to reject the 
draft resolution. 
29. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) said that her delegation's views had already 
been made known in discussions which had taken place in the Board of 
Governors. There could be no doubt that the question of Israeli nuclear 
capabilities was one which should be examined by the Agency, since Israel had 
attacked a nuclear reactor devoted to peaceful purposes which was under Agency 
safeguards. 
30. Other States in the region had shown their willingness to comply with 
the NPT and were therefore seriously concerned at Israel's refusal to do so. 
Although it was true that the decision to accede to the NPT was a matter of 
national sovereignty, special considerations applied in Israel's case. 
31. Member States should note the positive aspects of the draft resolution, 
which was very modest and objective. As the representative of Iran had 
pointed out it had been drafted in such a way as to avoid any attack on 
Israel, so as to ensure that it received the greatest possible acceptance. 
32. The establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East was 
not a prerequisite for placing Israel's nuclear facilities under safeguards. 
The Director General's technical study listed six modalities for the 
application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East. The fact that Israel was 
trying to isolate just one of those modalities and attempting to impose it on 
the other countries in the region made it seem unlikely that Israel really 
wanted to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 10 


33. With regard to the question of heavy water, Israel's position was in 
flagrant violation of international law and her delegation could not accept 
that such negotiations should go on for more than thirty years. It was to be 
hoped that safeguards would be applied in the case of Israel's heavy water, 
otherwise Egypt would be forced to make other proposals for a solution to that 
problem, such as to bring the matter before the International Court of Justice. 
34. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his delegation 
opposed the draft resolution because the matters addressed in it were of a 
political nature and lay beyond the Agency's mandate and competence. For 
example, operative paragraph 2 referred to "the situation in the area of the 
Middle East", which was clearly a political question which the Director 
General of the Agency had no mandate to deal with. 
35. Preambular paragraphs (b) and (d) referred to an Israeli threat to 
peace and security in the area, in total disregard of statements made to the 
Director General by the Government of Israel according to which it had no 
intention to threaten countries in or outside the region of the Middle East. 
The General Conference had itself accepted those statements. Furthermore, 
preambular paragraph (c) expressed concern about co-operation between Israel 
and South Africa in the nuclear field, even though both Israel and 
South Africa had denied those allegations. 
36. Operative paragraph 1 called upon Israel to submit all its nuclear 
installations to Agency safeguards. Whilst the United States delegation 
continued to urge all non-nuclear-weapon States to place all their nuclear 
activities under Agency safeguards, it could not countenance the 
discriminatory singling out of one State alone. Moreover, the draft 
resolution once again seemed to treat safeguards as a sanction, rather than a 
voluntary step which a Member State could take to confirm the peaceful nature 
of its nuclear activities. 
37. Including an item entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat" 
again in the agenda for the thirty-fourth regular session of the General 
Conference, as proposed in operative paragraph 4, would result in the 
continued involvement of the Agency in matters beyond its mandate and 
competence. The underlying issues concerned complex questions of 
international and regional security which ought to be resolved through 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 11 


negotiations in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. 
Perpetuation of that issue on the General Conference's agenda would continue 
to prevent it from concentrating on the proper scientific and technical tasks 
of the Agency. 


38. In conclusion, he urged other delegations to join him in opposing the 
draft resolution. 
39. Mr. QIN (China) said that his delegation was gravely concerned 
about the Israeli nuclear capability and threat and therefore supported the 
draft resolution and called upon Israel to implement Security Council 
resolution 487 of 1981 immediately. 
40. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan), referring to points raised by the delegates 
of Israel and the United States, said that Israel was being singled out for 
special treatment because it was the only State which had attacked a nuclear 
facility of another Member State while it was under Agency safeguards. 
41. The political situation in the Middle East was of course very important 
in the present context, but the draft resolution did not refer to the politics 
of the Middle East, only to the threat to nuclear facilities there. 
42. His delegation agreed with the delegate of the United States that the 
General Conference should concentrate on questions relating to nuclear science 
and technology, but wondered how States in the Middle East were to work on 
building up their peaceful nuclear programmes if such efforts were constantly 
threatened by Israel. 
43. Mr. MAHMASSANI (Lebanon) thought Member States would agree that 
the technical study contained in document GC(XXXIII)/887 was the outcome of 
the Agency's experience in the area of safeguards in general and not 
specifically tailored to suit the Middle East. Although six modalities for 
the application of safeguards were listed in the study, the delegate of Israel 
had singled out the only modality that did not conform to the situation in the 
Middle East, namely the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone on the 
lines of the Tlatelolco and Rarotonga Treaties. The situation in the regions 
covered by those Treaties, namely Latin America and the South Pacific, was 
completely different, since there was no ongoing conflict between States 
there. If Israel were sincere in its intentions, it should adopt one of the 
other practical options listed in the study. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 12 


44. The co-sponsors of the draft resolution under consideration were not 
singling out Israel. It was the Security Council which had unanimously 
adopted its resolution 487 in 1981 and thereby singled out Israel. 
Articles III.A.5 and III.B.I of the Statute specifically provided for the 
establishment, administration and application of safeguards. If that was a 
political issue, then the Statute would have to be amended. 
45. The delegate of Israel had claimed that there was no evidence to 
substantiate the allegation that Israel possessed nuclear weapons. However, 
in a report issued as document GC(XXXIl)/849 the Director General had 
concluded with a quotation from a report by the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations stating that although the United Nations did not have 
conclusive proof that Israel possessed nuclear weapons, circumstantial 
evidence together with other factors would seem to indicate that Israel had 
developed the necessary technology and had the means to manufacture nuclear 
weapons, if it so chose. 
46. According to an article in the "International Herald Tribune" newspaper 
relating to the heavy water imported by Israel from Norway, Israel had 
admitted to having operated the Dimona reactor with Norwegian heavy water 
since 1963. By now it could therefore probably have made enough plutonium for 
more than 100 atomic bombs. 
47. Finally, the delegate of Israel had indicated his country's willingness 
to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, but if its 
intentions were sincere the first step should be to accept Agency safeguards. 
48. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no more speakers, invited 
the General Conference to vote on the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXIII)/895. As had been requested by the delegates of Morocco and Iraq, 
the vote would be taken by roll-call. 
49. Cyprus, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
50. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea, Egypt, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, 
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
Iraq, Jordan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 13 


Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, 


Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, 


Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of 


Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United 


Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia, 


Zimbabwe, Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, 


Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Cuba. 


Against: Denmark, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, 
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, 
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica. 


Abstaining: Ecuador, Guatemala, Kenya, Peru, Sri Lanka, Venezuela, 
Argentina, Brazil, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, 
Cote d'Ivoire. 


51. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIII)/895 was adopted 
by 47 votes to 28, with 12 abstentions. [*] 
52. Mr. TETENYI (Hungary) said that he had voted for the draft 
resolution because his country was a committed supporter of the NPT and was in 
favour of using all opportunities for inviting States which had not done so to 
join the Treaty and to put their nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. 
Nevertheless, he was aware of the non-compulsory nature of the Agency's 
safeguards under Article III.A.5 of the Statute. He agreed that discussion of 
political conflicts did not fall within the mandate of the Agency and should 
be dealt with in competent political forums. However, the recommendations 
contained in operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution to the effect that 
the Director General should consult with the States concerned in the Middle 
East with a view to applying Agency safeguards in the area along the lines of 
the technical study submitted in document GC(XXXIII)/887, and in particular 
its paragraph 75, would help promote the NPT regime and establish a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 
53. Mr. SINAI (India) said that his country remained fully committed 
to the provision in Article III.A.5 of the Statute that safeguards could be 
applied "at the request of the parties, to any bilateral or multilateral 
[*] Subsequently the delegation of the Philippines informed the Secretariat 
that it had intended to vote in favour. 



GG(XXXII1)/OR.321 
page 14 


arrangement, or at the request of a State, to any of that State's activities 
in the field of atomic energy". Thus, any proposal for uniform application of 
safeguards in a particular region required the prior approval of all the 
States in that region. India could continue to support the application of 
safeguards globally provided that could be achieved on a truly universal and 
non-discriminatory basis. His country had supported earlier resolutions in 
the General Conference on the present subject in view of the unique situation 
in the Middle East and had always shared the concern of the countries in that 
region with regard to the threat to peace and security posed by the policies 
of Israel. In 1981, following the unprovoked military attack on the Iraqi 
nuclear reactor, the United Nations Security Council, in its resolution 487, 
had urgently requested Israel to place its nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards. Israel had still not complied with that request. The resolution 
just adopted by the Conference sought, inter alia, to enable the Agency to 
fulfil the task entrusted to it by the Security Council. With the exception 
of Israel all the countries in the Middle East which had a nuclear programme 
had already placed all their nuclear facilities under safeguards or had 
expressed their willingness to do so. It was for that reason that he had 
voted for the resolution. 


54. Mr. SHENSTONE (Canada) said that, in his general debate statement 
earlier in the week, he had called on all States that had not yet done so, in 
the Middle East and in all other regions, to accede to the NPT and to accept 
Agency safeguards on all their nuclear activities. Canada could not, however, 
support a resolution singling out one country for failing to place its 
facilities under safeguards. Moreover, the preambular clauses of the 
resolution contained several statements which gave a tendentious and 
unsubstantiated view of the situation. Still, the resolution submitted during 
the current session did represent an improvement over those of previous 
years; in particular, its operative paragraph 2 was essentially acceptable to 
the Canadian delegation. 
55. Mr. KAZUHARA (Japan) said that his Government's position with 
regard to the present question remained unchanged. Israel was urged, together 
with all other countries which had remained outside the NPT, to become a party 
to the Treaty as promptly as possible and to place its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. However, the IAEA was a technical organization which 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 15 


had been entrusted with well-defined functions, and factors not relevant to 


those functions should not be introduced into discussions since they did not 
come under the Agency's mandate and could only detract from its original and 
proper aims. Continued discussion of the present question within the Agency 


in the future might well jeopardize the normal conduct of the Agency's 
activities as defined in its Statute. However, the list of suggestions 
contained in paragraph 75 of the report in document GC(XXXIII)/887 was not 
only very interesting but suggestive of further steps which might be taken by 
all Member States in the region. That paragraph was referred to in operative 
paragraph 2 of the resolution, which thus pointed to a positive and 
constructive direction for Member States to follow, and which was appropriate 
for discussion within the Agency since it was closely connected to one of the 
Agency's main purposes, the consolidation of the nuclear non-proliferation 
regime. 


56. Mr. VILLAROS (France), speaking on behalf of the twelve members of 
the European Community, said that the text of the resolution bore clear 
witness to the concern of its authors to take into account the worries of a 
large number of Member States; that was particularly evident in operative 
paragraph 2 of the resolution. Such a concern was appreciated, but the 
resolution was still incompatible with the principles which the Twelve had 
always defended. They had been forced to vote against it for two main 
reasons: firstly, it perpetuated within the Agency the examination of a 
question which deflected the Agency from its purposes and divided its 
Members; secondly, its content was at variance with the objectives of Agency 
safeguards. Safeguards could be applied only as a result of a voluntary 
decision on the part of a State, and any attempt to use them as a means of 
putting pressure or bringing to bear sanctions upon a State ran counter to the 
objective for which they had been conceived. 
57. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) commended the obvious 
efforts which had been made to render the resolution less offensive and more 
constructive than in previous years. Preambular paragraphs (a) and (f) made 
perfectly valid comments, and the United States could have supported operative 
paragraph 2 of the resolution were it not for the reference to the situation 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 16 


in the Middle East, which lay beyond the Agency's competence. He hoped that 
the positive development which the resolution showed would continue in the 
future. 


58. Mr. GUYER (Argentina) said that he disagreed with any attempt to 
impose safeguards in a binding manner against the sovereign wish of a 
Member State whatever reasons might be invoked to justify such a move. Any 
such attempt would not be in conformity with the Statute and would undermine 
confidence in the safeguards system. That was why he had abstained from the 
vote. 
59. Mr. VETTOVAGLIA (Switzerland) said that his country had always 
supported the principle that the specialized agencies of the United Nations 
should avoid discussion of items which were more properly discussed by other 
bodies. Certain of the preambular paragraphs in the draft resolution 
contained statements which were not in keeping with the nature and purpose of 
the Agency. The acceptance of safeguards was exclusively the sovereign 
decision of a State, and a State could not be singled out and forced to accept 
them. However, the obvious attempts which had been made to moderate the draft 
resolution deserved praise. 
60. Mr. WILSON (Australia) said that in the technical study on 
modalities of application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East the Agency 
had produced a useful and factual analysis, which was a suitable response to 
the request made in operative paragraph 6 of the previous year's General 
Conference resolution (GC(XXXI1)/RESM87) on the same subject. Similarly, the 
report appended to document GC(XXXIII)/886 was a fully appropriate response to 
the request in operative paragraph 5 of that resolution for a report on the 
implementation of the resolution. As to the resolution just adopted, it had 
been opposed by Australia because it sought to keep before the Conference 
political issues which were extraneous to the functions and responsibilites of 
the Agency. It was also discriminatory in that it singled out the safeguards 
situation in one State for criticism and condemnation. Australia, for its 
part, had consistently urged all States to accept NPT, or at least the 
application of full-scope safeguards. 
61. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that his country was a convinced 
adherent of NPT and the safeguards regime and would always be ready to appeal 
to members of the international community to widen the geographical area 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 17 


of its application; however, such appeals should not be addressed on a 


selective basis, as that approach would make the attainment of the desired 


goal less likely. He appreciated the new elements contained in operative 
paragraph 2 of the resolution, which met with Austria's approval and support, 


even though it had not been able to vote for the resolution as a whole. 


62. Mr. GRIFFITHS (New Zealand) said that his country was not 
complacent about the situation in the Middle East but did not believe that 
discriminatory resolutions were helpful. Several countries in various regions 
of the world possessed advanced nuclear facilities which had not been 
subjected to Agency safeguards. Regional and global security and stability 
would be enhanced by the application of safeguards to all facilities. 
Operative paragraph 2 of the resolution therefore seemed to him to reflect a 
more constructive approach to the question of safeguarding nuclear facilities 
in the region than had previous resolutions on the same subject. 
63


 Mr. ESCOFET ARTIGAS (Mexico) said that his delegation had 
reservations with regard to preambular paragraph (b) of the resolution. The 
General Conference was not competent to consider situations which endangered 
international peace and security, such matters being exclusively the concern 
of the United Nations Security Council. Also, certain expressions used in the 
text of the resolution were inappropriate. 


64. Mr. FILHO (Brazil) associated himself with the position outlined 
by the delegate of Argentina, according to which safeguards could not be 
imposed on Member States but must always be the result of a sovereign decision 
on the part of a State. Brazil was in favour of non-proliferation, but on a 
non-discriminatory basis. It rejected the assumption implied in the 
resolution that unsafeguarded nuclear activities were not for peaceful 
purposes. 
ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


65. Mr. NETHSINGHE (Sri Lanka), Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole, presented the Committee's report on items 10 to 22 of the agenda. 
66. Under item 10, "The Agency's accounts for 1988", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution on page III of 
document GC(XXXlII)/874. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 18 


67. Under item 11, "Measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXIII)/907. 
68. Under sub-item ll(a), "Dumping of nuclear wastes", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXIII)/9O1. 
69. Under sub-item ll(c), regarding the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material, the Committee recommended that the Conference 
adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXII1)/9O2. 
70. Under sub-item ll(d), regarding the Convention on Early Notification of 
a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency, the Committee recommended that the 
Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXI1I)/9O3 as 
amended in document GC(XXXIII)/903/Corr.l. 
71. In addition, still under agenda item 11, the Committee recommended to 
the Conference that it request the Director General to include an item 
entitled "Prohibition of all armed attacks against nuclear installations 
devoted to peaceful purposes whether under construction or in operation" in 
the provisional agenda for the Conference's next regular session. 
72. Under item 12, "The financing of safeguards", the Committee recommended 
that the Conference adopt the draft resolutions set forth in documents 
GC(XXXIII)/877 and 908. 
73. Under item 13, "The financing of technical assistance", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXIII)/909. In addition, the Committee recommended that the 
Conference request the Director General to transmit the summary record of its 
discussion under that item to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Committee. 
74. Under item 14, "Plan for the production of low-cost potable water", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXIII)/904. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 19 


75. Under item 15, "The Agency's budget for 1990", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt draft resolutions A, B and C set out in 
Annex 111 to Part I of document GC(XXXI.Il)/875. 
76. Under item 16, "Scale of assessment of Members' contributions 
for 1990", the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXlII)/884/Rev.1. 
77. Under sub-item 17(a), "Rules Regarding the Acceptance of Voluntary 
Contributions of Money to the Agency", the Committee recommended that the 
Conference adopt the draft resolution attached to document GC(XXXIIl)/879. 
78. Under sub-item 17(b), "Confirmation of the acceptance of a voluntary 
contribution of money", the Committee recommended that the Conference take the 
action recommended in paragraph A of document GC(XXXIIl)/882. 
79. Under item 18, "Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXI11)/911. 
80. Under item 19, "Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute", the 
Committee recommended the adoption of the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXIII)/9O5. 
81. Under item 20, "Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXIII)/906. 
82. Under item 21, "Proposed amendment of Rule 89 of the Rules of Procedure 
of the General Conference", the Committee recommended that the Conference take 
the action recommended in paragraph 5 of document GC(XXXII1)/88O. 
83. Under item 22, "Representation of IAEA Member States not members of the 
Board at meetings of the Board as observers", the Committee, following a 
roll-call vote, had decided not to recommend the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXIH)/881/Add.1 to the Conference. 
84. In conclusion, he thanked the two Vice-chairmen, Mr. Papadimitropoulos 
of Greece and Mr. Posta of Hungary, for their extremely valuable support. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 20 


85. The PRESIDENT suggested that the draft resolutions relating to the 
agenda items which had been referred to the Committee of the Whole, together 
with its other recommendations, might now be considered by the Conference with 
a view to their adoption. 
The Agency's accounts for 1988 


86. 
The draft resolution on page III of document GC(XXXIII)/874 was adopted. 
Measures to strengthen international co-operation in matters relating to 
nuclear safety and radiological protection 


87. 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/907 was adopted. 
(a) 
Dumping of nuclear wastes 
88. 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/901 was adopted. 
(c) 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 
89. 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/902 was adopted. 
(d) 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency 
90. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/903, as amended in document 
GC(XXXIII)/903/Corr.l. was adopted. 
(e) 
Prohibition of all armed attacks against nuclear installations devoted 
to peaceful purposes whether under construction or in operation 
91. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Committee of the Whole had 
recommended that the Conference request the Director General to include an 
item entitled "Prohibition of all armed attacks against nuclear installations 
devoted to peaceful purposes whether under construction or in operation" in 
the provisional agenda for the next regular session of the Conference. 
92. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), reiterating his country's 
stand on the subject, emphasized that his delegation did not regard the matter 
as an appropriate topic for discussion by the General Conference of the 
Agency, which did not have the competence to consider complex political and 
military aspects of the problem, or to decide what was against the Charter of 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 21 


the United Nations. Armed attacks against peaceful nuclear facilities were a 
subject more suitable for the United Nations Security Council, the Conference 
on Disarmament or similar bodies. 


93. The PRESIDENT assumed that the Conference wished nevertheless to 
take the action recommended by the Committee of the Whole. 
94. 
It was so decided. 
The financing of safeguards 


95. The draft resolutions set forth in document GC(XXXIII)/877 and in 
document GC(XXXIII)/908 were adopted. 
The financing of technical assistance 


96. 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/909 was adopted. 
97. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the Conference wished to request the Director General to transmit the 
summary record of the Committee's discussion under that item to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Committee. 
98. 
It was so decided. 
Plan for the production of low-cost potable water 


99. 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/904 was adopted. 
The Agency's budget for 1990 


100. Draft resolutions A, B and C set out in Annex III to Part I of document 
GC(XXXIII)/875 were adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1990 


101. 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/884/Rev.1 was adopted. 
Voluntary contributions to the Agency 


(a) 
Rules Regarding the Acceptance of Voluntary Contributions of Money to 
the Agency 
102. 
The draft resolution attached to document GC(XXXIII)/879 was adopted. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.321 
page 22 


(b) Confirmation of the acceptance of a voluntary contribution of money 
103. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the Conference wished to confirm the Director General's acceptance of 
the voluntary contribution of money made by the Asian Development Bank, 
concerning which details were contained in document GC(XXXIII)/882. 
104. It was so decided. 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


105. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/911 was adopted. 
Amendment of Article VI.A,2 of the Statute 


106. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/905 was adopted. 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole 


107. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/906 was adopted. 
Proposed amendment of Rule 89 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference 


108. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the Conference wished to take the action recommended in paragraph 5 of 
document GC(XXXIII)/880. 
109. It was so decided. 
Representation of IAEA Member States not members of the Board at meetings of 
the Board as observers 


110. The PRESIDENT assumed that the Conference wished to take note of 
the report concerning the item made by the Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole. 
111. It was so agreed. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
8 November 1989 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-THIRD (1989) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Friday, 29 September 1989, at 3.15 p.m. 
President: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
23 Participation of Palestine in the 
activities of the IAEA 1 - 10 
24 South Africa's nuclear capabilities 11 - 57 
25 Examination of delegates' credentials 58 - 67 
27 Election to the Agency's Staff Pension 
Committee 68 - 70 
28 Report on voluntary contributions 
pledged to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund for 1990 71 
Closing of the session 72 - 79 

[*] GC(XXXIII)/897. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIII)/INF/274/Rev.2. 


89-4777 (5729e/0589e) 



GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 2 


PARTICIPATION OF PALESTINE IN THE ACTIVITIES OF THE IAEA (GC(XXXIII)/890 
and Mod.1) 


1. The PRESIDENT, recalling that the item entitled "Participation of 
Palestine in the activities of the IAEA" had been included in the agenda at 
the request of the Arab Permanent Missions to the Agency, announced that the 
extensive consultations which had been held on the matter had made it possible 
to arrive at an understanding Which he proposed to formulate in the following 
manner: 
"Taking account of United Nations General Assembly resolution 43/177 of 


20 December 1988, and after consultations with delegations, I wish to 


announce that there is a broad consensus that as of today the 


designation "Palestine" should be used instead of "PLO". This change 


of designation is without prejudice to the observer status of the 


Palestine Liberation Organization in accordance with GC(XX)/RES/334 of 


23 September 1976 and the continuance of its existing eligibility 


pursuant to Agency rules and practices to participate in open-ended and 


relevant meetings convened under the auspices of the Agency." 


2. It was so decided. 
3. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his delegation 
had discussed the question at issue extensively in the General Committee, 
where it had strongly opposed its inclusion as an item on the agenda, 
indicating clearly that the question was a purely political one which had no 
place in a scientific and technical body such as the Agency. It now wished to 
record its opposition to the decision just announced by the President to 
replace the designation "Palestine Liberation Organization" by "Palestine". 
4. His delegation had always objected to General Conference resolution 
GC(XX)/RES/334 of 23 September 1976, which invited the PLO to attend all 
future sessions of the General Conference as an observer, and continued to 
believe that it was a mistake to invite to the General Conference a purely 
political organization which had no other aim than to promote its own 
political objectives. That organization could make no contribution to the 
scientific and technical objectives of the Agency. 
5. His delegation had listened carefully to the President's statement 
concerning the decision of the General Conference to change the designation 
"PLO" to "Palestine". It was clear from that statement that the decision did 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 3 


not in any way alter the observer status of that organization in the General 
Conference. His delegation would find any decision to change the status of 
the PLO in the Agency totally unacceptable. The President's statement also 
made it clear that the decision to re-designate the PLO as "Palestine" did not 
in any way change the existing eligibility of the PLO to be invited to Agency 
meetings. It did not confer on the PLO, either explicitly or implicitly, new 
rights or privileges or expanded oportunities to participate in the work of 
the Agency. 


6. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said he had noted the statement made by the 
President of the General Conference and wished to register strong reservations 
about, and objections to, that statement. If the matter had been put to the 
vote, Israel would have voted against it. He noted that the President's 
statement had no effect on the existing status of the PLO in the Agency as 
formulated in resolution GC(XX)/RES/334 of 23 September 1976. Indeed, the 
statement stressed that the change in designation had no further implication 
of any kind for the PLO's status. 
7. Any participation of the PLO in the Agency's work beyond the present 
status was bound to introduce an undesirable element of politicization to the 
Agency, which was and ought to remain a purely technical and scientific 
organization whose task was to promote the utilization of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes. 
8. For those reasons, his Government regretted the statement read out by 
the President. 
9. Mr. MAHMASSANI (Lebanon) strongly supported the decision announced 
by the President. The views expressed by the two previous speakers did not in 
any way detract from the broad consensus on whose basis that decision had been 
adopted, a consensus which reflected General Assembly resolution 43/177 of 
20 December 1988 through which the designation "Palestine Liberation 
Organization" had been changed to "Palestine". That change was without 
prejudice to Palestine's eligibility, under the Agency's rules and practices, 
to participate in open-ended and other relevant meetings convened under the 
Agency's auspices. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 4 


10. The emergence of such a broad consensus and the substance thereof 
clearly and categorically demonstrated the non-political nature of the change 
in designation. Throughout the consultations conducted by the President, the 
delegations of the Arab countries had shown their attitude to be one of 
co-operation and moderation, rather than confrontation. Their aim was to 
promote the Agency's goals and to accelerate and enlarge its contribution to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. 
SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXXII)/RES/503, GC(XXXIII)/894 and 
GC(XXXIII)/900) 


11. The PRESIDENT said that the present item was included in the 
agenda pursuant to resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/503. In response to the request 
made in that resolution, the Director General had reported to the General 
Conference in his opening statement at the first meeting of the session. 
12. The General Conference also had before it, in document GC(XXXII1)/9OO, 
a draft resolution submitted by the African group. In order to save time, he 
appealed to delegates to include in their statements comments on the draft 
resolution, which would be introduced by the delegate of Nigeria. 
13. He also wished to draw attention to document GC(XXXIII)/894, which had 
been circulated at the request of the Resident Representatives of the United 
States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union in their capacity as 
representatives of the depositaries of NPT. 
14. Mr. MGBOKWERE (Nigeria), introducing the draft resolution on 
behalf of the African group, recalled the provisions of General Conference 
resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/503 and stated that the African group, with the full 
support of the Asian group and the near-total support of the Latin American 
group, was submitting the draft resolution - whose text was identical to that 
submitted the previous year - to the Conference for its consideration in the 
hope of reaching a consensus which would clearly show Pretoria the abhorrence 
universally felt with regard to its policy of apartheid. 
15. Since 1987 when the Board had taken the historic decision of 
recommending to the General Conference that it suspend South Africa from the 
exercise of its privileges and rights of membership of the Agency, the 
Pretoria regime had resorted to diversionary tactics, a game in which it was a 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 5 


past master, in order to undermine the will of the General Conference to take 


such a decision. Its strategy was evidently to dangle the prospect of its 


accession to NPT in front of the Conference in order to weaken its resolve. 
As his delegation had stated in the past, NPT was open to all countries 
wishing to accede to it and contained nothing which might form the subject of 
negotiation or consultation. The procedure adopted by the racist South 
African regime in claiming that it intended to sign NPT was both unusual and 
unnecessary. 


16. The negotiations which had taken place in the course of the year 
between South Africa, the three depositary powers and a number of Agency 
Member States were simply posturing. The experience of the contact group on 
Namibia showed the extent to which over-optimism could end in disappointment 
and frustration, particularly where South Africa and its apartheid policy were 
concerned. The current developments in Namibia were due to a combination of 
factors, most notably armed struggle and the intensification of economic 
sanctions, among which those applied by American and European businessmen 
should not be underestimated. 
17. Nigeria was following events in South Africa very closely. There were 
probably many who imagined that Mr. De Klerk, South Africa's new President, 
viewed or would view those events from a fresh perspective. But extreme 
caution should be exercised; there were no grounds for divining a change of 
heart. The apartheid regime had not yet taken practical measures to dismantle 
its oppressive race laws. No one should be taken in by any attempt by South 
Africa to use apartheid to reform apartheid, for it was well known that the 
nationalists were in the habit of using code language such as "homeland" and 
"separate political rights" to disguise their unyielding opposition to giving 
black South Africans complete freedom of political expression. Mr. De Klerk 
would have to prove that he had the means and the courage not only to make 
sweeping reforms, but also to keep them firmly on course. 
18. The message which the African Group and virtually all the other members 
of the Group of 77 wished to convey was that pressure on South Africa to 
comply with the Agency's resolutions and to abandon its policy of apartheid 
should not be relaxed. The Agency placed emphasis on universality, but it had 
the duty, as the International Lawn Tennis Federation had recently done, to 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.322 
page 6 


expel South Africa in order to strengthen international pressure on it to 
establish a political and social structure based on the principle of the 
equality of its citizens regardless of race. 


19. In conclusion, he urged all delegations to send a clear message to the 
racist regime of Pretoria by supporting the draft resolution under 
consideration, the simple aim of which was to defer a decision on suspending 
South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of membership of 
the Agency until the 1990 regular session of the General Conference. In the 
struggle to secure the desired changes in South Africa, Mr. De Klerk should 
not be given any respite. His delegation hoped that the draft would be 
adopted without a vote. If not, it requested on behalf of the African Group 
that a roll-call vote be taken. 
20. Mr. YASSIN (Sudan) said that, during the year which had passed 
since the present matter had last been examined by the General Conference, the 
South African people had remained under the yoke of the hideous regime of 
apartheid. With the twenty-first century approaching, that nation continued 
to be oppressed on its own territory. All countries wishing to enjoy the 
privileges of membership of the Agency should respect the principles on which 
the United Nations system was founded. The African peoples had renounced the 
possession of nuclear weapons, even for the legitimate purposes of defence. 
If the South African regime wished, as it claimed, to embark on a policy of 
moderation, why was it unable to display moderation in the sphere of nuclear 
armaments and why did it not respect the principles adhered to by all the 
other Member States of the Agency? 


21. The draft resolution under consideration demonstrated once again the 
patience of the African countries in their long struggle against apartheid in 
South Africa. It was therefore to be hoped that it would be supported by all 
Member States so that the question could be settled in 1990. 
22. Mr. ABDEL-MONEIM (Egypt) said that South Africa continued to 
resort to excuses and pretexts which fooled nobody in order not to sign 
the NPT. Moreover, it persisted in its refusal to submit all its nuclear 
installations to Agency safeguards as requested by the General Conference in 
its previous resolutions on the matter. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 7 


23. The African Member States of the Agency wished the submission of the 
draft resolution in question to be regarded as a gesture of good will on their 
part, and not as a step backwards. They hoped that those whose basic 
responsibility it was to preserve peace and security in the world would 
respond to that gesture by intensifying the pressure on South Africa. Egypt's 
position on that issue had been well known for many years. 
24. The African nations, acting through the Organization of African 
Unity (OAU), had wanted their continent to be free of nuclear weapons so that 
they might devote all their energy and resources to solving the problems 
confronting them. They aspired to progress and prosperity, one prerequisite 
for which was the opportunity to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In 
conclusion, his delegation urged all countries participating in the General 
Conference to vote for the draft resolution. 
25. Mr. BADRAN (Jordan) fully supported the draft resolution submitted 
by the African Group and requested the General Conference to adopt it by 
consensus. 
26. Mr. STLANGWA (Zambia), associating himself with the statements 
made by the preceding speakers, said he had not discerned any change in the 
attitude of the Pretoria regime, which continued to threaten peace and 
security in the southern African region. As all Member States were aware, 
South Africa had continued to intensify its military nuclear activities. The 
South African Government would continue to govern the country without having 
been elected by a majority of its population, as recently confirmed by the 
President elect. The current situation in South Africa demanded that the 
entire international community urgently step up its pressure on the Pretoria 
regime to force it to comply with the resolutions of the United Nations 
General Assembly. 
27. As indicated by previous speakers, the draft resolution under 
consideration bore witness to the patience and good will of the African 
countries. It was to be hoped that all the delegates present would support 
the draft in order to show the South African Government that the international 
community would not tolerate its policy of apartheid, military aggression and 
collaboration with other States in the oppression of the peoples making up the 
majority of the southern African population. That region needed peace and 

GC(XXXII1)/OR.322 
page 8 


security for its further social and economic development. In conclusion, he 


hoped that the draft resolution under consideration would be adopted without a 


vote. 


28. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) said that since 1987 when 
South Africa had announced its possible accession to NPT it had not made anyserious 
move to confirm its intention to keep that promise. On the contrary, 
before every session of the General Conference South Africa had gone through 
the same charade, which merely confirmed what Cuba had stated on previous 
occasions about the South African Government's true intentions. Moreover, 
South Africa had not shown that it had the least intention to comply with the 
General Conference's recommendations that it submit all its nuclear 


installations to Agency safeguards, and it continued to drag out the 
negotiations on the application of safeguards to its semi-commercial 
enrichment plant. 


29. If South Africa wished to accede to NPT, it had only to sign and ratify 
the Treaty as other countries had done, without making such a fuss. The 
special treatment which South Africa enjoyed in that regard was surprising, to 
say the least. His delegation therefore dismissed any delaying tactics 
enabling the South African Government to continue to trifle with the 
requirements of the General Conference and regretted that that respectable 
body had not adopted the same position with regard to South Africa as the 
overwhelming majority of international organizations. 
30. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) expressed his support for the draft resolution 
in document GC(XXXlll)/900. 
31. Mr. AYTOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said he fully supported 
the draft resolution and hoped that the General Conference would adopt it 
without a vote. 
32. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), supported by Mr. CLARK 
(United Kingdom), requested a roll-call vote on the draft resolution. 


33. The PRESIDENT announced that, as requested by the representatives 
of Nigeria, the United States and the United Kingdom, a roll-call vote would 
be taken on the draft resolution in document GC(XXXIII)/900. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 9 


34. Sudan, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
35. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, 
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Afghanistan, 
Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, China, 
Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, German 
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, 
Iran, Islamic Republic of, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Korea, 
Republic of, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Niger, 
Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Sri Lanka. 


Against: Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States of 
America, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, 
Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, 
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, 
Portugal, Spain. 


Abstaining: Chile, Colombia, Guatemala, Philippines. 


36. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIII)/900 was adopted 
by 59 votes to 26, with 4 abstentions. 


37. Mr. MARTINS FET-ICIO (Brazil) said that his delegation's vote in 
favour of the draft resolution did not in any way imply that his Government 
believed that safeguards could be imposed on any Member of the Agency. Its 
vote should be interpreted as an act of resolute opposition to the South 
African regime of apartheid, a regime which was contrary to the principles of 
the United Nations Charter and to the legitimate aspirations of the African 
peoples. 
38. Mr. BAEYENS (France), speaking on behalf of the European 
Community, said that the Member States of the Community could not, any more 
than the previous year, lend their support to the resolution which had just 
been adopted. They abhorred apartheid every bit as much as the sponsors of 
the resolution, had always condemned that system and would continue to do so, 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 10 


but felt that the suspension of any Member of the Agency ran counter to the 
fundamental principle of the universality of the United Nations and its 
related institutions. Moreover, such a step would weaken the international 


safeguards system and would be likely to affect nuclear safety adversely and 
set a precedent which could jeopardize the participation of other countries in 
the Agency. Because operative paragraph 2 clearly envisaged the possibility 
of suspending South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights of 
membership of the Agency, the Member States of the European Community had been 


obliged to reject the draft resolution. 


39. Mr. GUYER (Argentina) said he had voted in favour of the draft 
resolution primarily in order to protest against the repeated violations of 
the United Nations Charter by the South African regime. However, his country 
continued to oppose any attempt to force any Member State to accept the 
application of safeguards. 
40. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his delegation 
had voted against the draft resolution because although it did not call for 
the immediate suspension of South Africa, it clearly pointed to the threat of 
such a decision the following year. The United States Government was opposed 
to any measure of that kind for a number of fundamental reasons. 
41. First, any attempt to exclude a Member State or limit its participation 
would undermine not only the fundamental principle of the universality of 
international organizations, but also the special role of the Agency. The 
Agency could successfully promote the peaceful and safe uses of nuclear energy 
only if all nations with nuclear energy programmes took part in its 
activities. 
42. Second, disciplinary actions or sanctions had to be based on the rule 
of law. Article XIX.B of the Agency's Statute provided for suspension only if 
a Member State persistently violated the Statute or an agreement concluded 
pursuant to it, which South Africa had not done. If the membership took an 
illegal decision, the credibility of the Agency would be sacrificed. 
43. Third, the Agency's safeguards system was a vital component of the 
non-proliferation regime. Any steps which would reduce the scope of such 
safeguards, make more difficult their extension or call into question their 
continued application in any country should therefore be avoided. 

6C(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 11 


44. Fourth, safeguards were voluntary measures undertaken by governments 
wishing to confirm the peaceful nature of their nuclear activities. To treat 
them as sanctions or penalties could only undermine the common objective of 
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. In addition, preambular 
paragraphs (b) and (c) were totally unacceptable, the former because it 
referred to violations of international law and the United Nations Charter, 
which were properly the concern of the United Nations Security Council, and 
the latter because it made allegations about a nuclear weapons' capability of 
South Africa which had never been proved. 
45. The United States position was based solely on its desire to see the 
rule of law observed and the interests of the Agency preserved. It should in 
no way be interpreted as condoning the abhorrent apartheid system of 
South Africa, which was morally reprehensible and should have been dismantled 
a long time ago. The United States fully understood the frustrations of many 
Member States with the apartheid system, and had adopted sanctions against 
South Africa which were among the most stringent in the world. However, it 
could find no connection between the internal policies of the South African 
Government and the Statute of the IAEA. 
46. His country's opposition to the resolution did not suggest any 
slackening of its support for NPT, which it had consistently called on all 
States, including South Africa, to sign. In fact, that question was to be 
discussed by the three depositary Governments and the South African Government 
in early December. Nevertheless, adherence to NPT had never been and was not 
now a condition for membership of the IAEA - indeed, many States attending the 
General Conference had not acceded to the Treaty. He was therefore obliged to 
oppose any resolution which suggested that continuation of South Africa's 
rights and privileges of membership should be dependent on its signing NPT, 
since that would be contrary to the Statute and would undercut efforts to 
ensure that all nuclear programmes in all countries were carried out under 
effective non-proliferation conditions. In summary, his delegation understood 
and respected the views and concerns of the sponsors of the draft resolution, 
but feared that its adoption, far from promoting peace and justice in the 
region and encouraging South Africa to accede to NPT, might achieve the 
opposite result. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.322 
page 12 


47. Mr. KAZUHARA (Japan) said that his Government continued to believe 
that the apartheid system was unacceptable and contrary to human dignity. His 
delegation regretted that negotiations on safeguards between the Agency and 
the South African Government had not so far achieved any significant result, 
but was pleased that further consultations were to be held between the 
depositary countries of NPT and the South African Government, which it urged 
to accede to the Treaty as soon as possible. 
48. His delegation had voted against the draft resolution to protect the 
principle of universality and to avoid any form of politicization of the 
Agency which would harm its effective functioning. Moreover, it would not be 
politically desirable, legally appropriate or technically effective to suspend 
South Africa, because such suspension would bring to an end all hope of 
progress in the safeguards agreement negotiations between South Africa and the 
Agency. 
49. Mr. SHENSTONE (Canada) said that his country had always taken a 
strong stance against apartheid at the United Nations General Assembly, within 
the Commonwealth and in other international bodies. It had also imposed a ban 
on all nuclear co-operation with South Africa and on the import of 
South African uranium. His Government urged all States not parties to NPT to 
accede unconditionally to the Treaty and to accept full-scope safeguards on 
all their nuclear activities. 


50. Canada had voted against the draft resolution because it was firmly 
committed to the principle of universality in international organizations. It 
therefore opposed moves to suspend any Member State from the exercise of its 
rights and privileges in the Agency. Moreover, suspension of South Africa 
could undermine the Agency's ability to fulfil its responsibilities with 
respect to that country. 
51. Mr. SINAI (India) said that his country had voted in favour of the 
draft resolution because it gave the Agency a further year to implement 
General Conference resolutions GC(XXX)/RES/468 and GC(XXXII)/RES/503, which 
India had supported. The statements made by the Indian delegation on that 
issue at the thirtieth and thirty-second regular sessions of the General 
Conference remained valid. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 13 


52. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that his country's position on the 
policy of apartheid had repeatedly been made clear, especially in the United 
Nations General Assembly. Austria had voted against the draft resolution 
because it had always supported the principle of universality in international 
organizations. Support for that principle did not imply any judgement on the 
policies of Member States in general and South Africa in particular. 
53. Mr. GRIFFITHS (New Zealand) said that his country's abhorrence of 
the policy of apartheid had been frequently enunciated and was well known. 
His delegation had voted against the draft resolution, however, because it 
believed that the international community would be better able to exert 
effective pressure on a Member State of the Agency by not suspending it. New 
Zealand had always encouraged all Member States to accede unconditionally to 
NPT and to submit their nuclear facilities to full-scope safeguards. It was 
disappointed that the South African Government had not yet actually taken 
those steps, and repeated its call to that Government to follow up the 
intentions it had announced two years previously, as that would be convincing 
evidence of its true commitment to the principles and objectives of the Agency. 
54. Mr. WILSON (Australia) said that there were no real grounds for 
suspending South Africa from the exercise of its rights and privileges of 
membership under Article XIX.B of the Statute. Such a step would in any case 
violate the principle of universality of international organizations. 
55. His delegation was greatly disappointed that after South Africa's 
announcement two years previously that it was considering action leading to 
accession to NPT, it had still not done so. South Africa was not the only 
Agency Member State in that position however, and to use that as a basis for 
excluding South Africa alone would constitute a selective application of 
non-proliferation principles and would be counter-productive since isolating 
that country could have repercussions on the existing safeguards agreement. 
South Africa had recently shown itself willing to negotiate, and would in fact 
do so in December in further consultations with NPT depositaries. His 
delegation was hopeful that those actions would soon have the desired result 
and emphasized that its negative vote in no way represented any change in its 
position, which was that it abhorred apartheid. It was to be hoped that 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 14 


recent developments in South Africa would soon lead to a dialogue between the 
Government and black leaders which would be the first step toward real 
reform. 


56. Mr. MAROM (Israel) said that his country's consistent denunciation 
of racism and apartheid had been reaffirmed yet again by the Israeli 
Government on 18 March 1987. His delegation had voted against the draft 
resolution because of its overriding belief in the principles of universality 
and constitutionality of the IAEA and of all international organizations. 
Indeed the issue at stake was not South Africa's policies but the preservation 
of the Agency's integrity. 
57. Mr. LAVlRiPi (Philippines) said that his country had consistently 
supported resolutions against South Africa - in all fora, within and 
outside the United Nations system. In view, however, of paragraph 2 of 
the resolution in question (deferring action on South Africa), it had 
been constrained to abstain. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXXIII)/899 AND GC(XXXIII)/910) 


58. The PRESIDENT pointed out that document GC(XXXIII)/910 contained 
the report of the General Committee, which had met to examine the credentials 
of delegates as provided for in Rule 28 of the Conference's Rules of 
Procedure. Paragraphs 2-12 of the report explained how the General Committee 
had approached its task and conveyed the opinions expressed in the course of 
the discussion. The Committee had decided to recommend the adoption of the 
draft resolution contained in paragraph 13. Furthermore, the Secretariat had 
received telefax copies of the credentials of the delegates of Saudi Arabia 
and Uganda and had been assured that the originals would be presented in the 
near future. 
59. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia), speaking on behalf of the members 
of the League of Arab States participating in the General Conference, drew 
attention to the reservations which the Arab delegations had expressed in 
document GC(XXXIII)/899 regarding the credentials of the Israeli delegation. 
60. Mr. ALI (Malaysia), endorsing the statement by the Arab States, 
expressed his delegation's reservations in respect of the credentials of the 
Israeli delegation. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 15 


61. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said he deeply regretted 
the reservations which had been expressed by previous speakers. The General 
Conference had a mandate to reject credentials if they did not meet the 
requirements of the Rules of Procedure, but could not do so on purely 
political grounds. 
62. Mr. RADY (Egypt) said that his delegation had already explained 
its position on that issue during the general debate. 
63. Mr. ARAIH (Pakistan) supported the position adopted by the League 
of Arab States with regard to Israel. His delegation also wished to express 
its reservations regarding the credentials of the delegate of the illegitimate 
regime of Kabul, which was not the true representative of the Afghan people. 
64. Mr. AYTOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), endorsing the statement 
made by the Saudi Arabian delegation on behalf of the League of Arab States, 
expressed his Government's reservations with regard to the credentials of the 
Israeli delegate. 
65. Mr. OMAR (Afghanistan), replying to the statement by the 
representative of Pakistan challenging the legitimacy of his credentials, said 
that the democratically elected Government for which he spoke was the only 
legitimate representative of the Afghan people. The Republic of Afghanistan 
was a sovereign, independent and non-aligned State and was a full member of 
the United Nations and its agencies, including the IAEA. As such, it had 
signed the Geneva agreements with Pakistan on which that country's delegation 
was now attempting to renege, thus distorting the historical and political 
realities. That negative attitude ran counter to the efforts of the 
international community and the non-aligned countries to find a peaceful and 
negotiated solution to the problems of the region. His delegation therefore 
rejected those irresponsible statements, which were intended to undermine the 
process of national reconciliation. 
66. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no more speakers, he would 
take it that the General Conference was prepared to adopt the draft resolution 
set forth in paragraph 13 of document GC(XXXIII)/910, on the understanding 
that the comments and reservations just expressed would be reflected in the 
official record of the meeting. 

GC(XXXI1I)/OR.322 
page 16 


6 7. The draft resolution contained in paragraph 13 of document 
GC(XXXIII)/91O was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


68. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was at present 
represented on the Agency's Staff Pension Committee by two members, 
Mr. Morales Pedraza (Cuba) and Mr. Loedel (Uruguay), and two alternates, 
Mrs. Bhaduri (India) and Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands). 
69. As Mr. Morales Pedraza and Mrs. Bhaduri would no longer be available to 
serve on the Committee, he proposed that Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands) be elected 
as a member and that Mr. Kumar (India) and Mr. Tilemann (Australia) be elected 
as alternates. 
70. Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands) was elected as a member of the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee, and Mr. Kumar (India) and Mr. Tilemann (Australia) 
were elected as alternates, with Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) continuing to serve as a 
member of the Committee. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1990 (GC(XXXIII)/896/Rev.3) 


71. The PRESIDENT said that by 6.30 p.m. on 28 September 1989 the 
voluntary contributions pledged by Member States to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund had reached a total of US $15 337 482 (document 
GC(XXXIII)/896/Rev.3). Since then, Egypt had pledged $31 850 and 
Guatemala $9100, which took the total amount pledged for 1990 to 
US $15 378 432. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


72. Mr. ALI (Malaysia), speaking on behalf of all delegations present, 
noted with pleasure that the discussions on all items of the agenda of the 
thirty-third regular session of the General Conference had been extremely 
productive. The General Conference had taken a number of important decisions 
in respect of the Agency's future programmes and activities, the majority of 
them by consensus, even where sensitive issues were concerned. It had 
therefore demonstrated the collective determination of delegations to 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 17 


strengthen the Agency and make it an effective instrument for the promotion of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The General Conference commended the 
President for so ably guiding it through its work. 


73. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegate of Malaysia for his kind 
words. It had been an honour and privilege for him to serve as President of 
the General Conference at its thirty-third regular session. He was grateful 
to all delegations for the co-operation extended to him during the conduct of 
the Conference's business. He expressed his deep gratitude in particular to 
the delegation of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for its 
co-operation. His unanimous election as President of the thirty-third regular 
session of the General Conference had without doubt contributed greatly to its 
smooth progress and to the success of its work. 
74. He thanked the members of the General Committee and the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole for their assistance. He likewise thanked the experts 
and scientists who had participated in the special scientific meeting on the 
new generation of nuclear power plants. He congratulated Mr. Blix on his 
re-election as Director General of the Agency. 
75. Emphasizing the importance of nuclear science for the future of 
mankind, he expressed strong support for a revival of the nuclear option, 
which could only be achieved through the improvement of nuclear technology and 
the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear power within the framework of the 
Agency's safeguards system. In that connection, he appealed to those States 
which were considering concluding NPT safeguards agreements with the Agency to 
do so as soon as possible. 
76. On behalf of the Conference, he wished to bid farewell to Ambassador Kazuhara 
of Japan, Ambassador Wiryono of Indonesia, Mr. Mahmoud of Iraq and Mr. Wu of 
China, who were leaving Vienna. 
77. Finally, on behalf of the Conference, he thanked the Austrian 
authorities and the City of Vienna for their traditional hospitality and for 
the excellent facilities provided for the third time at the Austria Center 
Vienna. He also thanked the Director General and all his staff for their 
support, which had enabled the Conference to complete its work successfully. 

GC(XXXIII)/OR.322 
page 18 


78. Before closing the session, he invited delegations to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation, in accordance with 
Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


79. The PRESIDENT declared the thirty-third regular session of the 
General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 5 p.m. 



