GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
7 March 1991 


GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Monday, 17 September 1990, at 10.35 a.m. 
Temporary President: Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) 


President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
Opening of the session 1-1 0 
Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 11 34 
Suspension of Rule 42 of the 
Rules of Procedure 35 36 
Message from the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations 37 44 
3 Statement by the Director General 45 93 
5 Voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1991 94 96 

[*] GC(XXXIV)/914. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIV)/INF/287/Rev.2. 


90-04539 
(7560e/773e) 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 2 


Item of the 
provisionalagenda* 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annual report 
for 1989 97 149 
Statements by the delegates of: 
BrazilJapanUnited States of America 
101 115 
116 - 131 
132 - 149 


GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 3 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirty-fourth regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, after welcoming all the participants, and 
in particular Ms. Flemming, Austrian Minister for the Environment, Youth and 
the Family and Mr. Winkler, who had been the first Chairman of the Board of 
Governors, said that the General Conference was being held at a time when the 
world had been undergoing dramatic changes in its political and economic 
structure. The historic events of the past 12 months would affect the future 
in major ways for many years to come. Profound changes were taking place in 
Eastern Europe. A sudden confrontation had arisen in the Middle East which, 
at the slightest provocation, could put an end to peace in the world. The 
East had also been shaken by a wave of changes. Western Europe was moving 
towards greater unity, and that momentous development had found an echo 
throughout the western hemisphere. In North-South relations, too, there was 
hope for greater harmony, although the memory of past mistrust and suffering 
was still present. The old order was changing and yielding to the new. 
4. The new dawn was fraught with concern about the frailty of the earth. 
Pollution, the greenhouse effect, holes in the ozone layer, and climate 
changes were the key words of the day. The "atom" was appearing in a new 
light and the problems caused by oil and coal had suddenly given fresh impetus 
to nuclear power. 
5. The Agency had made great progress towards achieving certain of its 
objectives over the past year. The Agency's regime for preventing 
unauthorized diversion of nuclear material had been successful and excellent 
results had been achieved with regard to the operational safety of nuclear 
power plants. However, with regard to radioactive waste management, the use 
of advanced nuclear technology, and the improvement of the economics of 
nuclear power and its public acceptance, the objectives had not yet been 
reached. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 4 


6. Those were key issues which had long-term implications. Owing to the 
problems caused by dependence on fossil fuels, the need for a substantial 
increase in nuclear electricity production would be glaringly obvious in many 
countries by the beginning of the next century. Furthermore, universal 
standards for nuclear safety would emerge. Greater harmonization would lead 
to a single safety philosophy. 
7. The Agency's objectives had not changed, but its activities had become 
more complex, more technical and more costly. It had taken on the very 
important task of helping to co-ordinate safety reviews at nuclear power 
plants and the study of the consequences of the Chernobyl accident in the 
Soviet Union. It also had to maintain the delicate balance which had been 
established regarding the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT), which had been subjected to an extremely important review before its 
expiry in 1995. 


8. The Agency should have the vision of a world where men and women of all 
countries could look beyond their own horizons and individual ambitions, to be 
conscious not only of the immediate moment but also of the fate of their 
descendants, and act together to ensure that the destiny of humanity was not 
ended by the atom but continued into a bright future with the atom as a source 
of energy. As the Agency's symbol, the atom should not be understood only in 
its current meaning of many particles bound together, but also in its original 
Greek meaning of an indivisible entity. 
9. In his opening statement the previous year, he had stressed the 
importance of reconciliation between peoples, between nations and between man 
and nature. He believed that great progress had been made towards such 
universal reconciliation. A new order was emerging in which the emphasis was 
on unity and harmony, where former differences were given second place. That 
had been expressed clearly in the informal exchange of views on matters of 
common concern which had taken place the previous day. 
10. In conclusion, he expressed his deep gratitude to the Director General 
for his leadership of the Agency, as well as to members of the Secretariat for 
their efficient work, and to Member States for their support and encouragement 
during the past twelve months. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 5 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


11. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
12. Mr. GLADOUSH (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic), speaking on 
behalf of the Member States in Eastern Europe, proposed Mr. Vajda (Hungary) as 
President of the thirty-fourth regular session of the General Conference. 
Mr. Vajda was well known in his country and abroad as President of the 
Department of Technical Sciences of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences and as 
Vice-President of the Hungarian Atomic Energy Commission. He had attended 
numerous international conferences, including meetings organized by the 
Agency. The Ukrainian delegation hoped that Mr. Vajda's nomination would be 
supported by all delegations. 
13. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, noting that there were no other 
nominations, suggested that the delegate of the Republic of Hungary, 
Mr. Vajda, should be elected President of the General Conference for its 
thirty-fourth regular session by acclamation. 
Mr. Va.jda (Hungary) was elected President by acclamation. 


14. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, on his own behalf and on behalf of all 
the delegates, congratulated Mr. Vajda on his election and wished him every 
success. 
Mr. Va.jda (Hungary) took the Chair. 


15. The PRESIDENT, after thanking all delegations for the honour they 
had done him by electing him President, expressed his gratitude to Mr. Chung, 
on behalf of the General Conference, for the competence and creativity he had 
shown as President of the thirty-third regular session. 
16. As usual, the General Conference would be considering issues of great 
complexity which had direct relevance to the Agency's role. The Agency had 
acquired an excellent reputation throughout the world as a co-ordinator and a 
forum for a great variety of scientific and technical activities in the area 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and for ensuring, through its 
safeguards system, that all States could remain fully confident that those 
activities were being carried out exclusively for peaceful purposes. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 6 


17. With regard to the future of nuclear energy, he was convinced that the 
present hectic movements in world oil markets would give a new impetus to 
nuclear power. Accordingly, the role of the Agency should be carefully 
considered and finely balanced if and when those developments made it 
necessary. 
18. From the experience of his own country, he believed that without 
nuclear power, it would be very difficult to diversify world energy supplies 
to the necessary extent, to reduce environmental pollution and to build up 
energy reserves against unforeseeable shortages. On the other hand, 
confidence in the peaceful use of nuclear energy was closely linked to another 
crucial Agency function, namely the prevention of the further spread of 
nuclear weapons. The thirty-fourth session of the General Conference had the 
task once again of further increasing the capacity and reputation of the 
Agency in those major fields of operation. 
19. As a result of the very rapid development of nuclear science and 
technology during the past few decades, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
had certainly increased the hopes invested in that new and abundant energy 
source, but they had also created problems of such magnitude that they could 
only be compared with those caused by its military applications. In other 
words, the peaceful use of nuclear energy still retained a strategic dimension 
for all States, whether they made use of it or were simply concerned by the 
consequences of its use. 
20. Turning to another aspect of increasing importance in the area of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, he pointed out that the problems of their 
public acceptance were closely linked to the fear inspired by nuclear weapons, 
by the consequences of a possible nuclear accident and by the storage of 
radioactive wastes. The Agency had a major role to play in that respect. 
Firstly, it should support and promote research and development activities in 
order to enhance the safety and reliability of nuclear technologies and to 
reduce the effects on the environment and health. Secondly, it should play a 
leading role in the enlargement of knowledge about the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and thereby contribute to dispelling misunderstandings and 
misinformation about its use and to increasing its degree of public 
acceptance. That meant not only greater transparency in its own activities, 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 7 


but also strict global standards, the co-ordination of supervisory activities 
and the exchange of experience between all parties concerned. 


21. The debate on the future of nuclear energy did not provide any easy 
solutions, from the political, economic or scientific point of view, and all 
those who honestly considered the problems involved had to face the 
consequences of their choices. The Agency's role was not to make judgements 
but always to facilitate discussions and the taking of decisions while 
providing specialized knowledge and support in the form of organization and 
co-operation. That role need not be a passive one - on the contrary, the 
Agency had always demonstrated its ability to support and complement the 
efforts of its Member States by providing co-ordination and the necessary 
framework for a systematic and scientifically sound assessment of the 
different aspects of a problem. For those reasons and others, his country 
believed that the promotional, safeguards and safety activities of the Agency 
were of equal importance. There was no reason to establish priorities among 
them, but a constant balance should be maintained. 
22. With regard to promotion, he believed that the countries which had 
highly developed nuclear activities were themselves vitally concerned that 
those which had only just chosen the nuclear option should succeed. There was 
also a third group of countries which had learnt a great deal and still had 
much to learn, but were nevertheless able and willing to provide assistance. 
Those countries too had special needs which would have to be met in order to 
ensure effective technology transfer. 
23. To achieve and maintain favourable conditions for the promotion of 
peaceful nuclear technology, there would be a continued need to strengthen the 
climate of mutual trust and to do everything possible - and acceptable to all 
Agency Member States - to dispel the fears of a nuclear threat. For that 
reason, continuous extension and improvement of the Agency's safeguards system 
and the universal application of the non-proliferation regime were essential 
to ensure a wider diffusion of nuclear energy throughout the world. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 8 


24. It should also be noted that although significant and promising steps 
had been taken in the area of nuclear disarmament, the achievements so far did 
not seem sufficient to break through the very negative attitude which 
prevailed towards anything connected with peaceful nuclear activities. He was 
honestly convinced that those two fields were inextricably linked, and that 
only further and more successful negotiations on every aspect of nuclear 
disarmament could provide firm ground for the rapid development of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
25. Finally, he urged all those present to work together in a spirit of 
tolerance and mutual understanding, for the task awaiting them was extremely 
complex and of great strategic importance, not only for the present 
generation, but also for future generations. 
26. Turning to the appointment of the General Committee, he recalled that 
under Rules 34 and 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the General Conference had to 
elect eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and 
five additional members of the General Committee. From consultations which 
had taken place it appeared that all regional groups except one had already 
agreed on their candidates to serve on the General Committee. He hoped that 
the outcome of ongoing discussions within that one regional group would be 
communicated to him in the near future. 
27. In those circumstances, he suggested that the General Conference 
proceed to elect the candidates whose names were already known and defer the 
election of the other member of the Committee until later. If that procedure 
was acceptable, he would propose, on the basis of the agreements reached 
within the respective regional groups, that the delegates of/Canada, China, 
France, Kuwait, Malaysia, Nigeria, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and 
Uruguay be elected as Vice-Presidents, Mr. Newlin (United States of America) 
as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, and the delegates of Ecuador, 
Monaco, Sudan and Yugoslavia as additional members of the General Committee. , 
28. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that the nomination of Kuwait by the 
Group of 77 was a political manoeuvre which could distract the General 
Conference from its technical mandate. That nomination would involve it in a 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 9 


debate which went beyond its competence. It had been understood that all 
delegations attending the General Conference should show good will in order to 
create a favourable climate for a peaceful settlement in the Gulf region, 
where the massive presence of foreign troops had created an explosive 
situation. The nomination of the so-called delegate of Kuwait could only harm 
the Agency and left little hope for a solution to the Gulf crisis. 


29. Mr. AL-AWADHI (Kuwait) felt bound to reply to the delegate of 
Iraq, whose statement had clearly shown that despite its isolation in the 
international community, Iraq was continuing to violate the fundamental 
principles of international law. Without wishing to encumber the work of the 
General Conference with political considerations, he recalled the recent 
resolutions of the United Nations Security Council which condemned Iraq for 
its violation of the United Nations Charter and the basic principles of law. 
Iraq had invaded Kuwait, which was a peace-loving country. It was therefore 
appropriate to ask who had caused the confrontation and the explosive 
situation in the Gulf region. 
30. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) said that Kuwait was an independent State which 
enjoyed full sovereignty and played a role in all international 
organizations. That peaceful country was working to restore peace, security 
and stability not only in the Gulf region, but throughout the world. The 
allegations by the delegate of Iraq were without legal basis. The nomination 
of Kuwait as one of the Vice-Presidents of the General Conference had been 
supported without reservation by the region concerned. 
31. The PRESIDENT, urging all delegations to leave the settlement of 
that issue to the United Nations, expressed the hope that the General 
Conference would be able to accept the candidates he had suggested as 
Vice-Presidents, Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and additional members 
of the General Committee. 
32. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
33. The PRESIDENT said that one vacancy remained on the General 
Committee. He proposed deferring consideration of that matter until the 
regional group in question had completed its consultations. In the light of 
the outcome of those consultations, he would propose a candidate for election. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 10 


34. It was so agreed. 
SUSPENSION OF RULE 42 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE 


35. The PRESIDENT said that, as the General Committee had not yet been 
fully constituted, it would be some time before the Conference was able to 
adopt its agenda for the current session. In those circumstances, he asked 
the General Conference, pursuant to Rule 102 of the Rules of Procedure, to 
agree to a suspension of Rule 42 until the General Committee had met and had 
submitted its report on the agenda, so that the Committee of the Whole could 
start meeting to consider provisional agenda items 10 to 18, and the General 
Conference could begin the general debate and deal with items 7, 8, 23 and 
25. That procedure, which had been adopted on several previous occasions, 
was, as far as he could judge, the only way in which the General Conference 
could complete its work within the traditional time limit of five working 
days. Given that the General Conference was master of its own procedure and 
that the General Committee only made recommendations to it, he did not believe 
there would be any conflict if his suggestion were to be adopted and if which 
was rather unlikely - the General Committee subsequently made some 
inconsistent recommendation. 
36. The President's proposal was accepted. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


37. Mr. HINTEREGGER (Representative of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations), conveying to the General Conference a message from the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, said that 1990 might well be 
remembered as a watershed year in the history of international relations. The 
basis for the solution of long outstanding international and regional problems 
had been laid with potential benefit for all mankind. Although the progress 
achieved was still fragile and continuing efforts and vigilance were required 
to ensure international peace and security, there was good reason to hope that 
a new spirit of co-operation would prevail in the last decade of the century. 
38. 1990 had also been an eventful year in the nuclear field. The 
agreement between the United States and the USSR to reduce their respective 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 11 


strategic offensive weapons, the deliberations of the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference, and the preparations for the Amendment Conference of the Partial 
Test Ban Treaty marked significant achievements. A propitious atmosphere for 
progress had also been created for disarmament negotiations relating to other 
weapons and for confidence-building co-operation in other fields. 


39. The International Atomic Energy Agency played a fundamental role in 
confidence-building between nations and in reducing the level of anxiety over 
the use of nuclear energy. Its safeguards programme had not only reassured 
the 140 States which had pledged to forgo nuclear weapons, but also the 
populations fearing a nuclear holocaust. By creating confidence among the 
parties to NPT, extensive international co-operation had been made possible in 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy and the transfer of technology. 
40. The Agency's technical co-operation programme had become more important 
in view of the complicated new installations being built and the need to 
maintain older plants on an efficient and safe basis. The 1991 high-level 
technical conference which would deal with nuclear plant safety, radiation 
protection and radioactive waste management and identify specific areas for 
future action would not only be an important opportunity for reviewing the 
global situation; it could also make a significant contribution to the 1992 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. 
41. Sustained and sustainable development was now the goal of all 
countries, and there was considerable incentive for greater use of 
ecologically sound and socially acceptable alternatives to conventional energy 
sources. Limited natural resources and increased energy demand made nuclear 
power an attractive option for many countries. The Agency had a major role to 
play in ensuring that those possibilities were available to the maximum number 
of people and in preventing any possible misuse. 
42. The benefits of nuclear techniques in pest control and crop 
improvement, in medicine and hydrology were appreciated by scientists and the 
public alike. There again, the Agency could make an important contribution to 
the welfare of the peoples of the world. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 12 


43. The Chernobyl nuclear plant accident had not only caused worldwide 
alarm, but had also resulted in unprecedented co-operation in the study and 
amelioration of the agricultural, environmental and health conditions in the 
affected regions of Byelorussia and the Ukraine in the Soviet Union. During 
the summer, the Economic and Social Council had adopted a resolution 
requesting the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive report for 
submission to the General Assembly on the actions currently under way or 
planned within the United Nations system relating to that accident and its 
consequences. In addition to the inter-agency assessment of the situation 
being carried out under the leadership of the IAEA, a fact-finding mission of 
other United Nations entities would take place during the week following the 
General Conference to determine how they could best assist in improving the 
situation, particularly for children and the elderly in the region. The 
Economic and Social Council had made an urgent appeal to all Member States to 
provide all appropriate assistance in co-ordination with ongoing or planned 
efforts by the United Nations system to mitigate the consequences of the 
accident. 
44. The fear of nuclear disaster had drawn humankind together. The role of 
the Agency in promoting safe operational practices and radiation and nuclear 
safety standards, as well as providing sound management advice, was being 
recognized as never before. The fact that the activities of the Agency were 
currently in the limelight should be used to redouble the international 
community's efforts to secure safe nuclear power in order to meet some of the 
critical demands being made on the fragile planet Earth. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


45. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that the Agency's mission was to promote 
the peaceful and safe uses of nuclear energy and, through its safeguards 
system, to verify that nuclear materials and installations were not diverted 
for non-peaceful purposes. Much of its work consisted in increasing efforts 
to transfer nuclear know-how and expertise in the fields of medicine, industry 
and agriculture, not only from industrialized to developing countries, but 
also increasingly between developing countries. Activities in those fields 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 13 


did not attract much public attention, but they often had great practical 
importance for saving lives and improving health, increasing food supplies, 
reducing pollution and improving industrial products. He had wished to recall 
those many areas of quiet progress before focusing, as was proper at the 
outset, on areas which were attracting intense international attention. 


46. The confrontation in the Middle East had highlighted the special and 
dreadful dangers caused by the presence of weapons of mass destruction in a 
conflict-ridden region. Any peaceful development in that area would require 
not only broad political accommodation but also the establishment of a climate 
of confidence through verified arms control commitments. 
47. In its resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/506 adopted in 1989, the General 
Conference had requested him to consult with the States concerned in the 
Middle East with a view to applying Agency safeguards to all nuclear 
installations in the area. As could be seen from his report to the Board and 
the General Conference (document GC(XXXIV)/926), he had initiated such 
consultations by writing to the Governments in the region. He had also 
recently visited Egypt and Israel and had had extensive talks with senior 
officials in those countries. During those talks, he had noted an intense 
preoccupation with the current situation and at the same time a growing 
awareness of the urgent need for political accommodation and arms control 
agreements. It was evident that in that region, where deep mutual distrust 
had reigned for so long and where non-safeguarded fissionable material existed 
in one State, special safeguards approaches might be required to create 
confidence. Indeed, there was reason to wonder whether regional nuclear 
co-operation programmes could be set up in addition to safeguards as an 
important factor yielding economic benefits and creating mutual transparency. 
The confidence built up through control by verification would then be 
strengthened by confidence through co-operation. The experience of mutual 
openness and co-operation gained by Argentina and Brazil during the last few 
years was an interesting example - although in a region where there was no 
conflict. 
48. The current confrontation in the Middle East and its direct impact on 
oil supply were a reminder once again that it was necessary to diversify 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 14 


energy sources. That remained true even though the expansion of nuclear power 
had helped significantly to reduce the world's reliance on oil for electricity 
generation. In the countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD), reliance on oil had fallen from 24% to 9% between 1974 
and 1986, corresponding to a halving of the amount of oil used for electricity 
production. Countries such as France and Sweden were hardly burning any more 
oil for electricity generation. A great industrial power, Japan, had also 
succeeded, mainly through the use of nuclear power, in diversifying its 
sources of electricity supply and achieving somewhat greater independence in 
the energy field. 


49. Another important development of the past year was the growing 
scientific consensus that the current level of emissions of certain 
"greenhouse gases", notably carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels, 
threatened to bring about significant changes in the world climate, as 
documented in the report of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
published in August 1990. Given that there was no viable way of avoiding 
carbon dioxide emissions in the burning of fossil fuels and that the instinct 
for self-preservation demanded a response to that threat, there were 
increasing calls - in both scientific and political circles - for a reduction 
in the use of coal, oil and gas and for a shift from coal to oil and gas and 
from oil to gas, which gave rise to about half as much carbon dioxide per 
energy unit produced as coal. 
50. While determined and systematic efforts would have to be made to save 
energy and to develop hydroelectric power and other renewable sources further, 
many countries would continue to rely on and expand the use of nuclear power. 
At present, 5% of the world's energy needs and 17% of its electricity needs 
were met by nuclear fission reactors. Generating that electricity from coal 
would have added some 1800 million tonnes of carbon dioxide to the 
20 000 million tonnes or so already produced each year from the burning of 
fossil fuels. 
51. The Agency could not and did not contribute to the analysis of the 
greenhouse effect. In the United Nations system that task was entrusted to 
the IPCC, set up by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 15 


Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). However, with the increasing pressure 
for early responses to mitigate that effect, it was logical for energy 
experts, including nuclear energy experts, to be asked to join the discussions 
of climatologists and environmentalists and to contribute data on the 
potential and problems of different carbon-dioxide-free sources of energy. It 
was for that reason that the Agency's Secretariat had contributed data and 
comments to the IPCC and to the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development which would be held in 1992 in 
Brazil. That was also part of the reason why the Agency, together with a 
number of other organizations, was organizing an expert symposium on the 
impact on health and the environment of different methods of generating 
electricity. Man's interference with the natural environment was a vitally 
serious matter, and whatever the emotional or political attitudes of the 
general public and of governments to nuclear power, he believed that it was 
the Agency's duty to work with others to provide the most objective data 
possible on the environmental impacts of different energy options. 


52. In that connection, he noted that the leaders of the world's seven top 
industrialized nations, at their Houston summit in July, had stated that: 
"For the countries that make such a choice, nuclear energy will 
continue to be an important contributor to our energy supply and can 
play a significant role in reducing the growth of greenhouse gas 
emissions. Countries should continue efforts to ensure highest 
worldwide performance standards for nuclear and other energy in order 
to protect health and the environment, and ensure the highest safety." 


53. The third major development of the past year was the far-reaching 
changes occurring in the political and economic systems of countries in 
Eastern and Central Europe, including the Soviet Union. As a result of the 
tragic accident at Chernobyl combined with greater openness about data and 
events in the nuclear power industry and freedom of speech, nuclear power had 
come under close scrutiny and criticism. Openness and the possibility of 
public criticism were vitally important elements which had prompted many 
improvements in the safe operation of civilian nuclear power plants and the 
safe disposal of nuclear waste throughout the world. The effect should be the 
same in Eastern and Central Europe. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 16 


54. The Agency was currently bringing together national and international 
parties with a particular interest in first-generation WWER-440 reactors, 
namely the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic and 
Bulgaria, several Western countries, the Commission of the European 
Communities and the World Association of Nuclear Operators. The purpose was 
to establish a consistent and co-ordinated programme to identify jointly the 
problems and shortcomings and to follow the actions taken by the countries 
operating such plants. The first meeting of that group had been held in 
Vienna at the end of August to review safety studies already undertaken, and 
an advisory group meeting to work out a programme for the implementation of 
the project had been held the previous week. 
55. Another initiative that should be mentioned was a project on the 
radiological consequences of the Chernobyl accident, carried out with the 
participation of a number of organizations. The authorities of the Soviet 
Union and of the affected regions of Byelorussia, Russia and the Ukraine were 
co-operating in the project with international experts and covering most of 
the costs. The radiological conditions, including environmental 
contamination, the agricultural situation and the medical effects in the 
regions seriously affected by fallout from the Chernobyl accident were being 
assessed and the protective measures and approaches applied by the authorities 
in the Soviet Union were being evaluated. 
56. That was no small undertaking. Some 100 international experts in 
radiation protection, medicine and agriculture had visited the areas in 
question since March 1990. Some 2000 indoor and outdoor dose rate measurements 
had been made, and some 1000 air, soil, grass and food samples were 
being analysed in the Seibersdorf laboratories to corroborate measurements 
made by Soviet authorities. Eight thousand personal dosimeters had been 
distributed in selected villages, and whole-body counting examinations to 
measure any internal contamination had been performed on 10 000 individuals in 
a mobile van generously placed at the disposal of the project by the French 
Government. An Agency expert had been assigned to Gomel in Byelorussia to 
help co-ordinate activities in the field. The outcome of the inquiry would be 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 17 


a report bearing the authority of an international group of experts headed by 
Professor Itsuzo Shigematsu, Director of the Radiation Effects Research 
Foundation at Hiroshima. 


57. The Chernobyl accident had had a major impact on public acceptance of 
nuclear power. The situation was very heterogeneous, but three factors 
remained of key importance for a general revival of the nuclear power option, 
namely the safety of nuclear installations, the safe management and disposal 
of nuclear wastes, and non-proliferation. 
58. The Chernobyl accident had led the Agency to adopt an expanded nuclear 
safety programme in 1986. Other institutions, such as the Nuclear Energy 
Agency (NEA) of the OECD, the Commission of the European Communities, and many 
non-governmental international organizations, had focused increased attention 
on nuclear safety. The World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO) was also 
very important. The Agency took pleasure in welcoming representatives of 
those organizations to the General Conference, including Lord Marshall of 
Goring, Chairman of WANO, and Mr. Uematsu of the NEA. 
59. In 1989, the General Conference had dealt extensively with the Agency's 
work in the field of nuclear safety and had adopted a wide-ranging resolution 
(GC(XXXIII)/RES/508) supporting that work and requesting a report on measures 
to strengthen international co-operation in matters relating to nuclear 
safety. That report had been submitted in document GC(XXXIV)/919. It 
demonstrated the wide range of activities currently being undertaken by the 
Agency in the field of nuclear safety and suggested how those activities could 
be further developed and supplemented. 
60. With regard to that report in general, it should be noted that if the 
demand for the Agency's various safety services continued to grow, as seemed 
likely, an increase in resources would be needed. In addition, the report 
dealt with a number of specific points. 
61. Firstly, the Incident Reporting System (IRS), operated jointly with 
OECD/NEA, was gaining momentum and now contained more than 1000 incident 
reports from 24 countries. Under the current rules the reports were 
confidential, and so the Agency was sometimes accused in the public debate of 
suppressing information that might seem unfavourable to nuclear power. Since 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 18 


most countries operating nuclear power plants now published reports on events 
which were included in the IRS, it would be logical for governments to agree 
to the general distribution of those reports by the Agency, too. 


62. Secondly, there was always a risk that the public and the news media 
might misinterpret technical reports made available to them on unusual events 
or nuclear incidents and regard them as less or more serious than they 
actually were. That was probably why the rule of confidentiality had so far 
been maintained for the IRS. In order to help avoid misconceptions and to 
promote a better understanding of the significance of events at nuclear power 
plants, the Agency and the NEA had developed an International Nuclear Event 
Scale (INES) comprising seven levels. That scale was being used on a trial 
basis by almost all countries having nuclear power plants and should 
contribute to a consistent evaluation of the significance of events at nuclear 
power plants wherever they occurred. It should be added that the vast 
majority of events reported were either below the lowest level of the scale or 
at its low end. 
63. Thirdly, many people believed that the future expansion of nuclear 
power would depend on the development of reactors with enhanced and 
transparent safety features, including passive elements. The International 
Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) was currently working on a set of safety 
goals for future reactors. The next logical step would be to define safety 
criteria for the attainment of those goals. Meetings would be organized by 
the Agency to promote the exchange of information on advanced concepts, to 
encourage their development and to attempt to provide a framework for their 
evaluation. National regulators were of course responsible for the 
application of national licensing requirements. However, it would perhaps be 
worth examining whether the Agency could host international hearings in which 
interested suppliers could, at their expense, meet regulators from 
Member States to present the safety features of their designs. 
64. Lastly, at the request of the Member States of the European Community, 
the Agency was planning a one-week conference in August 1991 on the safety of 
nuclear power, including waste disposal. That conference would enable 
national policy-makers at the technical level to take stock of current aspects 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 19 


of international co-operation, including the Agency's nuclear safety 
programme. During that conference, efforts should be made to reach agreement 
on the thrust of the Agency's nuclear safety programme for the years ahead. 
The conclusions reached could then be examined at the political level during 
the 1991 session of the Agency's General Conference. 


65. The second issue which was of key importance to future public 
acceptance of nuclear power was the question of nuclear waste. In that area 
public acceptance was the main problem, since experts had been convinced for a 
number of years that the concepts and technologies which already existed for 
waste disposal guaranteed the safety of present and future generations. It 
was, however, a fact that the public was not equally convinced. Current 
problems related to nuclear waste and contamination in the military sector 
were contributing to public doubts. A comprehensive international system of 
codes and guidelines accepted by consensus might effectively demonstrate that 
international experts were confident and convinced of their ability to handle 
the waste issue with a clear conscience vis-a-vis future generations. 
66. In 1991, the Agency would be launching a programme to produce a new 
series of safety documents called the Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
series (RADWASS). The model on which it was based was of course the Nuclear 
Safety Standards or NUSS programme. The RADWASS programme was lkely to be of 
particular interest to developing countries wishing to establish waste 
management programmes, infrastructures and regulatory systems. The pace at 
which the RADWASS programme would be implemented would depend on the resources 
that could be made available. 
67. He was also pleased to report that the working group of experts on a 
code of practice for international transactions involving radioactive waste 
had successfully completed its work. The experts had adopted by consensus a 
code entitled "Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of 
Radioactive Waste". It would be recalled that the General Conference had 
requested the elaboration of such a code in 1988 following reports of illicit 
transfer and disposal of hazardous and other noxious wastes in the territory 
of developing countries. Although no case of such illicit dumping of 
radioactive waste had been found, the General Conference had thought it 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 20 


appropriate to request the drafting of a code which would regulate and 
establish the basic principles for the transfer of radioactive waste. 


68. The code that had been drafted affirmed the sovereign right of every 
State to prohibit the movement of radioactive waste into, from or through its 
territory. The code further required that transboundary movements of 
radioactive waste should take place only in accordance with internationally 
accepted safety standards and with the prior notification and consent of the 
sending, receiving and transit States and in accordance with their respective 
laws and regulations. 
69. The third key issue was that of non-proliferation and safeguards. As 
delegations had learned from the media and through their Missions, the Fourth 
NPT Review Conference had failed to agree on a final declaration. The reasons 
for that failure were completely unrelated to the texts which had been 
prepared on safeguards and other matters of direct relevance to the Agency. 
The Agency could take satisfaction from the strong and unanimous confidence 
that had been expressed at the Conference in its safeguards. He was sure that 
many of the interesting and innovative ideas which had been brought up at the 
Conference regarding the safeguards system would be introduced by 
Member States directly in the Agency. 
70. At the end of 1989, there had been 172 safeguards agreeements in force 
between the Agency and 101 States, and nearly 2200 inspections, representing 
over 10 100 person-days of inspection, had been carried out by an inspectorate 
of 211 full-time inspectors and inspection assistants. 
71. Some 50 States Party to NPT had not concluded the safeguards agreements 
required by the Treaty. However, only one of those countries had significant 
nuclear activities. The Board of Governors had been informed in June that 
negotiations would resume in July regarding the conclusion of a safeguards 
agreement with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. As he had informed 
the Board the previous week, those negotiations had lasted nearly three weeks, 
but had ended without a conclusion satisfactory to all concerned. Contacts 
would continue and further efforts would be made to find a satisfactory 
solution leading to the conclusion of a safeguards agreement between the 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 21 


Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Agency. When he had spoken to 
the Board of Governors in June, he had expressed the hope that he would 
shortly be able to announce the accession of South Africa to NPT. It appeared 
that he had been too optimistic, since no such announcement had yet been made. 


72. As indicated in the Safeguards Implementation Report, many problems 
remained unsolved in the application of safeguards. Of particular 
significance was the challenge presented by the need to safeguard large-scale 
facilities, especially those using mixed-oxide fuel. The tightness of the 
safeguards budget did not make things any easier, but progress had 
nevertheless been made in several areas. 
73. Two and a half years earlier he had proposed for the first time a new 
simplified system for the designation of inspectors, and he was pleased that 
many Member States had accepted that proposal. All inspectors approved by the 
Board were now acceptable to almost half of the States in which safeguards 
were applied. He was grateful to Governments whose co-operation had made that 
possible and hoped that other governments would join them. However, he 
wondered whether it would not be possible to go still further, so that a 
United Nations laissez-passer or an Agency inspector passport with an 
inspection assignment order would be enough to permit entry into a 
Member State. There were other possibilities which should be explored. 
Unannounced inspections or inspections at short notice and perhaps randomized 
inspections might help to improve efficiency in the safeguards system once the 
necessary technical basis for such inspections had been obtained. 
74. It was proper that the interests and requirements of developing 
countries should play a substantial role in the shaping of the Agency's 
overall programme, so that those countries could derive full benefit from it. 
Given the constraints on the Regular Budget, it was fortunate that the 
resources available for technical co-operation in 1989 had increased by 
nearly 10% over previous years, reaching $50 million for the first time. On 
paper, the total value of the technical assistance programme in 1989 had been 
well over $66 million. That good news was tempered, however, by information 
on the performance of Member States in meeting the current year's target for 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 


page 22 


voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 


Fund (TACF). As of 14 September, the Secretariat had received only 64.2% of 


the $45.5 million approved as the 1990 target for the TACF. 


75. During the General Conference, intensive consultations would take place 
as usual between delegations of developing Member States and the staff of the 
Department of Technical Co-operation concerning the two-year programme 
for 1991-92 which would be submitted to the Board in December. The 
indications were that the two-year cycle, by offering a longer lead time, had 
indeed facilitated the preparatory work necessary for the formulation of sound 
projects, which in turn would improve the future implementation of the 
projects. 
76. There were a number of other new important developments. The first was 
the establishment of the African Regional Co-operative Agreement (AFRA) on the 
lines of the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) 
and the Regional Co-operative Arrangements for Latin America (ARCAL). In 
order for it to be a success, participating countries would have to make 
strong commitments and outside donor countries would have to show interest in 
it. He trusted that that would be the case. The first working meeting, which 
he had had the privilege of attending, had recently been held in Cairo to 
examine specific projects. 
77. Another development related to the New World screwworm. As he had 
indicated in his statement in 1989, that insect had appeared in the Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriya during 1988. It had since spread to an area of about 
2 


20 000 km . A number of United Nations organizations were at present 
co-operating with the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in an eradication programme which 
relied exclusively on the sterile insect technique. Sterile New World 
screwworms would be produced in Mexico at the facility of the joint 
Mexico-United States Screwworm Eradication Commission, transported to the 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and released throughout the infested and adjacent 
areas. Initial releases were planned for the autumn and were to be followed 


as soon as possible by full releases of 50-100 million sterile flies per week, 
probably at the beginning of 1991. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 23 


78. The cost of that programme, which was to last two years, was about 
$80 million. The Agency was providing technical leadership for the project, 
in particular in the use of the sterile insect technique. The Agency was also 
providing research support for the project at the Seibersdorf Laboratory and 
had received a grant from the Swedish International Development Agency to 
conduct research and development in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 
79. He urged all Member States of the Agency to support that eradication 
programme in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. If it was not eradicated, the 
New World screwworm would spread throughout the Mediterranean basin, Africa 
south of the Sahara, and the Middle East. The consequences of such a spread 
would be staggering, particularly in Africa where livestock was essential for 
the livelihood of many people. The effect on wildlife, which was very 
susceptible to that pest, would also be potentially devastating. 
80. The previous week, in accordance with the Agreement Governing the 
Relationship Between the United Nations and the Agency, he had reported to the 
Board of Governors that he had been informed by the United Nations 
Secretary-General, in a letter dated 8 August 1990, of Security Council 
resolution 661(1990) which, inter alia, prohibited States from providing any 
commodities or products as well as any funds or financial or economic 
resources to Iraq or Kuwait. The sanctions decided upon by the Security 
Council had made it impractical for the Agency to provide technical 
assistance, such as experts and equipment, to Iraq under the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme. The Secretariat would continue to assess 
the situation in the light of any guidance that might be given by the 
policy-making organs and on the basis of the Agency's Statute, the United 
Nations Charter and other relevant instruments. 
81. From statements made at the 1989 session of the General Conference and 
in the Board of Governors during the past year, it was clear that several 
Member States would like the Agency to play a somewhat more active role in the 
area of public information. It was neither possible nor desirable for the 
Agency to address the public in any country directly. The Agency must 
continue to aim to provide factual information to special professional 
categories which could use it in their contacts with the public. National 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 24 


civil servants dealing with nuclear issues, medical doctors concerned with the 
effects of radiation, and journalists were among the categories which could 
benefit from information provided by the Agency. However, without voluntary 
extrabudgetary contributions, there were severe limitations on what could be 
done. 


82. In that connection, he was pleased to report that the Government of 
Japan had made a special contribution of $1.5 million to support the public 
information programme over a three-year period. That sum was being used to 
strengthen the staff, to prepare a number of publications and to hold regional 
seminars to inform journalists in particular about nuclear topics of special 
interest in the regions concerned. Two such seminars had already been held 
during the past year, one in India in December 1989 and the other in Australia 
in August 1990. Another seminar would be held in October in Japan. During 
the present session of the General Conference, the Secretariat was also 
organizing for the first time a meeting of public information officers to 
enable them to exchange experience. The IAEA-Highlights - the non-specialists* 
version of the Annual Report - and the IAEA Yearbook were two other examples 
of efforts to reach out better to interested groups. 
83. On the subject of the Agency's personnel policy, there were a few 
points which he wished to make. Firstly, it was essential to recruit staff of 
the highest standards of efficiency, technical competence and integrity. It 
was regrettable that the competitive edge which the Agency had once enjoyed 
had steadily declined. He wished to share his concern with Member States and 
to ask them to help the Agency by encouraging highly-qualified candidates to 
compete for vacant positions. 
84. Secondly, General Conference resolution GC(XXV/RES/386 and subsequent 
resolutions had called for an increase in the number of staff from developing 
areas, particularly at the senior and policy-making level. The statistics 
provided in document GC(XXXIV)/927 showed the level of representation of each 
region, and it could be seen that there had been a significant shift from 
industrialized to developing areas. He had also been requested to give 
special consideration to the appointment of qualified women to policy-making 
and other Professional posts on the staff of the Secretariat and, in that 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 25 


context, he reiterated his appeal for more nominations of qualified women for 


vacant posts. As the statistics showed, the number of women in the 
Professional and higher categories had increased from 42 in 1981 to 78 in 


1990. However, that was still only 12.8% of staff in those categories and 
much still remained to be done. For the first time, the Secretariat had two 
women at the D-l level, one of whom was a Division Director. 


85. Finally, the General Assembly had on several occasions criticized the 
practice of certain Member States of making supplementary payments to staff in 
international organizations or of requiring such staff to remit to them part 
of their salaries. Executive heads had been requested to put an end to those 
practices, which were considered incompatible with the status of international 
civil servants. The Secretariat had reminded staff of their obligation not to 
accept such payments and to report if they were requested to pay part of their 
salary to their governments. He appealed to Member States to respect the 
status of the Agency's staff and not to put their nationals in a position 
whereby they would violate, their obligations as international civil servants. 
86. Before concluding his statement, he wished to share with Member States 
his deep concern about the Agency's financial situation and to make some 
comments on the budget which had been submitted by the Board to the General 
Conference for approval. 
87. In 1991, for the seventh year in succession, the Agency was forced to 
meet its programme responsibilities within a zero-growth Regular Budget. Like 
the zero-growth budgets of previous years, the 1991 draft budget was based on 
the assumption that Member States would supplement the Agency's resources by 
making various voluntary extrabudgetary contributions. As an exceptional 
measure, it was also foreseen that the acquisition of important equipment 
would be financed from part of the 1988 cash surplus. Only with the help of 
those additional measures could the Agency hope to fulfil its various 
obligations, which continued to expand, particularly in the fields of safety 
and safeguards. 
88. There was a proposal to increase the Working Capital Fund by $2 million 
to a total of $8 million in 1991, or the equivalent of two and a half weeks of 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 26 


Regular Budget expenditure. That increase was in no way intended or able to 
cover anything but normal fluctuations in receipts. 


89. The effort to squeeze more activities out of the same resources was 
healthy, but he believed that the limits of what was possible had been 
exceeded and that the various expediencies to which the Secretariat had been 
driven bore witness to that fact. There was a pressing need to obtain a more 
regular and stable resource basis for the heavier workload which the Agency 
performed, not only in the area of safeguards, but also in administering more 
technical co-operation resources and in managing more programmes and services 
in the fields of safety and waste disposal. A medium-term plan was to be 
worked out, and he hoped that it would help governments to decide what they 
considered to be the indispensable activities of the Agency at the present 
time. 
90. He also had to draw attention to the extremely serious situation in 
which the Agency found itself as a result of late and uncertain payments. So 
far 72 Member States had not paid, or had only paid part of, their assessed 
contributions to the 1990 Regular Budget. That included both large 
contributors and small ones. Out of a total assessment of $170 million, only 
$85 million had been received. 
91. It was impossible for the Secretariat to run the Agency with such a 
large proportion of the resources missing. At present it had only about 
$10 million in convertible currency left in the administrative accounts and a 
Working Capital Fund of $6 million. That amount would allow it to operate 
until about the first week in October. 
92. If funds were not received within the following two weeks, serious and 
unprecedented steps would have to be taken. As a contingency measure, the 
Board had approved the borrowing of available cash from the unencumbered 
balances of various funds, including the TACF and all extrabudgetary funds. 
However, that would only provide short-term relief. He therefore earnestly 
appealed to all States which were in arrears to pay without further delay the 
contributions which should have been paid in January 1990. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.323 
page 27 


93. Finally, he wished to thank the Austrian Government and the City of 
Vienna for their hospitality and for the support they continued to give to the 
Agency's activities. He also wished to inform delegates that the General 
Conference would not be meeting in the same hall in 1991. Because of a prior 
booking of the Austria Center, the General Conference would be holding its 
next session in the Hofburg. It was five years since it had last met there, 
and he was sure many delegates would feel nostalgic about returning to the 
site of so many General Conferences. However, it was returning for 1991 
only. The Secretariat had made firm bookings for the Austria Center for all 
subsequent years up to the year 2000. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1991 


94. The PRESIDENT said that, since 1982, the Agency's policy-making 
organs had recommended indicative planning figures to serve in fixing annual 
targets for voluntary contributions to the TACF. In accordance with an 
agreement in the Board of Governors in 1988 which had subsequently been 
reported to the General Conference, the indicative planning figure for 1991 
was US $49 million, and in the draft resolution relating to the TACF contained 
in Annex IV to document GC(XXXIV)/917, the Board of Governors recommended that 
figure as the target for voluntary contributions to the Fund for the following 
year. 
95. Early pledging of voluntary contributions to the Fund considerably 
facilitated the work of the Secretariat in planning the Agency's technical 
assistance programmes. Accordingly, he urged all delegations which were in a 
position to do so but had not yet done so to notify the Secretariat during the 
current session of the voluntary contributions that their Governments would be 
making to the TACF in 1991. 
96. At the end of the session, under another agenda item, he would report 
on the voluntary contributions which had been pledged up to that time, and he 
was confident that he would be in a position to report that a considerable 
percentage of the 1991 target had already been pledged. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.323 
page 28 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989 (GC(XXXIV)/915) 


97. The PRESIDENT recalled that, at its previous session, the General 
Conference had approved and applied some of the recommendations made by the 
inter-sessional working group to review the Conference's working practices, in 
particular those related to the conduct of the general debate and, above all, 
to the duration of speeches made therein. Consequently, he proposed that, 
with a view to making the most efficient use of the available time, the 
General Conference should authorize him, under Rule 50 of its Rules of 
Procedure, to limit the duration of speeches in the general debate to 
15 minutes. He appealed to all delegations not to exceed their speaking time. 
98. It was so agreed. 
99. The PRESIDENT went on to say that, with a view to accommodating 
the needs of delegations as far as possible, the Secretariat might wish to 
make necessary adjustments to the order of speakers as set out in the 
speakers' list opened in June. If there were no objections, he would take it 
that the General Conference accepted that arrangement. 
100. It was so agreed. 
101. Mr. BERGAMASCHI DE LEONI RAMOS (Brazil) said that his Government 
attached particular importance to fostering international co-operation with a 
view to promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. At the same time, 
aware of the need to implement measures and policies to ensure adequate protection 
of the environment, it considered that international co-operation in 
nuclear safety was of crucial importance for all Member States. Accordingly, 
his Government supported the various praiseworthy initiatives which had 
recently been taken in that area, including the establishment of the World 
Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), the drafting of the Code of Practice 
on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, the revision 
of the Agency's Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) programme for nuclear power 
plants, and the holding of a world conference on nuclear safety. His 
Government was committed to sharing its experience in that area, as it had 
done after the regrettable radiological accident in Goiania. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 29 


102. Safeguards and technical assistance were the other two pillars of the 
Agency's work. His delegation wished to reaffirm its appreciation of and 
confidence in the safeguards inspectors. His Government fully supported the 
Agency's safeguards as long as they were the result of sovereign negotiation 
by States and were applied on a non-discriminatory basis. In a joint 
declaration issued during the Fourth NPT Review Conference, Brazil and 
Argentina had stressed that they respected the position of those countries 
which had exercised their sovereign right to adhere to international instruments 
which they believed would foster the objective of preventing nuclear 
proliferation and expected that their own choice of ways and means to 
contribute to the attainment of that objective would likewise be respected. 
103. The safeguards budget had experienced frequent and significant rises in 
recent years, growing beyond the resources allocated to other activities which 
were equally important, such as technical assistance. To his Government, it 
was important that an equitable balance be maintained between the resources 
devoted to safeguards and those devoted to technical assistance. 
104. With regard to international co-operation, it was worth recalling 
United Nations General Assembly resolution 32/50 on the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy for economic and social development, which set out the four 
basic guidelines for such co-operation: (a) the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes was of great importance for the economic and social development 
of many States; (b) every State had the right to develop its programme 
for the peaceful uses of nuclear technology; (c) all States should have 
access to the techniques, equipment and materials necessary for the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy and be free to acquire them; (d) the Agency's safeguards 
intended for the effective prevention of the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, should be applied on a non-discriminatory basis. 
105. He thanked the Secretariat for the high-quality technical assistance 
which the Agency had provided to his country and for the high project implementation 
rate achieved there. In 1989, several Agency-sponsored courses had 
been held in Brazil. Mention should also be made of the Agency's activities 
to promote the exchange of scientific and technical information between 
Member States, under the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) and 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 30 


regional arrangements such as the ARCAL. His country had strongly supported 
those activities by making available to other Latin American countries the 
services of experts from its Nuclear Information Centre. 


106. Brazil attached great importance to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme under which it had successfully implemented various projects in such 
areas as agriculture, medicine, industry, radiation protection, dosimetry and 
nuclear safety. In that connection, it was worth mentioning the continuation 
of the Amazon project, under which isotopic techniques had enabled much data 
to be gathered regarding the effects of changes in land use on the climate of 
the Brazilian Amazon region. 
107. In that context, he pointed out that the President of Brazil, 
Mr. Collor, had a personal commitment to environmental protection. Brazil had 
adopted a new, realistic approach the effects of which were already being 
felt. Environmental conservation called for the problem of pollution to be 
tackled on a global scale and for the necessary corrective measures to be 
taken. There was no denying that the consumption patterns of industrial 
societies had been and continued to be responsible for the greatest damage to 
the environment. The United Nations General Assembly had recognized that in 
declaring that the largest part of the emission of pollutants into the 
environment, including toxic and hazardous wastes, originated in developed 
countries and that those countries bore the main responsibility for combating 
such pollution. Nevertheless, there was a growing consensus that the issue 
was a global one which called for global action. His country was ready to do 
its part and expected other countries to do the same. Progress in that direction 
could be made only by recognizing the legitimate rights of developing 
countries to pursue sustainable industrialization, to have access, on favourable 
terms, to environmentally sound technology, and to obtain the additional 
resources needed to implement efficient environmental policies. Those principles 
had been broadly observed during the negotiations which had led to the 
signature, inter alia, of the Montreal Protocol on the Ozone Layer and should 
be taken into consideration during the United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development to be held in Brazil in 1992. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 31 


108. Another fundamental principle was that his country's nuclear activities 
should serve peaceful purposes. Brazil had always supported non-discriminatory 
policies aimed at avoiding the proliferation of nuclear weapons and at promoting 
complete nuclear disarmament, with an equitable balance of obligations and 
responsibilities among all nations, whatever their level of nuclear development. 
Those principles were incorporated in the Tlatelolco Treaty, which his country 
had signed and ratified, and were the basis of its nuclear policy. 
109. Brazil's new constitution, which had entered into force on 
5 October 1988, stated that all nuclear activities in the nation's territory 
would only be permitted for peaceful purposes and with the approval of the 
National Congress, which established the priorities for the national nuclear 
programme. That was a sovereign decision, taken by the Constituent Assembly 
and reflecting the wish of the Brazilian people, the country's commitment to 
use nuclear energy for the benefit of Brazilian society, and its international 
obligations. President Collor had personally instructed the competent authorities 
to ensure that those principles were strictly observed. 
110. Similarly, his country's current Government had undertaken the 
restructuring of the Brazilian nuclear sector under the aegis of the National 
Nuclear Energy Commission, a civilian body within the framework of the new 
Secretariat for Strategic Affairs that was responsible for all projects under 
the Brazilian nuclear programme, which the administrative changes made were 
intended to render more transparent. In that context, it was worth mentioning 
that the National Nuclear Energy Commission, the Industrias Nucleares do 
Brasil S.A. (1NB) and private Brazilian companies deploying efforts to 
encourage the private sector to increase involvement in nuclear activities. 
111. He recalled that in recent years, his country and Argentina had been 
engaged in a process of political consultation and economic integration. The 
co-ordination of those two countries' nuclear policies was an important area 
of co-operation. Since the signing of the joint declaration in the nuclear 
field at Foz do Iguacti in November 1985, technical contacts between the two 
countries had considerably intensified, involving an extensive exchange of 
data on experience and materials through seven meetings of the Working Group 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page. 32 


and of the Permanent Bilateral Committee on Nuclear Go-operation which had 
been held alternately in each country. High-level officials and technical 
experts from each of the two countries had visited nuclear facilities, 
research centres and other establishments in the other country. In July 1990, 
President Collor, on his first visit abroad as Head of State had had important 
talks in Buenos Aires with President Menem on nuclear affairs which had led to 
tangible results. 


112. The co-operation between Brazil and Argentina now covered a wide range 
of projects - nuclear safety, mutual assistance in case of nuclear accidents 
or radiological emergencies, research reactor fuel, safeguards concepts and 
methods, the fast breeder reactor project, exchange of information on 
materials and techniques, industrial co-operation, etc. The co-operation was 
proceeding harmoniously and demonstrated the maturity and responsibility with 
which the two countries approached their nuclear programmes, which had 
peaceful objectives. 
113. That increasing co-operation was also clearly reflected in multilateral 
and regional forums where the Brazilian and Argentine delegations worked 
together, for example the Agency, the Conference on Disarmament, the Agency 
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL), and the 
Fourth NPT Review Conference, in which Brazil and Argentina had participated 
as observers. 
114. On the threshold to the twenty-first century, countries and peoples 
were becoming increasingly aware of the need to promote development without 
damaging the environment. There seemed to be a growing consensus that 
sustainable economic development depended on the long-term availability of 
reliable, clean and safe energy resources. Nuclear energy was an option which 
had to be maintained because it offered a concrete possibility both of protecting 
the environment and of conserving fossil fuel resources for future 
generations. Technological improvements in many areas must be pursued and 
increasing levels of operational safety ensured. Clearly, in his country as 
elsewhere in the world, the promotion of nuclear energy required renewed 
public confidence in the safety of nuclear installations. Research in that 
area must be intensified and technical achievements shared. Care must be 
taken to avoid what President Collor had called a "new form of colonialism" 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 33 


which obstructed developing countries' access to sophisticated technologies 
that would be of immense value to them. 


115. His Government very much appreciated the support given by the Agency to 
those objectives and reaffirmed its full commitment to bilateral and 
multilateral nuclear co-operation. 
116. Mr. OSHIMA (Japan) said that although the situation of nuclear 
energy was not easy, even in his country, Japan was actively promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a major source of energy. Where the 
nuclear fuel cycle was concerned, his country had been making progress in its 
programme of construction of facilities for uranium enrichment, spent fuel 
reprocessing and radioactive waste disposal, with the objective of 
establishing its own nuclear fuel cycle. 
117. Under its fast breeder reactor programme, Japan was building a 
prototype, named "Monju", which was expected to attain criticality in 1992. 
In nuclear fusion, his country was pursuing research and development activities 
with a view to practical applications. In addition, once the conceptual 
design for the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) was 
completed, his country planned to play a more active role in the next phase of 
the project, the engineering design activities, through such measures as 
providing the ITER team with facilities necessary for its research. 
118. Turning to the Agency's nuclear safety activities, he said that the 
joint work being performed at the International Research Centre at Chernobyl 
in response to the request of the USSR Government and the activities to assess 
the various measures taken after the Chernobyl accident were expected to be 
successful. His country proposed to contribute as much as possible to promoting 
those new activities, without neglecting the humanitarian aspects. 
119. Nuclear power now supplied nearly 17% of the world's electricity needs 
and accounted for about a quarter of the electricity generated in his 
country. Nuclear power generation was thus firmly established and essential 
as one of the main sources of energy. 
120. Environmental protection had recently been receiving increased 
attention, and the economic summit held in Houston in July 1990 had confirmed 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 34 


that nuclear power generation continued to be important for energy supply 
while playing a key role in reducing emission of the gases which caused global 
warming. In that light, his country intended to promote the increased use of 
nuclear power, bearing in mind the need to ensure operational safety. 


121. In order to promote more smoothly the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
it had become imperative to obtain the assurance that nuclear reactors were 
safe and, more importantly, to gain the understanding and co-operation of the 
community. To that end, his country was sparing no effort in the area of 
nuclear safety, and it would also make a positive contribution to the Agency's 
various safety-related activities. 
122. The understanding and co-operation of the community could not be gained 
unless the co-operation of the people involved could be secured. At the same 
time, it was no less important to strengthen international ties, for example, 
through exchanges of information between the countries concerned. With that 
in mind, his country had made a special contribution to the Agency in March 
1990 and had decided to host a regional seminar on nuclear energy, mainly for 
the media, in Aomori (Japan) at the end of October 1990. His country hoped 
that the seminar would contribute not only to the smooth development of 
nuclear energy in Japan, but also wider acceptance of that type of energy in 
the countries concerned. 
123. At the Fourth NPT Review Conference, his country, believing that the 
development and use of nuclear energy should be strictly limited to peaceful 
purposes, had expressed its determination to contribute to maintaining and 
further strengthening the international regime established by the NPT. From 
that point of view, Japan had called upon States which had not yet acceded to 
that Treaty but which had significant nuclear activities to accede to it as 
soon as possible. Furthermore, his country strongly hoped that those States 
Party which had not yet concluded a full-scope safeguards agreement with the 
Agency, as required by NPT, would do so as soon as possible. 
124. With regard to the export of nuclear equipment and materials to nonnuclear-
weapon States, his country had taken very strict measures, issuing 
export licences only when the recipient country adhered to NPT and accepted 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 35 


full-scope Agency safeguards. Japan hoped that other countries would take 
similarly strict measures. 


125. The application of Agency safeguards to civilian nuclear facilities in 
nuclear-weapon States should be gradually expanded, within the resources 
available to the Agency, so as to strengthen the universality of the 
non-proliferation regime. 
126. The Agency's safeguards system had thus far produced results, but in 
view of the severe financial difficulties which States party faced, it was 
important to streamline inspection activities without undermining their 
effectiveness. His country hoped that a continuous review of the established 
procedures for safeguards and inspections would take place in the appropriate 
forums with the Agency. 
127. As an advanced nation strictly committed to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, Japan would continue its efforts to prove that the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
were compatible. In that endeavour, his country hoped to benefit from the 
co-operation and understanding of the countries concerned and the Agency. 
128. Japan was determined to support in every way possible the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities, which greatly contributed to expanding the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing countries. In particular, it 
would continue to increase its annual contribution to the TACF in proportion 
to its assessed share, in recognition of the importance which it attached to 
the Agency's activities in that area. It hoped that a greater realism would 
prevail in the formulation of long-term objectives with regard to the means 
for their implementation. 
129. In the area of regional co-operation, he welcomed the creation, in 
addition to the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) 
and the Regional Co-operative Arrangements for Latin America (ARCAL), of the 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement (AFRA). His country had played a 
central role in financial and technological assistance to developing countries 
in Asia and would spare no effort to meet the real needs of that region, while 
paying due regard to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 36 


130. Among international organizations, the Agency enjoyed unequalled 
prestige for the effectiveness of its management, and the Director General and 


the staff of the Secretariat deserved thanks for the understanding which they 


had shown regarding the financial situation of Member States and for the 


remarkable efforts which they had been making for a number of years to main


tain the growth of the budget at zero in real terms. His country hoped that 


the Agency would continue those efforts in the interest of realism and effec


tiveness, for example by assigning priorities to its various areas of activity. 


131. Thus far, the Agency had satisfactorily fulfilled its mission as a 
technical and universal organization for promoting the peaceful uses of 


nuclear energy while contributing to non-proliferation. In 1989, the Governor 


from Japan, Mr. Endo, had been able to assist the Agency in its activities by 


serving as the Chairman of the Board of Governors. Japan would continue, as 


part of its contribution to the Agency's important activities, to provide 


capable staff for the Secretariat. 


132. Mr. MOORE (United States of America) read out a message from 
President Bush of the United States: 


"As we begin the decade of the 1990s, the world has entered a period of 
significant change in the international system and strong challenges to 
international peace and stability. Since you last met in Vienna, we 
have witnessed meaningful and largely peaceful movements toward the 
restoration of democracy and the development of market economies in 
Central and Eastern Europe. At the same time, recent events in the 
Middle East and the Gulf demonstrate increased uncertainty, 
instability, and conflict in that region. Under such conditions of 
change and uncertainty, I believe we must continue our strong resolve 
to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, while facilitating the use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The International Atomic Energy 
Agency traditionally has fulfilled a vital institutional role at the 
centre of international efforts to achieve these objectives. The 
IAEA's unique safeguards programme is the cornerstone for global 
efforts to prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. This 
programme deserves the unwavering commitment and support of all IAEA 
members. Its function is especially important as we look to a 
substantial expansion of power reactors and other civil nuclear 
facilities in this decade. In addition, we strongly support the IAEA's 
effective programmes of technical assistance to promote peaceful 
application of nuclear energy in other areas such as health and 
agriculture. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 37 


"The IAEA also has much to offer in meeting the world's needs for safe 
and environmentally sound sources of energy. The Agency continues to 
be a primary source of assistance to countries seeking to develop clean 
energy sources for sustainable development. Nuclear energy offers a 
safe, reliable, and environmentally compatible means of providing 
electrical power. Nuclear energy will continue to be a vital part of 
global efforts to enhance energy supplies, while lessening dependence 
on fossil fuels. The Agency's programmes to improve nuclear safety and 
to promote measures for the safe and long-term disposal of nuclear 
wastes address important concerns over greater reliance on nuclear 
power and can advance public acceptance of nuclear power and 
technologies. 


"I look forward to strengthening the close co-operation between the 


United States and the IAEA in the years ahead. On behalf of the people 


of the United States, I extend to you my best wishes for a productive 


and successful General Conference." 


133. Since the early years of the nuclear age, the Agency had been a staunch 
and responsible advocate of nuclear energy for the betterment of people 
everywhere. Equally importantly, it had also stood as an ever vigilant 
guardian against the spread of nuclear technology to those who would exploit 
its potential not for peace and human progress but for threat and conquest. 
134. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had been a success, even though no 
final document had been adopted. It had achieved its main purpose by 
completing a thorough review of the various provisions of the Treaty. The 
vast majority of delegations had reaffirmed their strong support for NPT and 
had endorsed the conclusion that the Treaty had been and continued to be 
essential in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and maintaining 
international peace and stability. 
135. Both President Bush and Mr. Baker, the Secretary of State, had recently 
called for a strengthening of the non-proliferation regime. Preventing the 
spread of nuclear weapons was at present more important than ever. That was 
the prevailing view among the States party to NPT, a treaty which enjoyed 
virtually universal support. In fact, during the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference, the Government of Mozambique had acceded to the Treaty by 
depositing with the United States its instrument of accession. That accession 
was another step towards strengthening peace and co-operation in southern 
Africa, and the United States strongly urged other nations of the region to 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 38 


accede to the Treaty as soon as possible in order to show their support for 
Mozambique, to strengthen the NPT regime, and to enhance peace and 
co-operation in that part of the world. 


136. The Agency's unique safeguards programme, extensive technical 
co-operation and numerous nuclear safety activities had provided a foundation 
for the growth of peaceful nuclear energy. As a result, peoples around the 
world were currently enjoying its many benefits, whether for electricity 
generation, agricultural production, medicine or research. All those 
associated with the Agency's work could be proud of its remarkable 
achievements and success. 
137. While the work of the Agency had been central to the growth of civilian 
nuclear power, it would be even more important in the coming century, in which 
both economic and environmental issues would bear a distinct global 
character. The Agency's traditional roles would become even more crucial in 
the twenty-first century. Everyone was aware that the demand for energy, and 
especially electricity, was growing substantially. Also, in many countries, 
people were deeply concerned about endemic environmental problems and the 
issue of global climate change. A reconsideration of all energy options could 
therefore be expected, together with a renewed interest in nuclear power, 
which would lead to expanded responsibilities for the Agency. 
138. As increasing numbers of States acquired or developed their nuclear 
capabilities, the Agency's non-proliferation responsibilities would become 
much more critical. In a speech to Congress and the American people the 
previous week, President Bush had noted that: "Interdependence has 
increased. The consequences of regional instability can be global." Those 
consequences could indeed be terrible if nuclear weapons became part of the 
equation. The Agency's work to prevent any misuse of nuclear materials would 
be vital in the future. In the same speech, President Bush had spoken of his 
vision of a new world order in which the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
would have no place. 
139. Currently, 450 nuclear power plants were in operation in 26 countries. 
Nine other countries were planning or already constructing facilities. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 39 


Nuclear plants provided about 17% of world electricity needs, almost twice as 
much as in 1980. No similar increase was expected for the coming decade. In 
fact, despite the future potential of nuclear power, the short-term outlook 
was limited. Projections indicated that nuclear power's share of world 
electricity production would remain stable or even decrease slightly in the 
1990s. That was certainly the situation in the United States, which accounted 
for one quarter of the world's nuclear power plants. 


140. Despite the acknowledged need to increase installed capacity, growing 
environmental concern about fossil fuels and recent progress in nuclear 
technology, nuclear power was not expanding in the United States, for a very 
simple reason: many Americans were afraid of it. They were afraid of nuclear 
plant accidents such as those at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl, and afraid 
that nuclear wastes could not be safely contained. Those fears were not 
exclusive to the United States, they were shared by many people around the 
world. Civilian nuclear power could never fulfil its enormous potential 
unless those fears were addressed effectively. 
141. How could such fears be allayed? How could the public be enlightened 
as to actual risks versus the benefits of the peaceful atom? How could the 
future of civilian nuclear power be ensured? Mr. Watkins, the Secretary of 
Energy, had answered that question in his address to the General Conference 
in 1989, saying that "The key to restoring public confidence in nuclear energy 
is a positive track record of operational safety", including safe and environmentally 
sound waste management. In the final analysis, the human factor was 
crucial. However reliable the systems were, and however advanced the technology, 
it was ultimately the men and women who ran the systems and operated 
the technology who must have the training, discipline and commitment necessary 
to ensure sustained operating performance and full environmental compliance. 
The commercial nuclear industry in the United States had learned and successfully 
applied that lesson after the Three Mile Island accident. 
142. The United States Department of Energy had taken various measures in 
the past year to assist in ensuring the future of nuclear power. First of 
all, it was now giving priority in all decision-making to safety and respect 
for the environment. A ten-point plan to establish line management authority 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 40 


and accountability and to promote operating excellence was in place and being 
rigorously enforced at all nuclear facilities. As part of that plan, the 
Secretary of Energy, Mr. Watkins, had established "Tiger Teams" to assess 
environmental, safety and health problems at Departmental facilities and, more 


importantly, to identify the root causes of those problems. Secondly, the 
United States was completing work on the national energy strategy, which 
covered its energy needs to the year 2030. That strategy would for the first 
time set out a framework for decision-making which would demonstrate the 
difficulty facing the country - and the less desirable options open to it - if 


it refused the nuclear option. That project should assist significantly in 
establishing a rational national debate on nuclear power which did not exist 
at present. Thirdly, the United States was pursuing a vigorous technology 
development programme. Contracts had been awarded during the current year to 
Westinghouse and General Electric for continuing work on advanced, simplified, 
mid-size light-water reactors with natural or passive safety systems. Each 
contract called for submission of a standardized nuclear plant design to be 
certified by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission by 1995. 


143. Research and development activities were also continuing on integral 
fast reactor (1FR) technology as a possible complement, early in the next 
century, to light-water reactors. The IFR technology had a potential for 
reducing spent fuel storage capacity requirements. Work was under way to 
demonstrate the ability of the IRF system to separate the actinides from spent 
fuel, to fabricate fuel assemblies containing those actinides, and to recycle 
the assemblies through a fast reactor in large volumes. 
144. A fourth major initiative had been the development and implementation 
of a five-year plan for environmental restoration and waste management. The 
plan was updated annually and currently extended to 1996. For the first time, 
the five-year plan integrated environmental cleanup and protection, waste 
management and applied research and development within a single programme. 
The research and development gave priority to in situ waste treatment, waste 
minimization and human resources training. The full resources necessary were 
being committed for implementation of the plan. In its 1991 budget, the 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 41 


Department of Energy was requesting close to US $3 billion for environmental 
restoration and waste management activities, which was about 17% of the total 
budget. 


145. It was worth emphasizing again that effective waste management was 
essential in order to gain the necessary public credibility to allow the 
resumption of nuclear growth around the world. At the present time, people 
were generally more fearful of "radioactive" waste than of other hazardous 
chemical wastes. They did not understand the safe and reliable record of 
peaceful nuclear power. Those who did understand - all of the Member States 
of the Agency - had an obligation to work, individually and in concert, to 
correct faulty perceptions and to inform public opinion. 
146. Another major Departmental initiative in the nuclear area was renewed 
attention to the longer-term civilian radioactive waste programme. The Office 
of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management was responsible for supervising the 
development of the first permanent geological repository to be licensed in the 
United States. The Office, under its new director, had begun to work to a 
more realistic time schedule. 
147. The amounts of nuclear material used by first-generation nuclear plants 
that would be coming of age and requiring dismantling would increase the 
pressure on waste storage capacity; in the case of relicensed plants, old 
radioactive components would require disposal. In addition, nuclear 
disarmament, welcome as it was, would create another substantial body of 
nuclear materials which would have to be handled and stored with great care. 
148. He was pleased to announce that for some time the Soviet Union and the 
United States had been co-operating closely in those areas. Following an 
initiative taken during the 1989 session of the General Conference by 
Mr. Watkins and his Soviet counterpart, the United States Department of Energy 
and the USSR Ministry of Nuclear Power and Industry had continued their 
discussions and in March 1990 had signed a co-operative agreement on improving 
the operational safety of Soviet reactors. That agreement, which covered 
procedures, training, management and operational controls, would draw heavily 
on expertise in the United States private utility sector. A second 
co-operative agreement was to be signed on the following day in Vienna by 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.323 
page 42 


Mr. Konovalov and the United States delegate himself. It would be a 
memorandum of co-operation in the fields of environmental restoration and 
waste management. The first working groups would be meeting within a few 
weeks to begin to develop a detailed plan of action. 


149. In conclusion, the prospects for restoring the nuclear option worldwide 
were good if public confidence could be regained in the operational safety of 
nuclear facilities and the environmentally sound treatment, storage and 
disposal of radioactive wastes. Nuclear power, as a safe, clean and economic 
option, could have a place among the world's energy sources in the 
twenty-first century. Extensive human, scientific, financial and educational 
resources were being allocated to that end. Strong and active support of the 
Agency would also continue in the years ahead. The Agency was a primary 
channel for improved communications, expanded technical co-operation and 
concerted efforts to address the energy and environmental problems which were 
shared by the global community. Most importantly, the Agency must continue to 
play its driving role in preventing the further proliferation of nuclear 
weapons in accordance with the international community's commitment. At the 
dawn of the twenty-first century, States must make a common resolve to meet 
the challenge of peace, to ensure that world prosperity grew hand-in-hand with 
increased global security, and to improve the quality of life for people 
everywhere - in short, to create a new world order. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
26 September 1990 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 17 September 1990, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 
later: Mr. TREMEAU (France) 
Mr. HALIM (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annual 
report for 1989 (continued) 1-92 
Statements by the delegates of: 
India 1 9 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 10 18 
Canada 19 27 
China 28 41 
United Kingdom 42 50 
Poland 51 59 
Pakistan 60 72 
Romania 73 83 
Bulgaria 84 92 

[*] GC(XXXIV)/914. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIV)/INF/287/Rev.2. 


90-4563 
(7269e/720e) 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989 (GC(XXXIV)/915) (continued) 


1. Mr. IYENGAR (India) noted that the post-Chernobyl era was marked 
by negative attitudes which could undermine the Agency's efforts to spread the 
benefits of nuclear energy for development and progress. In the early years 
of its existence, the Agency's activities had been marked by a spirit of 
willing co-operation and it was important to recapture that atmosphere and not 
allow the legitimate concerns for safegards to inhibit the equally necessary 
promotional activities, since there were many areas where developing and poor 
nations could benefit from nuclear technology. 
The benefits of nuclear technology had not reached as far as one would 
have liked. The technology had been developed mainly in the advanced 
countries, but the resistance to it - due to issues connected with safety 


- had arisen in those same countries. However, the informed 
intelligentsia and technical experts were convinced that the risks 
associated with nuclear technology could be reduced to very low levels 
and that the potential benefits were vast; the base level of science and 
technology in many countries was now so high that the challenges of 
nuclear technology and its utilization could be met with confidence. 
2. India's nuclear power programme was making good progress and the 
performance of its power reactors had been improving in recent months: the 
problem experienced by the Madras Power Reactors had been resolved and the 
reactors were currently operating at 75% power level; the Narora reactor, 
after overcoming its initial problems, was currently operating at 150 MW(e); 
the prototype fast breeder reactor was developing well; and the Kamini 30 kW 
233 


U alloy-fuelled reactor was ready and would soon be functional. India 
expected a significant increase in its nuclear power activities during the 
next few years: the Manuguru and Hazira heavy water projects would be 
commissioned in the next few months and work on new fuel production facilities 
would be started in the near future. Furthermore, the use of the Dhruva 
research reactor for research and radioisotope production had increased 
substantially. 


3. Small research reactors were of great importance to developing countries. 
Once such reactors had been set up in developing countries, a basis would 
automatically be created, not only for basic research in nuclear sciences, but 
also for the production and utilization of isotopes in vital fields such as 
medicine and agriculture. However, it was important to remember that any 
country's nuclear activities should be commensurate with its economic and 
technological capability. In view of the fact that developing countries had a 
better understanding of each other's problems, the Agency should provide even 
greater encouragement to developing countries to help each other. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 3 


4. The future for nuclear energy lay in developing countries rather than 
developed countries, many of which had reached near saturation point as far as 
exploitation of nuclear power was concerned. The recent events in the Middle 
East had once again shown that developing countries were more vulnerable to 
disruptions in the supply of conventional energy resources. Technologies 
relating to small- and medium-sized reactors needed to be pursued within the 
framework of Agency research and technical assistance programmes. Although 
the Agency had begun studies for establishing the viability of small- and 
medium-sized reactors in developing countries, no practical results had yet 
emerged. 


5. For its part, India had accumulated valuable experience in building and 
operating small research reactors and was willing to share its experience with 
other developing countries in such areas as manpower training, consultancy 
services and so on. India could also supply small research reactors for 
training purposes in developing countries and could help developing countries 
with various nuclear-related technologies, such as isotope production and 
utilization, setting up of small reactors and operations like reprocessing 
which were more manpower intensive and therefore cheaper in developing 
countries. 
6. For many developing countries, the application of radioisotopes in 
agriculture, medicine and industry, would be of immediate benefit. The 
Agency's technical assistance programme had made a great contribution in 
bringing the benefits of radioisotopes to a large number of developing 
countries. That programme needed to be expanded more rapidly and it was, 
therefore, disheartening that actual pledges and payments made to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund were less than the targets set. 
For that reason it was important to finance technical assistance from more 
regular and assured resources. His delegation was pleased to note that the 
preparatory work relating to the establishment of the African Regional 
Co-operative Agreement (AFRA) had been completed. As far as the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) was concerned, India was 
eager to expand co-operation activities within the framework of that agreement 
and noted that it would be very useful to set up a Regional Training Centre in 
that area.It could perhaps be set up in a country like India. 
7. More basic research should be carried out on problems associated with 
environment and safety, including new solutions for waste management problems 
and further studies on inherently safe reactor systems. Ideas such as passive 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 4 


residual heat removal systems, core characteristics to limit or prevent 
reactivity excursions, computerized systems for improving monitoring of safety 
system availability and containment systems with features to retain and remove 
fission products and trap aerosols needed further consideration. Newer ways 
of handling actinide waste required substantially higher inputs and 
encouragement by the Agency. India had made major contributions in new areas, 
such as high-temperature superconductivity and a large number of groups were 
working in India on basic and applied problems. India had also made 
significant contributions to cold fusion studies and its extensive work on 
demonstrating the production of tritium in fusion cells had thrown new light 
on that phenomenon. 


8. In the context of the fourth Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT Review Conference), it 


was to be hoped that the international community would find ways of putting an 


end to the massive stockpiling of nuclear weapons by the nuclear-weapon 


States. There had, of course, been a perceptible movement away from 


confrontational positions and a constructive dialogue had been started. In 


that connection, India had proposed an action plan for a nuclear-weapon-free 


peaceful world order and had called upon the international community to 


negotiate a binding commitment to general and complete disarmament under 


effective international control. 


India, for its part, was ready to play a role in furthering the cause of 
nuclear energy in general. It had accumulated valuable experience in 
building and operating small research reactors and was willing to share 
that experience with other developing countries - for example, through 
manpower training and the provision of consultancy services; also, India 
was able to supply small research reactors which could become nuclei for 
manpower training in developing countries. India was poised to help 
developing countries with a number of nuclear-related technologies, with 
radioisotope production and utilization, with the building of small 
reactors and with operations like reprocessing, which were 
manpoweiintensive and could therefore be carried out more inexpensively 
in developing countries. 


9. In conclusion, he wished to state that India had pledged the full 
amount of its contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1991 and, as a founder member of the Agency, was well aware of the 
importance of supporting its activities so that it could achieve the 
objectives enshrined in its Statute. 
10. Mr. K0N0VAL0V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) congratulated 
the President of the General Conference on his election. 
11. The world was seeing a real reduction in weapons and a transformation 
of military alliances. The drawing up and implementation of the Treaty 
between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics on the Elimination of their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range 
Missiles had been an important step, and the forthcoming treaty on strategic 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 5 


weapons would give rise to major reductions in the strategic arsenals of the 
USSR and the USA. As well as reducing and, in the end, eliminating accumulated 
stocks of nuclear weapons, ways had to be found to prevent stocks regenerating 
and the USSR had proposed a ban on the production of fissile material for use 
in weapons. The USSR had tabled a proposal in the UN concerning the non-use 
of nuclear materials which became available as a result of reductions in 
nuclear arsenals for military purposes and the development of a suitable 
control mechanism. Agreements of that type could form the basis of an allembracing 
safeguards system aimed at preventing the regeneration of nuclear 
arsenals; the Agency would have an important role to play in monitoring such 
a system. One of the Soviet Union's priorities was the establishment of a 
complete nuclear test ban. The USSR had instituted a unilateral moratorium on 
nuclear tests for one and a half years starting in August 1985, and was ready 
to reinstitute such a moratorium on a bilateral basis with the USA. The 
nuclear testing programme in the Soviet Union had been significantly reduced 
and there had been no testing since October 1989. During the Soviet-American 
summit in Washington, the Protocols to the "threshold" test ban treaties of 
1974 and 1976 had been signed. Those agreements could now be ratified 
clearing the way for further reductions in nuclear testing. 


12. The general improvement in the international political climate had 
opened up possibilities for increased international scientific and technical 
co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Clearly such cooperation 
had to take place within the framework of strict observance of the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) which, over the 
twenty years it had existed, had proved its effectiveness. The number of 
parties to that Treaty continued to grow; Albania had deposited with the 
Soviet Government the text of its decision, taken 31 July 1990, to adhere to 
the Treaty. The NPT could only be replaced by an all-embracing agreement 
aimed at preventing regeneration of nuclear arsenals subsequent to their total 
elimination. 
13. The Soviet Union continued to value highly the Agency's monitoring 
activities and noted with pleasure that in 1989, as in all preceding years, no 
diversions of nuclear materials subjected to safeguards had been detected. 
Those results were testimony to the success of the safeguards system and the 
efficiency of the NPT. He welcomed the Agency's investigation of the scope 
for implementing safeguards in the Middle East, urged Israel to accept 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 6 


international monitoring of its nuclear activities, and spoke in favour of the 


creation of a nuclear weapons free zone in the region. The Soviet Union 
actively co-operated with the Agency in its inspections of peaceful nuclear 


facilities in the Soviet Union under the terms of the safeguards agreement 
between the USSR and the Agency. As an act of good will and an extension of 
that co-operation, it would submit to the Secretariat that very day an 
extended list of Soviet nuclear facilities, including all of its nuclear power 
plants and an additional list of research reactors, so that the Agency could 


implement monitoring of those facilities. The Soviet Union contributed to the 
development of the safeguards system via its national safeguards support 
programme. Courses for Agency inspectors were held regularly in the Soviet 
Union as well as courses on the State systems for nuclear materials 
accountancy and control. Between 1986 and 1989, the Soviet Union had spent 
over 7 million roubles on safeguards support and it intended to contribute a 
minimum of 5 million roubles over 1991-92 in that area. 


14. During 1989 the Agency had also made constructive contributions to the 
solution of global energy problems and ecological problems. It had confronted 
sensitive issues in the nuclear industry, such as nuclear and radiation 
safety, current and future nuclear power technology and the fuel cycle, and 
the problem of waste management; its work in those areas was to be 
commended. In a situation where the production of energy using organic fuel 
had to be limited owing to its ecological consequences, nuclear power was 
called upon to play a decisive role in satisfying growing world energy 
requirements. Over the comparatively short period in which it had existed, 
nuclear power had expanded dynamically to a point where it currently produced 
17% of the world's electricity. As of 1 January 1990, the Soviet Union had 
47 units operating in 15 nuclear power plants with a total installed power 
of 37 750 MW. Nuclear power plants produced 12.5% of the country's electricity 
in 1989 overall; in the Ukraine they produced 22.7%, in the north-western 
part of the Union 33%, and in the central part of the RSFSR 21.6%. 


15. The analysis of the Chernobyl accident had resulted in a new approach 
to operational safety in nuclear power plants. A corpus of organizational and 
technical measures had been implemented in units to ensure their safety and to 
prevent serious accidents from occurring even in the event of gross errors on 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 7 


the part of personnel. Plans were being drawn up to reconstruct first and 
second generation nuclear power plants built according to standards which no 
longer came up to current safety requirements, and training centres had been 
established for staff at all plants. Automated equipment diagnostics systems 
were being developed and installed and, as a result of the measures taken, 
currently operating nuclear power plants could continue to operate safely 
until the design lifetime of their main equipment had been exhausted. The new 
approach in nuclear power aimed less at quantitative growth than at a fundamental 
improvement in quality. If the future development of nuclear power was to be 
assured, plant design had to be improved. Two design bureau were currently 
producing independent designs for the WWER-500-600 reactor and the best of the 
two designs would be chosen for the new generation of nuclear power plants. 
In addition, the WWER-1000-1200 and BN series were being developed. The 
physical and technological characteristics of those reactors and their passive 
safety systems significantly reduced the probability of dangerous accidents. 
Nuclear power was going through the most complex and difficult period of its 
history to date. Its development was being scrutinized much more critically 
by the general public who were often ill-informed on the issue. It was 
therefore important that efforts to enlighten the general public and make it 
aware of the real facts of the situation continue. 


16. The Soviet Union greatly appreciated the Agency's work in the field of 
nuclear safety. The Chernobyl accident had been a serious warning to all and 
the situation around Chernobyl remained complex. Much was being done to deal 
with current problems and the Soviet Union greatly appreciated the assistance 
it had received from other countries and international organizations. He 
thanked the Agency and its Member States for the assistance they had provided 
and hoped that the Agency would continue to be active in that area. The 
agreement between the USSR, the Ukrainian SSR, the Byelorussian SSR and the 
Agency on the setting up of the Chernobyl Nuclear Research Centre was soon to 
be signed. That Centre was a logical extension of the Soviet Union's policy 
that as much information as possible on the causes and consequences of the 
Chernobyl accident should be presented to the scientific community. The 
agreement would facilitate the organization of research and the dissemination 
of results. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 8 


17. The Soviet delegation lent its support to the Agency's programme and 
budget for 1991; it endorsed in particular the work being proposed in the 
fields of nuclear power and the fuel cycle, nuclear fusion, nuclear safety and 
radiation protection, the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) and 
nuclear data. He also noted with pleasure the growing proportion of the 
Agency's budget devoted to technical assistance and co-operation. The 
practice of determining the volume of the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund (TACF) using indicative planning figures ensured significant planned 
growth in the available resources in the Fund. In view of the importance of 
that activity for developing Member States, the Soviet Union approved the 
suggested level for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1991 of 
US $45 million. The current method of constituting the Fund - on the basis of 
voluntary contributions in national currency - seemed to ensure activities in 
that area were adequately funded. The USSR's voluntary contribution to the 
Fund was constantly increasing and it regularly paid its contributions in 
full, supplying equipment, instruments and materials under major contracts 
with the Agency. Apart from its contribution to the TACF, the Soviet Union 
regularly contributed additional resources in national currency for additional 
assistance to States party to NPT. The Soviet Government planned to 
contribute 2 million roubles over 1991-94 for footnote-a/ projects in States 
party to that Treaty. 
18. In conclusion, he joined other delegations in approving the report for 
1989 and thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for their efficient 
and fruitful work during the year. 
19. Mr. LEE (Canada), expressing his delegation's approval of the 
Agency's Annual Report for 1989, commended the Director General on his prudent 
management and his success in implementing a high level of programmes despite 
the constraints of zero real growth. At a time when many Governments, 
including his own, were facing substantial expenditure cuts and were having to 
reduce deficits significantly, it was difficult to anticipate any lifting of 
those constraints in the near future. At the same time, his Government 
recognized that the level of certain activities, notably the safeguarding of 
new nuclear facilities, was externally imposed upon the Agency and that it was 
essential to ensure that the effectiveness of Agency safeguards was not 
compromised by budgetary pressures. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 9 


20. Problems associated with zero real growth were compounded by the late 
payment by Member States of their contributions. As the Director General had 
pointed out he had been forced, several times in recent years, to slow down or 
even to freeze programme implementation in mid-year as a result of such late 
payments. His Government, therefore, urged all Member States to pay their 
contributions in full and in a timely manner. In the longer term, Canada 
would support measures to provide the Agency with an adequate Working Capital 
Fund and with other tools to enable it to discharge its mandate effectively. 
21. Canada welcomed the fact that the recently concluded Fourth NPT Review 
Conference had urged all non-nuclear-weapon States which had not yet done so 
to make legally-binding commitments not to acquire nuclear weapons or other 
nuclear explosive devices. It had also urged them to accept Agency safeguards 
for all their peaceful nuclear activities and had urged the nuclear supplier 
States to require full-scope safeguards on new supply arrangements. 
Furthermore, his Government welcomed the Conference's recommendation that, in 
the event of questions arising about the commitment of any State Party to the 
non-proliferation objectives of NPT, the IAEA should not hesitate to take full 
advantage of its rights, including the use of special inspections. His 
Government would welcome an early study by the Agency of the possible scope, 
application and procedures of such inspections. 
22. The planned introduction of new safeguard criteria would enhance 
confidence in the Agency's safeguards evaluation. At the same time, it was 
crucial that there be sufficient lead time between the announcement of the new 
criteria and their entry into use, so as to enable the Agency and 
Member States to assess the considerable cost implications and to enable 
Member States to make the necessary arrangements. The Canadian support 
programme for Agency safeguards, administered by the Atomic Energy Control 
Board, now had assured funding at an annual level of $3.2 million Canadian 
dollars. One of the major activities of that support programme had been the 
development of a new closed-circuit television surveillance system. 
23. In March 1990 the Canadian Government had announced the results of an 
extensive study of the need for nuclear power in Canada. The study had 
examined the value of retaining the CANDU technology and the organization of 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 10 


the Canadian nuclear programme. The decision to retain a nuclear energy 
option for Canada was based on factors such as economics, security of longterm 
energy supplies and environmental and industrial benefits. CANDU reactors 
supplied about half the electricity needs of the industrial province of Ontario 
and about a third of the electricity in the province of New Brunswick. The 
province of Quebec, which had large reserves of hydroelectric power, also 
operated one CANDU reactor. The costs of generation had proved to be 
competitive with alternative energy sources, and the environmental benefits of 
the nuclear option were apparent in the context of global concerns about 
emissions of "greenhouse gases". 


24. The Canadian Government's renewed support would allow Atomic Energy of 
Canada Limited (AECL) to maintain its nuclear research and development 
programme to provide backup technical support for existing CANDU reactors and 
to continue development of improved systems for the future. The Government 
also recognized the importance of the CANDU 3 reactor design, which was being 
developed by the AECL and which incorporated innovative features enabling it 
to be built quickly and to operate reliably for a long life because its 
components could easily be replaced. The Government had authorized AECL to 
enter into negotiations to build a CANDU 3 unit in New Brunswick and Canada's 
nuclear regulatory authority, the Atomic Energy Control Board, was engaged in 
pre-licensing procedures for the generic design of CANDU 3. In a separate 
decision, the Government had approved a major increase in the resources of the 
Atomic Energy Control Board to allow it to keep pace with the growth and 
technological sophistication of the nuclear industry and to enable it to 
establish better controls. 
25. All those decisions made by the Canadian Government were evidence of 
strong support for the role of nuclear power in Canada's future, and his 
delegation was confident that nuclear power would be seen as an appropriate 
option for many countries as well. It was also to be expected that Canada 
would play a significant role as a supplier to other countries. 
26. The Director General's report on nuclear safety and radiation 
protection was comprehensive and provided a useful basis for medium-term 
planning. The specific proposals which the Director General had made would 
have to be examined in the context of the biennial programme and budget 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 11 


planning exercise. His delegation continued to believe that the Agency was 


capable of accomplishing much significant work without a substantial increase 


in its financial and human resources. Furthermore, his delegation remained 


convinced that the primary responsibility for nuclear safety must be a 
national one and it could not support the establishment of mandatory international 
safety regulations since, no matter how general, they would be of 
very little use in the context of the safety of specific reactor types. 
Safety standards were therefore best left as guidelines. 


27. With regard to the Agency's technical co-operation activities, his 
delegation welcomed the attention paid to the special needs of developing 
countries, particularly those of Africa, and welcomed the Agency's decision to 
develop a medium-term technical co-operation plan. Such a plan should include 
a statement of development objectives, programme and financial strategies and 
priorities, supported by a comprehensive management plan. His Government also 
looked forward to the publication by the Agency of the first in a series of 
policy review papers on technical co-operation and, in particular, to its 
review of the situation of the least developed countries. 
28. Mr. JIANG (China) observed that since the preceding session of the 
General Conference, important activities had taken place in the field of 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The first biennial technical co-operation 
programme which the Agency had started to implement in 1989 had been a 
laudable attempt at enhancing the rationality and predictability of 
projects. The Agency's work in such areas as reactor design and operational 
safety, provision of advisory services on radioactive waste disposal and the 
safe handling of radiation sources had played a positive role in the development 
of nuclear power. The Agency's activities relating to the effectiveness 
evaluation of safeguards had contributed to greater credibility of safeguards 
and thus had had a very important bearing on ensuring the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. He commended the Director General and his staff for their 
assiduous efforts. 
29. Environmental protection and economic development were among the 
important global issues facing mankind at present. Rapid industrialization, 
especially the large-scale use of coal, oil and gas, had had an enormous 
impact on climate and ecology. Being superior both economically and 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 12 


environmentally to other primary energy sources, nuclear energy was conducive 
to sustained world economic development. However, the development of nuclear 
power was currently facing difficulties and challenges from many sides. The 
public had yet to recover fully from the bad memories of the Chernobyl 
accident. Numerous developing countries continued to suffer from serious 
financial shortage and technical constraints. There had been no basic change 


in the industrialized countries' monopoly of nuclear power technology. In 
the consideration, formulation and implementation of the Agency's future plans 
and projects, the focus should be on the solution of these problems. The 
Agency had done a great deal to help developing countries formulate nuclear 
power programmes, reinforce the infrastructure needed for nuclear power 
development and increase their expertise. In China's view, the Agency should 
continue to accord priority to such activities in its medium-term plan. It 
should make greater efforts to assist those countries in the development of 
nuclear power, including joint efforts with international financial 


institutions to seek new financing mechanisms, with a view to creating a more 
propitious external economic environment for the purpose. 


30. Nuclear safety was vital for smooth development of nuclear power. It 
was gratifying to note that with the concerted efforts of Member States and 
the Secretariat, the Agency's expanded nuclear safety programme had since 1987 
played a positive role in gaining public acceptance and understanding of 
nuclear energy, promoting nuclear power plant design and operational safety 
and strengthening international co-operation in nuclear safety. He hoped that 
provision of plant design and operational safety services would continue to 
occupy an important part in the Agency's nuclear safety activities. In that 
connection, China supported the conference on nuclear safety to be held the 
following year and was confident that it would lead to a deeper understanding 
and greater awareness, on the part of the international community, of the 
importance of nuclear safety to nuclear power development. He hoped that 
priorities would be identified in the area of nuclear safety, that the 
requirements of the developing countries would be taken fully into account and 
that greater international co-operation in the area of nuclear safety and 
radiation protection would be fostered. 
31. The safe and effective management of radioactive waste had a vital 
bearing on human health and the environment and constituted a basic guarantee 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 13 


for the development of nuclear energy- Over the years, the Agency had done a 
great deal of useful work to help Member States in formulating their waste 
management plans. He hoped that the Agency would lay down a comprehensive 


and integrated development strategy, including a set of radioactive waste 


safety standards currently under consideration, guidance for the planning and 
construction of radioactive waste repositories, and plans for co-ordinating 
research and development programmes on radioactive waste disposal and 
management. 


32. Advanced light-water reactors were a new generation of reactors with 
good passive and inherent safety features. China supported the Agency's 
basic objective of enhancing safety and lowering costs in developing a new 
generation of reactors and was willing to participate in the international 
co-operative efforts on the development and demonstration of such reactors. 
33. The Chinese Government attached great importance to the Agency's 
technical assistance and co-operation activities and had consistently 
supported the projects on nuclear applications which were of benefit to the 
economic and social development of developing countries. It appreciated the 
Agency's unremitting efforts in that regard. He wished to mention in 
particular the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA), 
a successful international co-operation mechanism. He hoped that the Agency 
and the countries concerned in the Asia/Pacific region would continue to 
support that programme and further enhance multidimensional and multiform 
co-operation so as to make it a dynamic vehicle for fostering economic and 
technological development and promoting social stability and prosperity in 
that region. 
34. The Agency's role in safeguards was well known. During the preceding 
30 years, it had done a lot of useful work, in accordance with its Statute, in 
the area of preventing nuclear proliferation and maintaining world peace and 
stability. The current discussions within the Agency on safeguards financing 
reflected in one respect the desire of numerous developing Member States that 
the two major objectives, as set forth in the Statute, should be fully 
realized. The Chinese delegation considered that, while the developing 
countries should fulfil their financial obligations in order to support the 
Agency's safeguards activities, their specific circumstances and capacity to 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 14 


pay should be taken fully into account in fixing their financial contributions. 
The assessments of some countries should continue to be shielded if they 
qualified for such shielding. No country or group of countries should unduly 
stress the prevention of nuclear proliferation and add to the economic burdens 
of developing countries. 


35. The Chinese Government had always attached importance to the Agency's 
work and to developing co-operative relations with it. China had participated 
in the work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage and in 
the meeting of the expert group as the convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material, and continued to take part in the activities of the 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG). China also supported the 
preperation of the Agency of a code of practice on international transboundary 
movement of radioactive waste. In the area of strengthening international 
nuclear safety co-operation, after the Agency's Pre-OSART safety review of the 
construction of the Qinshan nuclear power plant in April 1989, China had again 
invited the Agency to carry out follow-up actions in the current year. It had 
also invited the Agency to make a safety review of the Daya Bay nuclear power 
plant in Guangdong Province, which was jointly funded by China and Hongkong. 
In the preceding year, his country had hosted or financed six regional 
training courses and international symposia and continued to use its nuclear 
installations and research institutes to train personnel from developing 
countries, particularly those in the Asia/Pacific region. At the Agency's 
invitation, many Chinese experts had attended meetings of advisory or expert 
groups on various topics and, together with experts from other countries, had 
contributed to international nuclear co-operation. 
36. Nuclear power was the main area of development of China's nuclear 
industry. On the basis of the policy of identifying priorities and developing 
nuclear power step by step, new progress had been made in nuclear power 
development in the preceding year. The first phase of the Qinshan power plant 
with the Chinese-designed and -built 300 Mw prototype reactor was making 
steady progress and had reached the stage of hydraulic testing and 
commissioning. The construction of the China/Hongkong jointly funded Daya Bay 
nuclear power plant was going on according to schedule and the installation of 
the major equipment of the first reactor was well under way. The conceptual 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 15 


design of the 2 x 600 MW nuclear power plant for the second phase of the 
Qinshan project had been completed. It would be the standardized commercial 
nuclear power plant to be put into series production. The total installed 
nuclear power capacity in China was expected to reach 6000 MW by the end of 
the century. 


37. In parallel with the development of nuclear power, work on the 
corresponding civil nuclear fuel cycle industry was in full swing. Fuel 
assemblies had been produced successfully for the first load of the Qinshan 
nuclear power plant. The construction of a pilot-plant for reprocessing power 
reactor fuel had already begun. Experiments with the atomic laser technique 
for uranium isotope separation had yielded important results, and the 
engineering testing of isotope separation by the centrifugal method was 
proceeding smoothly. 
38. Nuclear research was being carried out actively so that the nuclear 
industry could be placed on a solid foundation and have good potential for 
later growth. Following the construction of the high-flux engineering test 
reactor, the "Flash-1" high-current pulsed electron beam accelerator and the 
China Tokamak HL-1, the Chinese-designed and -built prototype low-temperature 
heating reactor and the uranium-hydrogen-zirconium pulsed research reactor had 
gone into operation. Under the high technology development plan an 
experimental fast breeder was expected to be built by the end of the century. 
39. In developing its nuclear industry, China had always accorded the 
highest priority to quality and safety. It had strengthened the supervision 
of nuclear safety, radiation protection and nuclear waste disposal, attached 
importance to the establishment of nuclear safety regulations and standards 
consistent with international practice and reinforced the licensing and 
quality assurance system for nuclear safety. It had drawn upon the experience 
of advanced countries in the area of nuclear power safety. Apart from applying 
measures to strengthen defence in depth, it had endeavoured to solve the 
problems of man-machine interface and had made emergency plans and preparations 
in case of serious accidents. Nuclear emergency offices had been set up at 
the two nuclear power plants now under construction and in the provinces where 
they were located. The establishment of a national nuclear emergency centre 
was under consideration. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 16 


40. The Chinese Government attached great importance to the fourth NPT 
Review Conference, to which it had sent observers. In the twenty years since 
its entry into force, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty had played a 
positive role in preventing nuclear proliferation and maintaining world peace 
and stability. It reflected the just aspirations of numerous non-nuclearweapon 
States, especially developing countries, for complete prohibition of 
nuclear weapons and a nuclear-weapon-free world. His Government supported the 
three major objectives of the Treaty, i.e., preventing nuclear proliferation, 
promoting nuclear disarmament and facilitating peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, and considered those objectives to be interrelated and inseparable. 
While China was in favour of nuclear non-proliferation, it was an even 
stronger advocate of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear 
weapons. The authority of the non-proliferation regime could be truly 
strengthened only if significant progress were made in nuclear disarmament and 
complete elimination of nuclear weapons could be achieved only through 
maintaining an effective non-proliferation regime. As for international 
co-operation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the co-operating 
parties must take appropriate measures to preclude the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices - that was a prerequisite for 
smooth co-operation. However, such non-proliferation measures should not 
hamper normal co-operation activities, nor the normal peaceful nuclear 
activities of States. During the preceding 30 years, the Agency had played a 
positive and effective role in facilitating and ensuring the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and in fostering international co-operation in that area. 
China was confident that the Agency would make fresh efforts and continue to 
support the fundamental objectives of the Treaty. 
41. China adhered firmly to its fundamental State policy of reforms and 
opening up to the outside world and pursued the independent peaceful foreign 
policy. It had consistently held that multilateral co-operation was dictated 
by the imperatives of our times, namely safeguarding of peace and promotion of 
social progress and economic development, that it reflected the interdependence 
of the international community and served as a important means of 
promoting the joint development of different countries. In the area of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, China would, as in the past, maintain and 
develop friendly co-operative relations with the International Atomic Energy 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 17 


Agency and would strengthen friendly exchanges and co-operation with all 


States on the basis of the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty, 
non-interference in internal affairs and equality and mutual benefit, so as to 
make its due contribution to the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy in the world. 


Mr. Tremeau (France) took the Chair. 


42. Mr. WALKER (United Kingdom) pointed out that the effects of the 
Chernobyl accident continued to be felt and that nuclear industries in many 
countries were experiencing troubled times. Costs at nuclear power plants 
were uncomfortably high in some countries by comparison with conventional 
power plants and the level of public confidence remained generally low, 
particularly where health and environmental matters were concerned. 
43. Since the last General Conference, the British Government had made 
important changes in nuclear power policy, affecting the structure of industry 
and its development. The privatization of the electricity industry in Britain 
had undoubtedly had major repercussions for nuclear power generation. However, 
the Government continued to believe that economic nuclear power was, and would 
continue to be, an option in meeting the country's energy needs. 
44. In the best interests of both the taxpayer and the consumer, the 
British Government had decided to withdraw nuclear power stations from its 
planned sale of the electricity supply industry. It had become clear that the 
private sector was seeking unprecedented guarantees from the Government 
against the financial risks associated with the construction of new stations 
and that the older gas graphite stations would incur much higher charges for 
spent fuel management and decommissioning than had previously been envisaged. 
The industry's nuclear assets were held in two new public companies - Nuclear 
Electric and Scottish Electric. Pending a full policy review of the prospects 
for economic nuclear power in 1994, the year in which Britain's first 
pressurized water reactor (PWR), Sizewell B, was scheduled for completion, the 
Government had decided to withhold approval for investment by Nuclear Electric 
in further new reactor construction. The intervening period would allow the 
nuclear industry to reduce costs as far as possible and give time for the 
arguments on environmental issues and the appropriate levels of fuel diversity 
within the nation's energy policy to become more clearly established. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 18 


45. The Secretary of State for Energy had recently granted his consent and 
planning permission for a second PWR to be constructed at Hinkley Point 
following thorough consideration by an independent public inquiry into the 
safety, environmental and economic aspects of the proposal. The Secretary of 
State's consent did not include approval of the capital investment which would 
be considered after the 1994 review. The present consent and planning 
permission would therefore remain in force long enough for the 1994 review to 
be completed. If the outcome was favourable to further PWR construction, it 
would be possible for work at Hinkley Point to begin soon afterwards. 
46. Nuclear power had a significant role to play in reducing carbon dioxide 
emissions in line with the British Government's commitment, announced in 
May 1990, to stabilize the country's carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels 
by the year 2005, provided other countries also played their part. Nuclear 
power generation was also an insurance against unforeseen developments in the 
fossil fuel market. The world had had a compelling reminder in recent weeks 
that security of energy supplies could never be taken for granted, and there 
was clearly a risk of world prices rising faster if the international development 
of nuclear power ceased to be an option. It could also be argued that 
the relative economics of nuclear power would improve if all fuels were 
assessed on a comparable basis taking account of long-term environmental costs. 
47. For the general public, economic factors were overshadowed by other 
concerns, such as problems of nuclear safety and the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. Safety would continue to be the first priority for the United 
Kingdom's nuclear industry. Like other Agency Member States, the United 
Kingdom welcomed the advisory role of the Assessment of Safety-Significant 
Events Teams (ASSETs), the Radiation Protection Advisory Teams (RAPATs) and 
the Operational Safety Review Teams (OSARTs). The report on the first 
OSART mission to visit his country had concluded that Oldbury power station 
was operating at a high level of safety. Safety practices in the United 
Kingdom were kept under continual review by the industry and regulatory 
authorities. The Department of Energy, in collaboration with the nuclear 
industry, had recently accepted recommendations for further improvements to 
detailed aspects of the emergency planning and preparedness regime. 
48. The United Kingdom also participated fully in international efforts to 
improve safety standards and was keen to play its part in co-operating with 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 19 


Eastern European countries on nuclear safety. Another encouraging area of 
nuclear safety co-operation, originally suggested by the United Kingdom, was 
the development of peer group discussions between senior nuclear regulators. 
The 1989-90 cycle of meetings on regulatory inspection and enforcement 
practices had now been completed, and it was to be hoped that such meetings on 
a range of topics would become a regular feature of IAEA activities. 


49. His delegation welcomed the development of a medium-term plan for the 
Agency. The central aim of that plan should be to clarify the Agency's main 
priorities and to develop a firm strategy for responding to them, although it 
would not necessarily be easy to agree on priorities. While his country was 
committed to the policy of zero real growth, which it believed had served the 
Agency well, the draft plan itself should not be constrained from looking 
ahead intelligently at a range of approaches to ensure that the Agency's 
obligations and objectives were met. 
50. Although the fourth NPT Review Conference had been unable to agree on a 
Final Document, it had certainly been a useful exercise. One of the most 
important obligations stemming from the Non-Pro1iteration Treaty was the 
acceptance of IAEA safeguards. In his speech at the NPT Review Conference, 
the British Minister of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs had 
emphasized the importance of the IAEA safeguards system in the context of 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and of international nuclear trade for 
peaceful purposes. Compliance with their Treaty obligations by parties to NPT 
would undoubtedly be under close scrutiny in the next few years prior to 1995, 
when the nature of the extension of NPT had to be decided. 
51. Mr. ZELAZNY (Poland) said that the fact that the fourth NPT Review 
Conference had not been able to agree on a final declaration should not 
overshadow the positive aspects of the Conference. Problems raised and 
extensively discussed, such as the requirements of full-scope safeguards in 
the case of nuclear exports, rationalization of IAEA safeguards, especially in 
nuclear-weapons States, together with the requirement that civil and military 
fuel cycles should be separated, seemed to be well understood by all 
interested parties. There had been a strong conviction among the participants 
of the Conference that the Agency performed well in applying its safeguards 
and that it should be encouraged to use the full provisions contained in 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 20 


document INFCIRC/153. Poland regarded the NPT as an instrument to facilitate 
the fullest possible exchange of equipment, material, services and scientific 
and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to 
eliminate the technological gaps between the developed and developing 
countries. 


52. The Agency's medium-term programme should establish a firm basis for 
selection of priority tasks and for departing from rigid zero growth rules, if 
the necessity of further intensification of the Agency's activities was 
recognized by a significant majority of its Member States. Non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, as well as the promotion of safe nuclear energy, including 
its power and other applications, were key factors in ensuring the world's 
sustainable development. Regional and global efforts to lessen the existing 
technological imbalance and to reduce the dangers of global environmental 
degradation and climatic disaster were vital. In that connection, the 
International Conference on Nuclear Safety, to be convened in 1991, and the 
International Symposium on Electricity and the Environment to be held in 
Helsinki in 1991, would help to prepare valuable input for the UN Conference 
on Environment and Development in 1992. The link between nonproliferation 
and protection of the world's environment had been emphasized 
during the fourth NPT Review Conference. Many regarded nuclear power as a 
benign energy option which could help to reduce the problem of global warming 
and believed that safe nuclear power should be made available to all countries 
interested in its use, where the necessary infrastructure could be established. 
Others regarded nuclear power as a source of problems, including the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and radioactive waste management. Supporters of 
that view advocated concentrating efforts on energy conservation and the 
development of renewable energy sources. 
53. It was generally recognized that nuclear power plants required high 
investment costs which were difficult to accept in countries with serious 
economic problems. His delegation was particularly grateful to the Agency and 
the Commission of the European Communities for their assistance to Poland in 
its consideration of its energy future. Although the Polish Government had 
recently decided to halt further construction of the Zarnowiec nuclear power 
plant, that decision did not mean that Poland was abandoning the nuclear power 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 21 


option in the future and the Government had in fact stated that in the first 
decade of the next century, nuclear power would definitely have to be 
introduced in Poland. 


54. Two Agency programmes, namely the programme to upgrade older WWER 
reactors and the programme to study the consequences of the Chernobyl 
accident, would help clarify attitudes to nuclear power in Central and Eastern 
Europe. Poland, which had a common border with the Byelorussian and the 
Ukrainian Republics, was particularly interested in the results of 
investigations carried out under the aegis of the Agency by international 
experts on the territories of those Republics affected by the Chernobyl 
accident. 
55. The Agency should do more to protect the public against nuclear 
disinformation. The organization of the first forum on public information 
during the present session of the General Conference was a good step in that 
direction. His delegation looked forward with great interest to the results 
of subprogramme X of the Agency's programme for the years 1991-92 which should 
provide objective data for planning energy programmes in an economically and 
environmentally sound way. In order to convince the sceptical public that 
safe nuclear energy was possible, the presentation of model facilities for the 
treatment and storage of wastes and for the storage of spent fuel, together 
with decommissioning procedures, was essential. It would be highly advisable 
if, for example, such a model and demonstration facility for the treatment and 
storage of wastes were built under the aegis of the IAEA and possibly another 
internationally recognized organization or organizations. 
56. The Agency should promote not only nuclear power but also the 
conservation of energy, since both were vital for delaying the danger of the 
"greenhouse effect", and the so-called "low-energy path", recommended by the 
World Commission on Environment and Development, should be given greater 
prominence in the Agency's programme and documents. Conservation of energy 
through the promotion of energy-saving processes and less energy-consuming 
industrial products could also be achieved using non-power applications of 
atomic energy. In that context, his delegation was very interested in the 
establishment of a regional European co-operation programme on different 
irradiation technologies. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 22 


57. In the area of liability for nuclear damage, Poland welcomed the 
progress made since the thirty-third session of the General Conference. For 
its part, Poland had acceded, in December 1989, to the Vienna Convention on 
civil liability for nuclear damage and to the Joint Protocol between the 
Vienna and Paris Conventions. While supporting the Standing Committee on 
Liability for Nuclear Damage, Poland also felt that a Revision Conference on 
that Convention would be useful as a first step towards strengthening the 
international nuclear liability regime. 
58. With regard to technical co-operation activities, his delegation 
appreciated the continuing efforts of the Agency's Department of Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation to improve efficiency in the preparation and 
delivery of technical assistance. Technical assistance to Poland had greatly 
facilitated its research and development work in different areas of atomic 
energy applications and had provided training for its experts. A large 
proportion of technical assistance to Poland was being focused on projects 
related to environmental protection and human health. Sulphur dioxide and 
nitrogen oxide emissions in Poland exceeded 4.5 million tonnes and more than 
0.5 million tonnes per year respectively and a reduction in those figures was 
one of Poland's main goals in environmental protection. It therefore had high 
expectations of the pilot station, built in Warsaw with Agency assistance, 
which used accelerator electron beam technology to purify flue gases. That 
pilot station could also be used to train specialists from other countries 
interested in that technology. Another area, where Poland was particularly 
interested in receiving technical assistance was in the treatment and disposal 
of low- and medium-level radioactive wastes. 
59. Finally, Poland intended to make its full contributions to the Agency's 
Regular Budget and to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
for 1991. It would also continue to contribute to the Agency's extrabudgetary 
resources through the services of its experts and the organization of 
traineeships in Poland. 
60. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that during 1989 the world had witnessed 
historic and revolutionary changes affecting relations between the two 
superpowers, the situation in Eastern Europe, Africa and elsewhere. He 
welcomed these changes, and particularly the steps being taken towards nuclear 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.324 
page 23 


disarmament. Hopefully, the end of the cold war would bring about a closer 
North-South relationship on which the future welfare and prosperity of all 
mankind depended. 


61. The current situation in the Gulf had created many problems including a 
new energy crisis. The days of cheap energy were over. Moreover, the use of 
fossil fuels to generate electricity was causing unacceptable environmental 
damage necessitating measures to restrict their use. Debt-ridden developing 
countries could not afford to incur new financial burdens by importing 
expensive oil for power generation. Energy security had thus become crucial 
for both the industrialized and the underdeveloped countries. The combined 
effect of higher oil prices and greater awareness of environmental issues was 
likely to bring about a revival of nuclear power in many countries and 
therefore the Agency should have a long-term plan for responding to the 
emergent energy needs of its Member States. He therefore welcomed the 
initiative of the Director General with respect to the drawing up of a mediumterm 
plan. 
62. If the superpowers were genuinely sincere about reducing defence 
expenditure, financial resources, materials, manufacturing capabilities, and 
manpower might be released for an accelerated development of nuclear power. 
Defence-related nuclear installations and production plants should be 
rededicated forthwith to peaceful purposes and placed under Agency safeguards. 
Surplus materials from nuclear-weapons programmes, including uranium, 
enriched uranium and plutonium, could be made available to fuel nuclear power 
reactors under safeguards. The time had come for the Agency to consider 
establishing a nuclear fuel bank as provided for under Article IX and XIII of 
the Statute to be used for peaceful nuclear activities in Member States. 
Advanced nuclear power plant designs which were safe, more reliable and more 
competitive would give a new impetus to the use of nuclear power and revive 
the nuclear industry. The Agency should accelerate its programme on the 
development of small- and medium-power reactors to help developing countries 
with smaller grids and high conventional fuel costs. The large-scale 
introduction and exploitation of nuclear power would not be possible without 
assurances of safety and public acceptance of nuclear energy. The credibility 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 24 


of nuclear energy would not survive another Chernobyl. Alongside the broader 
safety programme, the Agency should expand its activities aimed at improving 
public understanding of nuclear energy. 


63. With regard to the recent NPT Review Conference in Geneva, Pakistan was 
not a party to NPT but it did support strongly the establishment of a 
non-discriminatory regime of non-proliferation covering both vertical and 
horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons. Pakistan's nuclear programme was 
peaceful and dedicated solely to the economic, technical and social 
development of the country. Pakistan was prepared to subscribe to any nonproliferation 
regime in the region which was non-discriminatory, and had made 
several proposals including the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in South 
Asia which had been repeatedly and overwhelmingly supported by the United 
Nations General Assembly. 
64. It was sometimes suggested that the Agency should supply peaceful 
nuclear technology, equipment and materials to Member States party to NPT on a 
preferential basis. Such discrimination would be contrary to Article XII.B of 
the Statute of the Agency and, therefore, unlawful and unacceptable. Nuclear 
proliferation was essentially a political problem. Withholding nuclear 
technology from developing countries would simply encourage those countries to 
develop independent nuclear fuel cycles. The policy of denial was therefore 
self-defeating and counterproductive. Pakistan strongly supported the idea of 
solving the problem of proliferation through constructive political dialogue 
and was prepared to participate in such dialogue both at regional and 
international levels. 
65. Pakistan supported the adoption of the Agency's programme and budget 
for 1991 and 1992 as contained in document GC(XXXIV)/917. However, the 
concept of zero growth restricted the Agency's budget and had outgrown its 
usefulness. If the Agency was to play a meaningful role in the future, it had 
to be relieved of such artificial constraints, particularly with regard to its 
promotional activities. He urged all Member States to pay their contributions 
on time in order to prevent the recurring financial crises in the Agency. 
66. Almost a decade and a half had passed since the proposal to amend 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had been first put to the General Conference and 
the Board of Governors with a view to remedying the gross underrepresentation 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 25 


of the Africa and Middle East and South Asia groups (MESA). At one time, the 
General Conference had endorsed the idea of a modest increase in the 
representation of those two regions. However, no concrete steps had been 
taken. The time had come to improve the representative character of the Board 
and to rectify the gross injustice being done to those two groups. 


67. The Agency's safeguards system had proven its effectiveness and 
reliability over the years. The fact that no diversion had been detected in 
any facility placed under safeguards was most reassuring to the international 
community. While the Department of Safeguards was to be commended there was 
room for improvement in terms of streamlining, expenditure control and 
performance evaluation. 
68. Technical assistance and safeguards constituted the two major pillars 
of the Agency. Pakistan had always advocated a proper and visible balance 
between promotional and regulatory activities. Regrettably, the disparity 
between the funding of safeguards and technical assistance was growing, as 
were uncertainties about the availability of funds since many countries did 
not fulfil their pledges of voluntary contributions. Technical assistance 
should therefore be funded through predictable and assured sources in the same 
manner as safeguards. 
69. Over the preceding nine years the Director General had made several 
positive attempts to implement resolution GC(XXV)/RES/386 concerning the 
representation of developing countries on the Agency's staff at Professional 
level. Although progress had been made in redressing the serious imbalance in 
the representation of the Third World countries much more still needed to be 
done in that area. 
70. Over the previous year Pakistan had made notable progress in its 
peaceful nuclear energy programme including the introduction of nuclear power 
in the country to meet its chronic power shortages. Agreement had been 
reached, in principle, with the People's Republic of China regarding the 
supply of one 300 MW plant and with France for a 900 MW plant. Negotiations 
were underway with both countries prior to signing of contracts. In addition, 
Pakistan was going ahead with a well-planned and comprehensive programme for 
indigenization of nuclear power plants. Local participation in the 
construction of the two plants mentioned above would be an important step in 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.324 


page 26 


that direction. Major efforts were being devoted to the development of the 
necessary infrastructure and manpower resources for the design, engineering 


and manufacture of key systems and components. Pakistan had been co-operating 


closely with the IAEA on enhancing the safety of the KANUPP plant at Karachi 
which had been in operation since 1972. Pursuant to the recommendations of an 
ASSET safety mission from the Agency a number of improvements had been made 
which had increased plant safety and reliability. The unit had recently 


achieved a new performance level. Pakistan had been manufacturing its own 
nuclear fuel for the past ten years and the thousands of fuel bundles used in 
the KANUPP plant had performed satisfactorily, fully meeting design burnup 
specifications without a single failure. Pakistan had already achieved basic 
capacity in the front end of the fuel cycle, involving mining, milling, 
refining, and manufacture of nuclear fuels and materials. All facilities had 
been designed and built locally. Pakistan had recently installed a second 
research reactor for training purposes and was upgrading its 5 MW research 


reactor to 10 MW and converting it to use "low" instead of "high" enriched 
fuel. Both projects had been undertaken in collaboration with China and under 
Agency safeguards. 


71. Through the use of nuclear techniques in agriculture Pakistan had made 
important breakthroughs in the development of new varieties of cash crops, in 
particular, cotton. Pakistan would soon have its first nuclear medicine 
graduate. There was a growing demand for nuclear medical experts in the nine 
medical centres in the country which treated over 160 000 patients per year. 
The Government had approved the construction of two additonal nuclear medicine 
centres. Pakistan had been hosting the International Nathiagali Summer 
College on Physics and Contemporary Needs for the past fifteen years with the 
co-operation of the ICTP at Trieste. The College had been attended by 
hundreds of scientists from developing countries thereby promoting not only 
North-South co-operation but also scientific exchanges within developing 
countries. Pakistan was participating in the activities of the Regional 
Co-operation Agreement (RCA) and hosting some of its meetings. 
72. In conclusion, he expressed his appreciation for the valuable technical 
advice and assistance the Agency had provided and commended the Director 
General and his colleagues. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.324 
page 27 


73. Mr. OLARIU (Romania) wished at the outset to thank the Director 
General for having visited Bucharest shortly after Romania's December 
revolution, noting that the visit had represented a landmark in the development 
of co-operation between Romania and the Agency. 
74. The current session of the General Conference was particularly 
significant in the light of the deep changes - both positive and convulsive now 
occurring on the international scene, of the progress achieved and the 
continuing efforts being made toward reducing nuclear-weapon stockpiles, and 
of the recent conclusion of the fourth NPT Review Conference. 
75. For its part, Romania was meeting in good faith its obligations 
under NPT and its multi- and bilateral safeguards agreements, and was 
co-operating with all other Parties toward the achievement of the corresponding 
objectives. Soon after the December revolution his Government had taken a 
number of important measures, one of which had been to declare null and void 
any agreements concluded by the former dictatorial regime which might have run 
counter to Romania's international obligations in the field of nonproliferation, 
and indeed in any other field. Romania had joined the group of 
countries exporting nuclear materials, equipment and technologies by 
officially accepting the non-proliferation standards agreed upon by those 
countries, and had formally joined the Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers 
(INFCIRC/254). It had also decided to join the "Australian Group", which was 
concerned with halting the spread of chemical weapons. At national level, 
moreover, his country's moves toward privatization and a market economy would 
give it the increased flexibility necessary to co-operate more fully in the 
field of non-proliferation. Another positive step had been Romania's 
ratification four months previously of the Conventions on Early Notification 
of a Nuclear Accident and on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency. 
76. At a time when Romania was taking a number of major decisions 
concerning its future economic and social development, great emphasis was 
being laid on the use of nuclear power, particularly in view of the increased 
international co-operation Romania now enjoyed with a number of countries, 
especially Canada. Progress in that field would also be greatly enhanced 
through active co-operation with the Agency, and his country attached great 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 28 


importance to the Agency's programmes on nuclear safety, quality assurance and 
training of operating staff. His authorities also highly valued the Agency's 
technical assistance in connection with the licensing process. 


77. He noted with satisfaction that in 1990 there had been increased 
opportunities for Romanian organizations and scientists involved in the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy to participate in a number of the 
Agency's technical programmes, national or regional projects, expert groups, 
dedicated expert missions and training courses - a trend which should 
certainly continue in the future. 
78. Convinced that the Agency's safeguards, as well as other international 
agreements in the field of nuclear transfers, should operate for all Member 
States, he noted that the winds of change which were now sweeping across 
Europe - a continent in which division, tension and confrontation had 
previously given rise to the cold war and the nuclear threat - were creating a 
situation in which mankind's dream of a nuclear-free world had come that much 
closer to being a reality. The recent events in the Gulf, however, showed 
that a stable world peace still remained to be achieved. The present risk 
that new actors might emerge in the "nuclear game" was making the balance of 
power at both regional and international levels even more complex, 
particularly in the case of those regions whose non-proliferation regime was 
more vulnerable. He therefore strongly supported the Agency's safeguards 
programme for 1991 as a significant means of preventing access to nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology for purposes other than peaceful. In that 
connection, measures should also be taken to assure the physical security of 
nuclear power plants against military attack - a matter which had been 
considered by the recent NPT Review Conference and which was now on the agenda 
of the General Conference. 
79. Another area of vital concern was that of nuclear safety and 
radiological protection, in which connection he noted with satisfaction the 
Agency's readiness to become more active in the review of safety levels of 
older types of reactors. Romania's interest became evident if one took into 
account that four reactors of the older WWER type - the so-called V-230 
design - were now in operation at Kozloduy, Bulgaria, which was very close to 
the Romanian border, and that three major earthquakes - in 1977, 1986 and 1990

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 29 


had shaken the structures and systems of those reactors. He therefore 
expressed his country's willingness to participate in that work, and appealed 
to all other Member States to do likewise, in the interests of reducing the 
risks associated with older reactors and thereby making an important 
contribution toward restoring public confidence in nuclear power. 


80. Expressing full support for the various types of technical assistance 
provided by the Agency, he was happy to announce that Romania was now prepared 
to make a voluntary in-kind contribution to those activities by offering ten 
fellowships of up to 60 man-months in various scientific and educational 
fields, to be used in 1991. He further noted that, in line with Romania's 
efforts to strengthen its relationship with the Agency, the Romanian 
contributions to the Agency's budget for the years 1982-88 had now been paid, 
thus indicating Romania's desire to regain its place in the community of 
Agency Member States. Furthermore, having reviewed the Agency's Regular 
Budget proposals for 1991, his delegtion was now ready to join others in 
approving it, assuming that, as in the past, the Secretariat would take all 
appropriate measures to ensure that the most efficient use possible was made 
of the available resources. 
81. Romania supported the Agency's efforts toward achieving a framework of 
multilateral legal instruments specific to nuclear activities, for example in 
the areas of liability for nuclear damage or of international transboundary 
movements of radioactive wastes. However, there were many other areas still 
requiring attention, in which connection he pointed to the need for an 
instrument to prevent and/or to minimize the risks of radioactive dispersion 
across State boundaries unless the two countries concerned agreed to share 
both the benefits and the risks of nuclear power. Like other countries shaken 
by the Chernobyl accident, Romania appreciated the Conventions on Early 
Notification and on Assistance. However, a legal instrument to prevent the 
danger of transboundary effects from an accident appeared the most effective 
way to minimize that danger and was, therefore, highly desirable. 
82. The international community now had a well-defined legal framework to 
deal with non-proliferation, and it was now important that all States develop 
a comparable framework to deal with safety matters. The community of nations 
should finally accept - particularly in view of the great political changes 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 30 


which were now occurring - that the non-profliferation regime and international 
attention to nuclear safety could prove their full validity only if 
based on the recognition of mutual vital interests and co-operation, to which 
end the Agency could serve as a major catalyst. 


83. In conclusion, he reiterated his country's full support for the work of 
the Agency, the importance of which was to a large extent reflected in the 
remarks made by the Director General during the Board's session the previous 
June to the effect that the long-term energy mix must contain not only a 
continued but also an expanded use of nuclear power globally in order to meet 
energy needs and environmental concerns about global climate change. Finally, 
his delegation had no difficulty in supporting the conclusions of the 
1989 Annual Report. 
Mr. Vajda (Hungary) resumed the Chair. 


84. Mr. GEORGIEV (Bulgaria) congratulated the Agency on its successful 
year in 1989, commending in particular the active and fruitful work of the 
Department of Nuclear Energy and Safety and its growing co-operation with the 
countries of Eastern Europe, most especially, Bulgaria. 
85. The Agency's work on radioactive waste management was crucial to the 
successful development of nuclear power. The setting up of the International 
Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee (INWAC) was a welcome move, as 
was the plan for the new Radioactive Waste Safety Standards (RADWASS) programme. 
He approved the draft Code of Practice on the International Transboundary 
Movement of Radioactive Waste. 
86. The problems of attacks on peaceful nuclear installations, antiterrorist 
measures, and physical protection of nuclear material were also 
related to the safe use of nuclear energy. Bulgaria was prepared to help with 
the search for solutions to those problems inside the framework of the Agency. 
87. The question of non-proliferation had always been a high priority for 
Bulgaria which was a party to NPT and supported fully the Agency's safeguards 
system. Safeguards goals were being fully met in Bulgarian nuclear 
facilities. The recent NPT Review Conference had once again confirmed the 
unique role played by the Agency safeguards system and the need to reinforce 
and universalize that system. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.324 
page 31 


88. Bulgaria also actively supported the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation programme, which was developing apace, and was prepared to extend 
its activities in that area. He thanked the Agency for the technical assistance 
it had provided in Bulgaria. In recent times there had been serious 
problems with international shipments of sealed radioactive sources and 
facilities containing such sources. The Agency might look into the 
possibility of setting up special arrangements in collaboration with its 
Member States to facilitate such shipments since delays held up project 
implementation. Despite serious financial difficulties the Government of 
Bulgaria had decided once again to pay in full its contributions to the TACF 
for 1991. He reiterated the position of his delegation with regard to the 8% 
assessed programme costs in respect of technical assistance received which he 
viewed as being an outdated arrangement; he requested that the Board look 
into that question further. 
89. He approved the draft programme and budget for 1991. Bulgaria would 
strive to fulfil its obligations despite its economic difficulties; he also 
approved the Agency's accounts and thanked the auditor for his work. He 
reiterated the position of his delegation with regard to the staffing of the 
Agency's Secretariat and the proposed amendments to Article VI.A.2 and 
Article VI of the Statute as a whole. 
90. The current oil crisis and the resultant rise in prices gave room for a 
somewhat more optimistic view of the future of nuclear energy. Several 
countries, including Bulgaria, would find it difficult to find alternative 
ways of satisfying their energy requirements except from nuclear power. The 
Agency's efforts to improve nuclear and radiation safety in that area were 
laudable. The development of nuclear power in Bulgaria was taking place in 
the face of major social and economic changes. Pressure of public opinion had 
somewhat retarded development, and the construction of the Belene nuclear 
power plant had been temporarily halted. With the help of the Agency an 
intensive check was being carried out as to the suitability of the site, 
danger from earthquakes, and the technical level of equipment. The Agency had 
already sent two missions and a third and final one was planned after which 
the Government and Parliament of the country would take a final decision as to 
whether construction of the new plant should be continued. Construction of 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.324 
page 32 


Unit 6 at the Kozloduj nuclear power plant was nearing completion. Four 
V-230-type WWER-440 reactors were alrady operating at that plant and Bulgaria 
was concerned to improve the safety of those reactors. Owing to the difficult 
economic situation in the country which had been further exacerbated by the 
crisis in the Persian Gulf, Bulgaria required swift and effective assistance 
both from the Agency and the whole nuclear community to solve that problem. 
There were also plans to send an ASSET mission to the Kozloduj plant. The 
special project on improving the safety of older nuclear power plant units was 
also a most welcome move. 


91. With the help of technical assistance from the Agency Bulgaria had, 
during the previous year, commissioned a facility for irradiating medical 
products. At a meeting in Bulgaria a draft regional agreement among the 
countries of Eastern Europe on the irradiation of food products and trade in 
such products had been agreed upon. A regional agreement among the countries 
of Eastern Europe on early notification and assistance in the event of a 
nuclear accident had been signed in Sofia. A charged ion accelerator had been 
constructed with the assistance of the Agency and would shortly be 
commissioned. 
92. In conclusion, he assured the Agency of the full support of his 
Government in its activities. 
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m. 



/ 


GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
22 April 1991 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

Original: FRENCH 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 


I 


1*1 GC(XXXIV)/9I4. 

THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 18 September 1990, at 10.30 a.m. 


President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 


CONTENTS 


Election of officers and appointment of the General 
Committee (resumed) 


General debate and annual report for 1989 (resumed) 


Statements by the delegates of the following States 
and organization: 


Italy 
Republic of Korea 
Islamic Republic of Iran 
France 
Argentina 
Venezuela 
Mex i co 
Cuba 
World Association of Nuclear Operators 


Paragraphs 


I -2 


3 - 153 


3 -29 


30 -43 
44 -69 
70 -84 
85 -99 
100 -112 
113 -125 
126 -138 
139 -153 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXIV)/INF/287/Rev.2. 


90-04569 
8ll3e/789e 



GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 2 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT, noting that agreement on a candidate had been 
reached in the Middle East and South Asia group, proposed that the General 
Conference elect the delegate of Saudi Arabia as an additional member of the 
General Committee. 
2. The delegate of Saudi Arabia was elected as a member of the General 
Committee. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989 (GC(XXXIV)/915)(resumed) 


3. Ms. AGNELLI (Italy), speaking first on behalf of the 
12 Member States of the European Community, said that the European Council had 
made a declaration on nuclear non-proliferation in Dublin in June 1990 in 
which it recognized the vital role played by the Agency in the development of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the paramount importance of safeguards 
in ensuring the effectiveness of the non-proliferation regime, as well as the 
important contribution made in that connection by the EURATOM (European Atomic 
Energy Community) safeguards system. In that declaration, the Council had 
called for the application of safeguards on as universal a basis as possible, 
expressed concern about the continuing risk that further countries might 
acquire nuclear weapons and called on all States to join efforts to eliminate 
the danger of nuclear proliferation. 
4. The 12 Member States of the European Community Party and not Party to 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliteration of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) were committed to 
working actively to permit access to the benefits of nuclear energy to those 
countries seeking it, through equitable and stable regulations on 
international trade and in compliance with international non-proliferation 
obligations, since they were convinced that such access could only be 
considered within the framework of such regulations and obligations. For 
their part, they had accepted the exercise of international controls on their 
nuclear installations and had adopted limitations on their exports. They 
therefore hoped that progress could be achieved on the basis of equitable and 
stable regulations for international trade in nuclear materials and equipment 
and international commitments to non-proliferation by recipient countries. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 3 


5. The Member States of the European Community fully supported the 
non-proliferation objectives of the NPT and the Agency's Statute in making the 
benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy available to all States and 
they would continue their active support of the Agency's activities. They 
attached particular importance to the safeguards system which, as the Director 
General had rightly emphasized, was an impartial verification service that was 
in the interest of the parties subject to it. 
6. They welcomed the proposal for a medium-term plan, which would make it 
possible to identify priorities, although in order to implement the 
medium-term plan with the limited resources available, current activities 
would also have to be examined. It was to be hoped that that activity could 
enhance the discussions on the role which the Agency could play in the 
worldwide debate on ways of securing energy supplies, while avoiding 
irreversible environmental damage, at a time when there was strong public 
opinion about ecological issues and the delicate link between the environment 
and energy production. 
7. The discussion on nuclear energy was inseparable from a global 
consideration of the relationship between present and future energy policy and 
environmental protection. That was particularly true in a world where energy 
consumption was expected to increase considerably and where many countries did 
not have such a diversity of energy options as in Europe. It was important 
that that growth should not result in increased pollution, in particular an 
increase in gases contributing to the greenhouse effect, or in any other 
environmental damage. In that respect, the Member States of the European 
Community had noted the importance attached by the Director General to 
environmental issues in his statement to the Fourth NPT Review Conference. 
8. Environmental preservation included the need to ensure the highest 
possible degree of safety at all types of nuclear installations, beginning 
with nuclear power plants. While the Agency's Member States bore the primary 
responsibility for the safety of nuclear installations located within their 
territorities, the Members of the European Community appreciated the support 
which the Agency could give its Member States in fulfilling that 
responsibility. The impact of the Chernobyl accident had demonstrated the 
importance of international co-operation in the area of nuclear safety. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page A 

9. The Member States of the European Community hoped that the conclusions 
of the Agency missions to evaluate the radiological consequences of the 
Chernobyl accident would soon be published. They were participating actively 
in the current studies on the safety of nuclear power plants in East European 
countries and were following with particular attention the important changes 
in Central and Eastern Europe, which were opening up the way to new 
co-operation in the nuclear field, particularly in the area of nuclear 
safety. They recognized their duty of solidarity to the countries in that 
region which had appealed to them to share their experience and provide 
assistance. That solidarity manifested itself in the prominent part played by 
the Community and its Member States in the programme of assistance for the 
economic reconstruction of certain Central and Eastern European countries. 
One important sector of that programme was the provision of technical and 
financial resources to improve the safety of nuclear power plants in the 
countries concerned. However, the European Community Member States reaffirmed 
that those countries bore the responsibility for implementing the results of 
the studies and recommendations concerning their nuclear power plants. 
10. The Community had noted with satisfaction that the missions of the 
Operational Safety Review Teams (OSARTs), Radiation Protection Advisory Teams 
(RAPATs) and Waste Management Advisory Programme (WAMAP) had increased during 
the past few years and that recently more frequent use was being made of the 
missions by the Assessment of Safety Significant Events Teams (ASSETs). That 
trend reflected a recognition that the efforts made in the area of safety and 
radiation protection were contributing effectively to the objectives set out 
in Article II of the Statute. The report prepared by the Director General in 
response to resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/508, submitted the previous year by the 
Members of the European Community, on measures to strengthen international 
co-operation in matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection 
outlined strategies for greater and more effective global co-operation in 
nuclear safety. The Community recognized the importance of further developing 
research on the improvement of nuclear safety, environmental protection and 
the design of all reactor types, including new ones. 
11. The Community's proposal to organize a conference on nuclear safety 
in 1991 with as wide a participation as possible aimed to promote all aspects 
of nuclear safety. The Community believed that that conference could make an 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 5 


important contribution to strengthening international co-operation in the area 
of nuclear safety. It would also provide an opportunity for reviewing the 
status of nuclear safety worldwide and would enable Member States to identify 
priority areas and to draw up future action plans. The report of that 
conference should form part of the Agency's contribution to the United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development to be held in 1992. 


12. The Member States of the European Community had noted with satisfaction 
that the Board of Governors had recently approved a code of practice on 
international transfers of radioactive waste, which was a good example of 
international co-operation. 
13. The European Community had followed with interest the revision of the 
mandate of the Standing Committee on International Liability for Nuclear 
Damage, which had already achieved very encouraging results. It hoped that 
the work on the revision of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damage would soon start and that it would lead to a successful 
conclusion. The Community would join in common efforts to achieve early 
agreement on the various issues submitted to the Committee for consideration. 
14. The European Community assigned a high priority to the whole spectrum 
of Agency activities in the field of scientific and technical co-operation. 
It noted with satisfaction that during the past ten years the funds allocated 
to technical assistance and co-operation programmes had increased from 
US $20 million to over $50 million, reflecting a growing interest on the part 
of Member States in those activities and the renewed efforts by the Agency. 
15. The Member States of the European Community welcomed the recent 
conclusion of the African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training related to Nuclear Science and Technology (AFRA). 
The positive experience already gained with similar regional initiatives such 
as the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) and 
the Regional Co-operative Arrangements for Latin America (ARCAL) - showed the 
advantages of such co-operation. 
16. The Agency played a key role in supporting the development of nuclear 
technology and in ensuring fair access to nuclear resources. The Fourth NPT 
Review Conference, which had just completed its work, had not been able to 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 6 


agree on a final document, but it had permitted a thorough review of the 
implementation of the NPT. The Agency should analyse the material produced by 
the Main Committees II and III with the greatest attention. In that 
connection, the Community looked forward to the strengthening of the Agency's 
role as a major guarantor of an effective non-proliferation regime and would 
play its part to ensure that the Agency continued to make a vital contribution 
to dialogue and co-operation in all regions of the world. 


17. Speaking on behalf of Italy, she had a few additional remarks to make. 
18. The basic objectives of Italy's energy policy continued to be energy 
saving, assurance of supply and environmental protection. Since Italy was 
largely dependent on energy imports, that policy aimed to achieve an effective 
and competitive system which fully complied with safety requirements and the 
need to protect the environment. 
19. The 1987 referendum had resulted in a five-year moratorium on the 
construction of nuclear power plants. The debate on the country's energy 
future was currently being given new emphasis. Account had to be taken of the 
growing energy requirements and increased public concern about the 
environmental impact of energy production. In any case, the use of nuclear 
energy would only be possible when a new inherently safe technology could be 
adopted. Future plants would have to ensure that no radiation was released 
even in the event of a malfunction of the facility, so that it would not be 
necessary to evacuate the neighbouring population. 
20. The Italian Government was committed to decommissioning the Caorso and 
Trino Vercellese nuclear power plants in the expectation that research and 
development activities would provide new solutions to safety problems. At the 
same time, Italy was encouraging research on the design and development of new 
reactors with enhanced passive and inherent safety features, together with 
research in the areas of radioactive waste management and fusion. 
21. Italy wished to underline the need to establish a comprehensive system 
of international guarantees in the field of nuclear safety. At present, the 
safety regime basically relied on national initiatives, supplemented by a 
number of actions taken at international level. Regulatory practices adopted 
and safety levels achieved varied significantly in different countries and 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 7 


regions. Strengthening the international safety regime would help make 
national systems more uniform and raise the general level of safety. 


22. With regard to the definition of safety criteria and requirements, a 
set of codes and guidelines already existed for the present generation of 
nuclear power reactors, namely the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) documents, 
which had been drafted by the Agency with the assistance of all Member States 
and which were constantly updated. The revision of those documents should 
focus primarily on the definition of stricter safety requirements for a new 
generation of reactors with enhanced inherent and passive safety features. 
The NUSS documents should be a binding reference for national regulatory 
systems. Each country would of course be free to supplement the system if it 
saw fit, in accordance with its national responsibilities and with due regard 
for its international commitments, but in no case should national safety 
criteria be less stringent than those agreed upon at international level. 
23. At present, the responsibility for verifying compliance with safety 
requirements lay essentially with national authorities. The huge volume of 
control activities worldwide would alone make it impossible to assign that 
task to an international institution, not to mention the problems of national 
sovereignty which would be involved. That verification should therefore 
continue to be carried out essentially at national level. However, procedures 
should be set up at international level to verify the adequacy of activities 
carried out in each country. An international institution such as the Agency 
could be given the responsibility of verifying the quality of the safety 
regime in individual countries. To that end it would be necessary to 
encourage the rationalization, simplification and harmonization of national 
procedures, to establish mechanisms for the continuous quality assessment of 
national safety regimes based primarily on the implementation of adequate 
quality assurance programmes and to empower the Agency to conduct safety 
assessments similar to those it currently carried out under the OSART and 
RAPAT programmes, not only at the request of countries, but also at its own 
discretion. Those measures should be internationally accepted under the 
auspices of the Agency, which would be given the relevant regulatory and 
control tasks. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 8 


24. Italy supported the Agency's project to establish an international 
programme of co-operation on the safety of WWER reactors. That project was 
currently being reviewed to determine ways of providing technical assistance. 
A final decision would soon be made, taking into account the results of the 
advisory group meeting held in Vienna the previous week. 
25. Italy also encouraged direct initiatives with the Central and Eastern 
European States which, together with Austria, participated in the Pentagonal 
initiative. Under that programme, the Italian energy authority ENEA was 
preparing a project to provide assistance and to train managers for the 
nuclear industry, since Italy shared the desire to develop activities related 
to the safety of nuclear power plants in other countries. Furthermore, the 
members of the Pentagonal were negotiating an agreement on early exchange of 
information in the event of a nuclear accident, based on an automatic system 
of communication. Italy hoped that that system would be accepted and applied 
on as wide a scale as possible and would complement the existing international 
agreements. 
26. The aforementioned considerations clearly showed the interdependence of 
all countries in the field of nuclear safety. However, the chances of fuller 
accceptance of nuclear power would be limited if the public continued to be 
concerned about other countries* nuclear reactors. In that context, the 
Agency had a unique role to play, but it needed to improve the important 
instruments developed so far and Member States should co-operate fully to make 
those instruments effective. 
27. The contribution which nuclear power could make to environmental 
protection was an opportunity which should not be missed. Italy fully 
supported the Agency's expanded activities on the comparative assessment of 
risks and safety for nuclear power and other energy sources planned for the 
following two-year cycle, which would require the full participation of other 
international organizations. 
28. The problems raised by the use of nuclear energy varied from one 
country to another and it was therefore difficult for the Agency to draw up 
programmes taking into account very different expectations. While being fully 
aware of those difficulties, Italy was very much in favour of the decision 
recently taken by the Director General, and supported by the Board, to prepare 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 9 


during the following few months a medium-term plan for the Agency's 
activities. That would provide an excellent opportunity for carrying out a 
thorough concerted study of the role which the Agency would be called on to 
play in the future and the way in which it could carry out that role. 


29. The issue of the revision of Article VI of the Statute could not be 
eluded indefinitely. Italy was convinced that the growing scope of the Agency 
urgently required broader, more equitable representation in the Board of 
Governors. It was, as was evident from the proposals which it had repeatedly 
submitted, well aware of the need to ensure balanced representation in the 
Board and to preserve and enhance the effectiveness of the Agency's governing 
body and its decision-making processes. It trusted that that problem would be 
tackled with determination and dynamism during the following few months. 
30. Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) said that even though the 
ideological confrontation between East and West was coming to an end and the 
world was on the verge of a grand reconciliation, certain regional, political 
and military conflicts could still threaten world peace. Furthermore, 
problems such as widespread famine, dangerous diseases and serious threats to 
the environment darkened the future of humanity. The international community 
should adopt a harmonious approach to deal with those problems before they 
became uncontrollable. The judicious development and application of science 
and technology could provide key solutions to those problems. He was very 
happy that he had participated in the informal meeting of ministers of 
Member States attending the session of the General Conference which had been 
organized with the support of the Agency in order to study the possibility of 
establishing an international forum to discuss existing and future scientific 
and technological problems. 
31. As had been stated at the Fourth NPT Review Conference, the 
strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime was essential to the 
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Acceptance of the 
NPT regime should be further expanded and there should be more effective 
implementation of safeguards. His country was highly encouraged by the fact 
that China and France, among others, had participated in the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference as observers. It urged countries which had not yet joined the NPT 
and States Party to the Treaty which had not yet concluded a safeguards 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 10 


agreement with the Agency to do so. During the Fourth NPT Review Conference, 
his country had expressed its serious concern about the fact that the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which had significant nuclear 
activities, had not yet concluded full-scope safeguards with the Agency almost 
five years after it had joined the NPT. It therefore called upon that country 
once again to conclude such an agreement with the Agency without further delay. 


32. Under the international non-proliferation regime, efforts should be 
made to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy not only to cope with the 
oil crisis, but also to re-establish a clean environment. To achieve that 
goal, industrialized countries should assist developing countries in using 
nuclear power and make the necessary technology available more easily. 
33. Existing nuclear power technology had been subject to intense scrutiny 
in terms of safety and public acceptance. It was time to look into the 
development of a safer and more economical new nuclear power technology, using 
advanced techniques, within the framework of extensive international 
co-operation. The Republic of Korea was planning to conduct research and 
development work on a new type of advanced passively safe power reactor which 
would be easily accepted by the public. It was also studying the possibility 
of establishing passively safe small or medium-sized plants mounted on barges 
near the seashore. That solution would shorten plant construction time 
significantly, improve quality control and assurance and lower electricity 
generation costs and might help to solve the difficulties of site acquisition 
on land. His country proposed that all Member States interested should join 
it in studying that idea and possibly in carrying out such studies. It 
planned to co-ordinate its work closely with the Agency's programme of user 
requirements for the evaluation of advanced reactor systems. 
34. Reviewing the main developments of his country's nuclear power 
programme since the previous session of the General Conference, he said that 
an additional unit had started commercial operation at the end of 1989. There 
were at present a total of nine nuclear power plants in the Republic of Korea, 
accounting for more than half of its electricity production. Its nuclear 
power programme had been further expanded. The construction permit for two 
additional PWR units had been issued at the end of 1989. Those two units 
would enter into commercial operation in 1995 and 1996, respectively. In 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 11 


addition, negotiations were being conducted on three more units (two PWRs and 
one CANDU reactor), which were scheduled to be operational before the end of 
the century. The design and contruction of those plants would be carried out 
on a standardized basis to shorten construction time and to reduce generating 
costs. 


35. Recent forecasts suggested that the Republic of Korea would need an 
additional 50 nuclear power plants by the end of the year 2030. That would 
mean that an average of three new plants would have to be constructed every 
two years. As far as the choice of reactors was concerned, it planned to 
continue to use advanced PWR and improved CANDU technologies during the next 
two decades and hoped that passively safe reactors would be commercially 
available from about 2005. That long-term nuclear programme would be 
officially adopted by the Korean Atomic Energy Commission by the end of 1990. 
In that connection, he thanked the Director General who, in his speech at the 
opening of the Fourth NPT Review Conference in Geneva, had kindly said that 
the Republic of Korea was an excellent model for other countries in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear power. 
36. During 1990, the Government of the Republic of Korea had set up an 
independent regulatory organization, the Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety, 
and had promulgated a law to provide people living near operating nuclear 
power plants or those under construction with various advantages, including 
regional development programmes. 
37. The Republic of Korea had been producing fuel for CANDU reactors 
locally since July 1987 and for PWR reactors since 1989. It was also making 
long-term efforts to develop advanced fuels for PWRs and CANDU reactors within 
the framework of international co-operation. 
38. Together with the development of front-end fuel cycle technology, the 
Republic of Korea placed strong emphasis on the management of radioactive 
wastes, which had been rapidly accumulating during the operation of nuclear 
power plants and as a result of radioisotope applications. It had established 
a long-term plan of radioactive waste management which called for the 
construction of final disposal facilities for low- and medium-level wastes by 
1995 and an away-from-reactor storage facility for spent fuel by 1997. He 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 12 


hoped that the Agency would be able to provide internationally acceptable 
codes and standards on radioactive waste management in a timely manner. 


39. His country had a sincere desire to share its experiences and 
capabilities with other Member States and, in particular, with developing 
countries. For that purpose, it was going to host the third RCA regional 
training course on nuclear power project planning and implementation in 
October 1990. 
40. His country had been steadily increasing its contribution to the 
Agency's activities, particularly since 1987, when it had become a donor 
country. It had donated 30 personal computers to the Agency's Secretariat the 
previous year and had supported the Agency's footnote-a/ project in Egypt on 
computer-aided nuclear safety analysis. It was also providing financial 
support for the Agency's high-level conference on nuclear safety to be held in 
1991 and it planned to increase its contribution to the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation programme. 
41. It was often suggested that countries which had active nuclear power 
programmes and which were strongly committed to the achievement of the 
Agency's objectives should be better represented in the Agency. His country 
would sincerely like to have more opportunities to share the experience and 
knowledge it had gained through developing its nuclear power generating 
capability. It was very interested in the discussion on the revision of 
Article VI of the Statute as a whole and asked that its request to be allowed 
to become a permanent member of the Board of Governors be given favourable 
consideration. His Government was also willing to increase its technical and 
financial support for Agency programmes. 
42. The Republic of Korea had joined the Convention on Early Notification 
of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a 
Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency and was prepared to co-operate with 
other Member States in those important areas of nuclear safety. Also, a 
nuclear co-operation agreement had been concluded in May 1990 between the 
Republic of Korea and Japan to strengthen co-operation in the area of nuclear 
safety and related research and development activities. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 13 


43. In conclusion, he was satisfied with the way in which the Agency had 
carried out its work to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to 
implement the non-proliferation regime, and he recalled his country's firm 
commitment to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in accordance with the 
letter and spirit of the NPT and to growing co-operation with the peaceful 
nuclear community. His country, whose experience in the Agency had been 
enriching and stimulating, had demonstrated that a poor developing country 
could become a dynamic and responsible member of that organization. It was 
grateful to the Agency for the assistance which it had given in past years and 
pledged to work to make the Agency more active and important in future years. 
44. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his delegation, 
for the ninth time, was denouncing the violation of the rights of other 
nations before the General Conference. Its repeated condemnation of the 
spirit of aggression in any place or form had scarcely been taken seriously at 
first, but the passage of time and the perseverance of his courageous people 
had finally shown that his country's conviction had been justified. 
45. Recent developments had once again emphasized the extreme strategic 
importance of oil, which, owing to its scarcity and value, would in the future 
be used not as a source of energy, but for specific applications for which no 
substitute was available. Nuclear power was the only viable energy option for 
the future, but it remained beyond the reach of many countries, particularly 
in the developing world, and the situation was continuing to deteriorate, as 
his delegation had been pointing out for many years. 
46. The special scientific meeting held during the thirty-third session of 
the General Conference had had the objective of investigating new approaches 
to the design of nuclear power plants in the light of the new requirements for 
electrical utilities and regulatory bodies, environmental issues, and the 
changes in public opinion resulting from the serious nuclear accidents which 
had taken place in recent years. Those objectives had not been fully 
achieved, firstly because only the point of view of the industrialized 
countries - in other words the main beneficiaries of nuclear technology - had 
been taken into consideration, and secondly, because the main concern of most 
speakers had apparently been to determine how public opinion could be 
persuaded to support nuclear power following the recent accidents, whereas 
that issue was primarily the concern of nuclear power plant vendors. 

GG(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 14 


47. However, it was clearly an international problem. If the world was 
being asked to accept the inherent risks of nuclear power, then it should also 
be provided with its potential benefits on an equitable basis. Unfortunately, 
that was not the case. Firstly, because of discrimination between various 
countries on political grounds, and secondly, because nuclear power programmes 
had become so capital-intensive that only the wealthiest nations could afford 
to finance them. Those issues deserved closer attention. 
48. Technological barriers were erected by the majority of developed 
countries in order to preserve proprietary rights and maintain a monopoly on 
certain technologies. That was particularly the case in the nuclear industry 
where growth was strictly regulated by political considerations, despite the 
NPT, the Agency's full-scope safeguards programme and other treaties and 
safeguards regimes. Thus, contrary to the statutory objectives of the Agency, 
nuclear technology had been stagnating in the developing countries for a 
number of years, whereas the majority of developed countries were showing 
considerable growth in that field. It was interesting to note that the 
developing countries accounted for only about 5% of the total nucleargenerated 
electricity in the world. That showed clearly that those countries 
were not enjoying the advantages of nuclear technology, even though they were 
expected to share fully in any potential transboundary consequences. 
49. In addition to political constraints, the passage of time and 
over-regulation had made the nuclear industry extremely complex and 
capital-intensive. Although some developing countries were not faced with 
political barriers, the sheer magnitude of the required investments, 
particularly for nuclear power plants, had made any venture into that field 
practically impossible. The stagnation of the nuclear power programmes of the 
majority of developing countries, in the form of half-completed power plants 
and dormant nuclear projects, could clearly be attributed to financing issues. 
50. Nuclear power thus presented a contradiction: although it was a 
desirable energy resource because it was generally well suited to replacing 
oil for electricity production as well as combating environmental degradation, 
and particularly the greenhouse effect, the capital cost of nuclear power was 
high and currently beyond the reach of many countries. It was therefore vital 
to adopt a fresh approach to nuclear power plant technology in order to reduce 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 15 


investment costs without compromising safety and operability levels. His 
country firmly believed that nuclear power was the only viable energy option 
for the future. However, its effectiveness would depend to a large extent on 
its ability to compete safely and economically with other energy sources, and 
on whether all countries could benefit from it without political 
discrimination. 


51. His country had described in detail its concerns about those issues 
during the topical seminar on the financing of nuclear power projects in 
developing countries, which had been held in Jakarta at the beginning of the 
month, and it was imperative to reiterate them in the hope that the developing 
countries would reach a consensus on the subject. That applied to both 
oil-importing and oil-exporting countries, as the latter would be more 
seriously affected than the others if, when their oil reserves were exhausted, 
they were unable to use other energy sources. The oil-exporting countries, 
and particularly some members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC), should therefore be warned against the future dangers of 
overproduction within an economic framework based solely on oil revenues. 
52. His country was fully committed to the NPT, to which it was a 
signatory, and it supported the Treaty's extension beyond 1995. It had taken 
an active part in the Fourth NPT Review Conference, where it had delivered a 
critical statement emphasizing that although almost all non-nuclear-weapon 
States had fulfilled their obligations under the terms of the Treaty, the 
nuclear-weapon States had generally not done so. 
53. On an issue which was directly relevant to the Agency, namely the 
application of Article IV of the Treaty, he recalled that under that Article 
the Parties undertook to facilitate the exchange of equipment, materials and 
scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, especially for the benefit of non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the 
Treaty. A review of the situation over the past 20 years showed that the 
developing States Party to the Treaty had not only not benefited from the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, but had also had to face growing and often 
insurmountable constraints in that area. Restrictive measures adopted by the 
industrialized countries, particularly the nuclear-weapon States, to curb the 
transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes were a clear violation of 
Article IV of the Treaty. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 16 


54. The Islamic Republic of Iran had been particularly affected by those 
measures, as they had prevented it from completing the construction of its two 
nuclear power plants, in which it had already invested almost $4 billion. Its 
research activities had also been hampered by export restrictions. Severe 
discriminatory measures had been applied, although it had been one of the 
first States to accede to the NPT and that all of its nuclear facilities were 
subject to full-scope Agency safeguards. 
55. The Agency's promotional activities should be granted at least the same 
importance as its safeguards activities. The disparity in those areas was 
shown by the repeated reductions in the promotional and technical assistance 
budgets on the one hand, and the increases in the safeguards budget on the 
other. To ensure the continued existence of the NPT and scrupulous compliance 
with it, attention should be given to shortcomings in the way it was 
implemented. Its success would depend, to a large extent, on the will of the 
nuclear-weapon States to rectify those shortcomings. 
56. Thus, while the gap between North and South in the fields of science 
and technology was growing, the credibility of certain international 
organizations and certain bilateral and multilateral agreements and treaties 
was being seriously compromised. That trend also jeopardized the future role 
of the NPT as a potential instrument for maintaining world peace and 
security. 
57. If peaceful nuclear technology was to be applied worldwide without 
discrimination, and nuclear power was to be a viable energy option, a number 
of measures would have to be taken by all the parties concerned. 
58. First of all, the Agency had a vital role to play and it should be made 
clear to the politicians responsible for the nuclear power industry that no 
developing country had yet succeeded in diverting nuclear material from a 
power plant for military purposes, as had been concluded in all of the 
Agency's safeguards implementation reports. 
59. Next, the supplier countries should renew their efforts to standardize 
their nuclear power plants. The nuclear industry as a whole could no longer 
sustain the development of about ten different types of reactor. The best 
performing systems currently in operation should be selected for 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 17 


standardization. Of course, studies relating to new concepts such as 


intrinsically safe reactors should be continued. However, experience showed 
that some of the present systems, when operated by well-trained personnel, 
were sufficiently safe and could be standardized. 


60. Licensing procedures should be subject to extensive review and 
streamlining, particularly in some supplier countries, without compromising 
the safety and reliability of the systems. Many redundant requirements should 
be removed, and again standardization should be the aim. 
61. Finally, the retroactive laws and regulations which had been periodically 
enacted by the industrialized countries had considerably eroded the 
confidence of developing countries in bilateral agreements and contracts 
concluded with the suppliers. International measures should be adopted in 
order to protect developing countries in that respect and the Agency should 
take the initiative of establishing the necessary mechanisms. 
62. The international community would find that such measures would 
contribute much towards reducing the technological gap between North and South 
and preserving the NPT. 
63. The Agency's safeguards system was an important instrument of 
verification, but the debate on safeguards financing had become unnecessarily 
complicated. The application of safeguards was one of the Agency's two main 
objectives, as laid down in Article 11 of the Statute. It was therefore 
logical that a substantial portion of Member States' annual contributions 
should be required to cover the expenses involved. It should be recognized, 
however, that those expenses had increased considerably owing to the growth in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in line with the other objective mentioned 
in Article II of the Statute. That increase must be met by Member States, but 
the main issue was to decide how that should be done. 
64. It would seem fair and logical for the additional expenses to be borne 
by those Member States which had benefited most from the use of nuclear 
energy. It was quite unacceptable to expect a Member State whose nuclear 
facilities had not changed since the establishment of the Agency, or which 
si.ill had no such facilities, to cover the costs of safeguards implementation 
in other Member States which had increased their nuclear capacity and the 
number of their facilities at an enormous rate. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 18 


65. The key issue was to establish a link between the nuclear capability 
and facilities of each Member State and the benefit it derived from the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy in general, on the one hand, and the 
particular Member State's share of the additional safeguards expenses, on the 
other. 
66. Accordingly, he proposed that the following factors be taken into 
account to ensure the fair allocation of safeguards expenses among 
Member States: nuclear-weapon capability; number of nuclear power plants 
(some Member States had proposed taking into account the percentage of 
electricity produced by nuclear plants, but that could be misleading as such a 
percentage did not accurately reflect the share of safeguards expenses); 
number of nuclear research facilities under safeguards; and number of nuclear 
installations (enrichment, reprocessing, and fuel fabrication plants, etc.) 
under safeguards. No other factor, such as the economic situation, should be 
considered. If the economy of a country was in a poor state, it was unlikely 
that it would have a well-developed nuclear infrastructure. 
67. Any attempt to spread the burden of safeguards expenses among 
developing countries which were neither active in the nuclear field nor in a 
position to benefit from the advantages of nuclear power would be 
unacceptable. That opinion was surely shared by many other developing 
countries, although some developed countries had stated the contrary. 
68. His country, which had been the first State of the Middle East to 
initiate, in 1974, the proposal for turning the Middle East into a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone, continued to support that proposal, while regretting 
that Israeli activities and nuclear capability remained an obstacle. 
Moreover, paragraph 2 of resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/506, in which the General 
Conference had requested the Director General "... to consult with the States 
concerned in the Middle East area with a view to applying Agency safeguards to 
all nuclear installations in the area ...", had not led to any results because 
Israel persisted in refusing to accept full-scope Agency safeguards. 
Nevertheless, the Islamic Republic of Iran was prepared to support any 
initiative which would bring about the application of Agency safeguards to all 
nuclear facilities in the Middle East and the eventual establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in that region. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 19 


69. The Iranian Atomic Energy Organization was continuing to pursue 
peaceful activities at its nuclear research centre, despite the difficulties 
it faced with regard to nuclear technology and material transfer. Nuclear 
technology was used for the production of radioisotopes and radiopharmaceuticals. 
Local industry was also making greater use of the gamma 
irradiation centre's facilities. Seminars and conferences had also been 
organized to encourage fundamental research in physics and nuclear science as 
well as their applications. For example, an international conference on high 
levels of natural radiation was due to be held from 3 to 7 November 1990 in 
Ramsar. That conference had been organized by the Iranian Atomic Energy 
Organization in co-operation with the Agency, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). The international 
scientific community had already reacted very favourably to that initiative, 
whose results, it was to be hoped, would bring benefits to all parties 
concerned. 
70. Mr. ROUVILLOIS (France) said that the past year had been rich in 
events whose full implications would probably only become clear in a few 
decades. Recent developments in the international situation had somewhat 
overshadowed the satisfaction of witnessing the processes of renewal in 
Central and Eastern Europe, but the gradual coming together of East and West 
had given greater impetus to discussion and co-operation at the international 
level, particularly in the area of safety. 
71. The international nuclear community recognized that nuclear safety was 
of global importance, as the consequences of an accident would extend beyond 
national boundaries, and questions of safety were a major issue in the 
acceptability of nuclear power to the public. Furthermore, calls for a high 
level of safety regardless of the country or technology in question must be 
backed up by solidarity with countries whose safety level was judged 
insufficient. Any action by the nuclear community demanded an international 
consensus, and the Agency had played a role in promoting international 
co-operation though the development of a universally acceptable set of safety 
objectives and criteria. 
72. The NUSS codes and guides and the basic principles drawn up by the 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (1NSAG) were references that were 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 20 


universally accepted by Agency Member States and should be implemented by 
them. They were constantly revised in order to take into account technical 
progress and experience gained, and they thus provided an undisputed basis for 
any future progress in safety at the international level. However, it should 
be remembered that only the requesting countries could decide what action to 
take following the results of analyses carried out at their request in their 
territory. Those results were neither a warning nor an injunction, but a set 
of reports and recommendations. 


73. It was no longer sufficient to seek excellence in safety at the 
national level. Research and progress in that area must be global in nature, 
and information on the progress made should be shared. The Agency remained 
the principal forum for expressing needs, analysing difficulties, collecting 
data, and drawing up the necessary recommendations with the participation of 
all concerned. It had amply proved its effectiveness, for instance by 
producing a code of practice on the transboundary movement of radioactive 
waste. France, which had played an active role in achieving the consensus on 
the adoption of resolution GC(XXXII)/RES/490 in 1988, welcomed that prompt 
success in such a sensitive and important area. There was no doubt that the 
Agency would become even more important in the future. 
74. His country continued to believe that the development of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy was inseparable from appropriate action against the 
risks of nuclear proliferation. What had been true at the very beginning of 
the development of nuclear energy was even more so at the present time, when 
all Members should show greater vigilance with regard to nuclear 
proliferation. The improvement in relations between East and West should not 
be accompanied by the development of new nuclear, ballistic or chemical 
weapons programmes in other regions of the world. 
75. France had been following a rigorous policy against nuclear 
proliferation for many years, was continuing that policy in ever closer 
co-operation with its main allies, and had contributed to strengthening 
European unity in that area. As the representative of Italy had stated on 
behalf of the Member States of the European Community, the Dublin summit had 
reaffirmed their common stand on that issue as well as their determination to 
take more concerted action. The same intention had been expressed by the 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 21 


Heads of State and Government of the seven most industrialized countries at 
the Houston summit. Finally, at the Fourth NPT Review Conference, where 
France had been represented by an observer to demonstrate its readiness for 
dialogue with all its partners, the same concern had been expressed by the 
vast majority of States, including developing countries. The strengthening of 
international agreement on that subject gave grounds for satisfaction, as it 
appeared more necessary than ever to have as wide a consensus as possible in 
favour of a stable non-proliferation regime and to reconcile the development 
of civil nuclear activities and the need for binding international commitments. 


76. Nuclear energy was obviously one of the essential responses to a world 
situation characterized by rapid demographic growth, increasing energy demand 
and growing concern for environmental protection. It was also generally 
acknowledged that in many countries, increased use of nuclear power would 
require external support to enhance technological capabilities, provide 
funding and mobilize manpower. One of the Agency's main tasks was to 
contribute to that endeavour through its technical assistance activities, 
including personnel training programmes. France was increasing its efforts in 
that area, through closer involvement in Agency projects and by increasing its 
total financial contribution. 
77. Lastly, the implementation of strict non-proliferation controls was 
widely recognized as a prerequisite for the development of nuclear power. In 
that area, the Agency made an irreplaceable contribution through its 
safeguards system. The Agency should also be the main forum for working out 
the difficult consensus referred to previously. It was a difficult task, but 
there was no other way. Joint monitoring of the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy was a means of defending it, and of defending development in general. 
Nothing could be more damaging or unrealistic than to claim that the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was solely the concern of the developed 
countries, or that it was an issue for confrontation between North and South. 
It was clearly an issue of interest to everyone, and particularly to the vast 
majority of developing countries which were scrupulously honouring their 
commitments and had nothing to fear from the strict application of 
international safeguards. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 22 


78. Faced with a growing workload and a constant budget, the Agency was 
forced to make choices; rigorous analysis of priorities and regular evaluation 
of results were therefore essential to ensure both the effective use of the 
Agency's resources and the co-ordination of its activities to complement those 
of Member States. 
79. There was at present a growing conviction that nuclear power might 
enter a new period of expansion, and probably would do so before the end of 
the decade. Preparations should be made by developing products appropriate 
for potential future markets and by seeking solutions to the problem of public 
acceptance of nuclear power. In that spirit, France was continuing to develop 
its own nuclear power programme. Substantial research and development work 
was being conducted on reactors to take over from the present generation 
towards 2010-2015. In the same spirit, the replacement of current reactors 
made it necessary to give thought to the fate of shutdown reactors, and 
consequently to add to the present level of experience with decommissioning. 
80. Where the fuel cycle was concerned, France was actively pursuing 
development work on laser technology for uranium enrichment, on the use of MOX 
fuels, and of course on reprocessing. The facilities at the La Hague UP3 
plant would be completed and put into operation during 1990. 
81. France was also giving close attention to waste storage options. 
Construction of a second storage site for low-level wastes had begun. In the 
interests of securing public support for its nuclear power programme, the 
French Government had recently decided for the time being to discontinue its 
siting study for a deep repository in order to allow time for a debate on the 
technical choices involved and for the improvement of public relations. 
82. As absolute priority would continue to be given to safety in the 
future, a significant amount of work was directed to that end, often in an 
international framework, and particularly at the European level. 
83. Co-operation in Europe of course primarily meant strengthening the 
unity of the European Economic Community, with the establishment of a single 
market in 1992, and with the free circulation of energy and in particular 
electricity within the Community. But since the rapprochement with Central 
and Eastern Europe, a new and hopeful dialogue had begun and new initiatives 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 23 


were being taken, for example with Czechoslovakia, Hungary, the German 
Democratic Republic and Poland. In addition, the foundations for easier 
co-operation with the Soviet Union had been laid in the fields of science, 
technology and industry. 


84. The internationalization of all aspects of nuclear energy was becoming 
more essential every day, particularly since 1986 when it had become clear how 
an event in one part of the world could affect all other parts, however 
remote. That irreversible trend should also have a positive effect, as it was 
not only the problems which transcended boundaries, but also the search for 
solutions. 
85. Mr. M0ND1N0 (Argentina) said that the decade which was beginning 
should enable nuclear power to take its rightful place as the only technically 
reliable, safe and clean energy option. The distrust caused by the accidents 
at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl was receding, but until ecological groups 
recognized the non-pollutant nature of nuclear power, efforts would have to be 
made to develop new power reactor models which were even safer and more 
economical than those of the present generation. Confident that the future of 
nuclear power was a promising one, Argentina intended to continue to develop 
its capacity to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and to pursue the 
permanent objectives of its nuclear programme until they had been achieved. 
86. Argentina, where nuclear power had provided an average of 16.3% of 
total electricity production in 1990, had the satisfaction of having completed 
by itself the repair of the Atucha I nuclear power plant, which had been shut 
down in August 1988 for 16 months owing to faults in some of the fuel 
channels, after 14 years of effective operation, some of which had been 
characterized by load factors which were among the highest in the world. That 
repair, conducted under difficult conditions, had forced the technicians and 
companies in the nuclear industry to develop special techniques and tools. 
During the last few months, the plant, which had been in operation again since 
the beginning of 1990, had operated at 100% of its capacity under excellent 
safety conditions. The technical solution adopted had been endorsed by a 
group of experts sent, at the request of the Argentine authorities, by the 
Agency to evaluate the work undertaken. Argentina was of course ready to make 
that experience available to the Agency and countries which wished to profit 
from it. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 24 


87. Argentina was in a position to announce that it had completed the 
conversion of its main research and radioisotope production reactor to the use 
of low-enriched uranium by means of a technology developed in Argentina. In 
addition, on the fortieth anniversary of the National Atomic Energy 
Commission, a set of hot cells, also designed and constructed locally, had 
been inaugurated to analyse the behaviour of irradiated materials. 
88. Argentina was working actively on a programme for the eradication of 
the Mediterranean fruit fly and hoped that, through those efforts, it would be 
able to guarantee the quality of the fruit which it exported. In the area of 
cobalt therapy, it was developing special equipment which it also made 
available to friendly countries. In addition, it had completed the 
feasibility study for a high-level radioactive waste disposal facility and it 
was making that study available to the Agency's Secretariat. 
89. Within the constraints imposed by its economic difficulties, Argentina 
was continuing its international co-operation activities, both at the 
multilateral and bilateral level. Within the framework of the Agency, it had 
continued to participate in the technical co-operation programme and in ARCAL, 
as was demonstrated by the interregional courses it had hosted, the regional 
workshops it had organized, and the fact that in 1989 it had been fourth in 
the ranking of Member States in terms of the number of experts and lecturers 
provided to the Agency and tenth in the ranking for provision of training in 
the form of study visits and fellowships. Argentina reiterated its full 
support for the ARCAL programme, the second stage of which had got off to a 
good start. The programme was a real stimulus to development and regional 
integration in that area which was so important for the welfare of the people 
of Latin America. 
90. As in previous years, he was in a position to pledge, on behalf of his 
Government, a voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1991. 
91. At the bilateral level, Argentina had co-operated with a large number 
of friendly nations with which it had concluded 21 co-operation agreements 
relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the most recent one being 
with the Republic of Indonesia. Others were currently being negotiated and 
would soon be added to that list. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 25 


92. There was reason to draw attention once again to the growing significant 
co-operation between Argentina and Brazil, the continuity of which was 
guaranteed by the political will reaffirmed on many occasions by both 
Governments. The accelerated integration process, adopted with resolute 
determination by Argentina and Brazil, and the perfect understanding between 
the two countries in the nuclear field provided all international forums which 
had expressed concerns on the subject in the past with the best assurance that 
they could discard once and for all the notion of an alleged risk of a nuclear 
arms race in Latin America. 
93. Argentina was particularly pleased to note the beginning of a new stage 
in its co-operation with Chile, with which it had had close links in the 
nuclear field for many years. The beginning of that stage had recently been 
confirmed during the first meeting of the current presidents of both countries. 
94. Argentina continued to be convinced of the need to make the benefits of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy available to all, without imposing 
restrictions based on equivocal arguments relating to the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, but with the requirement and acceptance of adequate 
assurances that the technologies, installations and nuclear materials 
transferred would be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. 
95. Turning to the Agency's activities, he recalled that at the nineteenth 
session of the General Conference, held in New Delhi in 1979, his Government, 
considering that the type of technical assistance offered by the Agency did 
not meet its specific needs, had announced its decision not to apply for such 
assistance as of 1 January 1980, while making a firm commitment to maintain, 
and even increase, its contribution to the technical assistance programme in 
support of other developing countries. During the whole of the 1980s, 
Argentina had faithfully adhered to those commitments. Having carried out a 
thorough analysis of the evolution of the technical assistance provided by the 
Agency, his Government now believed that the reason which had prompted it to 
take its decision in 1979 was no longer applicable. Accordingly, Argentina 
would begin to take advantage of Agency technical assistance again as of 
1 January 1991. That major change in a policy followed for more than a decade 
reflected a clear recognition of the fact that, through the Secretariat's 
continuous efforts, the volume and quality of current technical assistance and 
co-operation activities had reached satisfactory levels. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 26 


96. With regard to safeguards, it was gratifying to note that there had 
been no case of failure to fulfil the commitments undertaken by Member States 
and that the Secretariat was therefore in a position to state that no material 
subject to safeguards had been diverted for non-peaceful purposes. 
97. As to the problem of the financing of safeguards, which had still not 
been settled after more than 15 years, his delegation reaffirmed its 
conviction that the problem would not be solved simply by finding ingenious 
formulas, but by determining how the cost of safeguards could be kept to 
acceptable levels in future without damage to their credibility. It was 
obvious that, with the impending upturn in the use of nuclear power, the 
application of existing safeguards methods to an ever-growing volume of 
material and number of nuclear facilities would soon lead to an impossible 
situation where Member States would no longer be able to finance the system. 
That was why, at the last meetings of the Board of Governors, his delegation 
had stressed the vital need to rationalize those methods and to focus efforts 
on the application of safeguards to direct use material, and to the limited 
number of facilities where such material was produced, treated or stored. 
98. His delegation was satisfied with the measures taken by the Secretariat 
in the area of nuclear safety. Argentina had acceded to all the existing 
international conventions in that area and had participated actively in 
drafting the new code of practice on the international transboundary movement 
of radioactive waste which had been submitted to the General Conference for 
its consideration and the proposals for amending the Vienna Convention on 
Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, which it hoped would lead to wider 
accession to that instrument. 
99. The Agency should also be commended for the results achieved in the 
areas of food and agriculture, life sciences and physical sciences. In the 
last-named area, the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste 
once again deserved particular praise for its excellent work. Lastly, the 
Director General and the Secretariat should be thanked for their hard work and 
for what they had accomplished in spite of the growing difficulties they 
faced. His Government appreciated all those efforts and undertook to lend 
wider and more active support to all the Agency's activities. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 27 


100. Mr. ALVAREZ GORSIRA (Venezuela) expressed appreciation of the 
quality and volume of the work carried out by the Agency, particularly in the 
area of technical assistance and co-operation. His Government regarded 
activities in that area as the Agency's raison d'etre, since they were of 
benefit to the developing countries and an effective and modern means of 
improving the living conditions of great populations. As the former 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. U Thant, had rightly pointed out, 
development was the long and slow path that led to peace. International 
scientific and technological co-operation was advantageous to all, not only 
the poor and less developed countries. It made it possible to maintain peace 
by helping to narrow the technological gap between industrialized and 
developing countries. However, the efforts made in that direction were not 
enough: instead of diminishing, the technological advantages of the 
industrialized countries were increasing at an excessive rate, thereby 
facilitating their economic growth, while countries in the South were 
experiencing a deterioration which was adversely affecting the standard of 
living of their populations and increasing the contrasts between the peoples 
of the world, thus engendering envy, aggressiveness and violence. In that 
context, the Agency's activities in the area of technical assistance and 
co-operation, together with other statutory activities, made an important 
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security. 
Accordingly, Venezuela felt very strongly that technical co-operation should 
receive more support, be granted more substantial, assured and predictable 
resources, and be regarded as the Agency's main activity. 
101. Since Venezuela had oil, hydroelectric and other resources, it did not 
intend to use nuclear power in the immediate future. It had therefore 
requested assistance from the Agency for projects concerning applications of 
nuclear techniques in agriculture, medicine, food and other areas. It needed 
that support and it hoped that that fact would be taken into account in the 
allocation of technical assistance resources. For 1991-92, Venezuela had 
submitted technical assistance project requests in the areas of health, 
agriculture and education, and their implementation would make a substantial 
contribution to the country's development plans. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 28 


102. In May, Venezuela had hosted the seventh ARCAL co-ordination and 
planning meeting, during which the schedule of activities presented by the 
Agency for 1991-92 had been examined and the second stage of the programme 
(1990-94) had been co-ordinated and planned. The experience gained during the 
implementation of the first stage would surely serve to strengthen the ARCAL 
programme, which was a valuable instrument for technical promotion and 
regional integration supported by the Venezuelan Government and by private 
Venezuelan institutions working in the area of nuclear energy. 
103. His delegation thanked the Agency for the way in which it had conducted 
that co-operation and urged it to make the necessary efforts to ensure that 
the programme received the required resources. It also thanked donor 
countries and organizations and recalled the importance of their assistance 
for the programme's success. 
104. The public interest in the environment had been increasing since the 
United Nations Conference on the Environment in 1972, causing the misguided 
notion of development based solely on accelerated economic growth to be 
abandoned. In that light, Venezuela was proud of having launched in 1976, 
with the promulgation of the organic law on the environment and the 
establishment of the Ministry of Environment and Renewable Natural Resources, 
an environmental policy whose main objective was to reconcile national 
development with the need to protect the environment. 
105. Venezuela also shared the concerns raised internationally by the 
greenhouse effect and supported the environmental protection activities 
carried out by international organizations. It was following with interest 
the comparative studies on the impact of different energy sources on the 
environment and on health. In order to implement the necessary corrective 
environmental protection measures, however, it was necessary to adopt a global 
approach to the problem of pollution. Those comparative studies should be 
based on scientific criteria and not on economic considerations likely to 
favour one energy source to the detriment of others. Decisions taken in the 
area of energy must not be guided by simplistic criteria or theoretical 
schemes which did not correspond to the changing reality. Given that research 
instruments and capabilities for scientific and technological innovation were 
continually developing in all areas, including that of fossil energy sources, 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 29 


it was possible to state that countries could continue to develop with 


bearable costs and risks. On the other hand, it must also be borne in mind 


that underdevelopment was just as dangerous for the environment as 


overdevelopment. Development needs and environmental requirements were 


interlinked, and developing countries whose economies were highly dependent on 
the exploitation and export of a natural resource could not be expected to 
make sacrifices which industrialized countries were not prepared to make. 


106. The Agency should be commended for the effective work it was doing in 
the area of environmental protection, which was supported by a large number of 
technical assistance projects. In his statement, the Director General had 
pointed out, as an example, that the programme on nuclear applications was 
particularly significant in terms of its focus on the environment and the 
related question of sustainable development. That was the most important 
contribution which the Agency could make to international co-operative efforts 
to slow down environmental degradation: while it was in line with one of the 
Agency's fundamental activities, namely technical assistance and co-operation, 
that activity also helped to promote the sustainable development of the least 
developed countries. 
107. The Agency's activities in the area of nuclear safety and radiological 
protection deserved to be praised once again. Nuclear safety was of vital 
importance, since it benefited the whole of humanity. His delegation 
therefore regarded favourably the increase in the activities planned in that 
area by the Agency. However, since certain activities in the area of nuclear 
safety and radiation protection were of more immediate benefit to developing 
countries, his delegation recommended that those directly related to power 
reactor safety be financed with extrabudgetary resources. That would make it 
possible to set aside the necessary financial resources for improving the 
safety of nuclear techniques used in medicine, agriculture, industry and 
research and strengthening the radiation protection infrastructures in 
developing countries. 
108. Given the importance which Venezuela attached to the Agency's technical 
assistance activities, particularly those relating to the applications of 
nuclear techniques in agriculture, medicine, geology and food, and despite the 
fact that Latin America was the region which had been the highest implementation 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 30 


rate, his delegation felt it was necessary to recall the recommendations it 
had already put forward previously with a view to increasing the programme 
implementation rate. It was essential to modify certain existing internal 


administrative procedures and financial regulations which hampered the 
Department of Technical Co-operation in the performance of its work. 


Similarly, despite the progress achieved in that area by the Secretariat, 
efforts should be continued to solve the problems of equipment maintenance and 


spare parts as soon as possible. Countries which paid contributions in 
non-convertible currencies should help the Secretariat in overcoming the 
problems raised thereby. The formalities relating to fellowship requests 
should also be expedited, both within the Agency and in the countries 
providing fellowships. The Secretariat should also consider redistributing 


its staff so as to strengthen the Departments which administered the greatest 
number of projects, namely the Department of Technical Co-operation and the 
Department of Research and Isotopes. 


109. His delegation was pleased that the increased use of experts from 
Latin America had contributed to the success of activities under the 
ARCAL programme, thus confirming that the use of more experts from developing 
regions could facilitate the implementation of programmes and contribute to 
the scientific and technical development of countries in those regions. 
110. Similarly, efforts should be continued to achieve a more balanced 
distribution of budgetary resources between the Agency's various activities 
and to ensure that the policy of zero growth did not hamper technical 
assistance activities. It was particularly disturbing to note that the 
financing of those activities continued to depend largely on voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF) which, 
though appreciable, did not guarantee assured and predictable resources for 
the implementation of projects. It should also be stressed that the pledges 
of contributions to the TACF continue to diminish and that pledged 
contributions were not necessarily paid on time. 
111. With regard to the medium-term plan, two recommendations had been made 
by his delegation during the meetings of the Board of Governors preceding the 
General Conference. The first was that, in order to achieve its aim of 
enabling the Agency to meet present and future challenges arising from its 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 31 


objectives, the plan should be prepared taking into account, firstly, the fact 


that the interests and needs of Member States with regard to the use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes differed, and, secondly, the fact that 
nuclear science was a dynamic area, characterized by constant progress and 
unpredictable circumstances which must be applied in a changing world. The 
second recommendation was to uphold the basic criterion that the technical 
co-operation programme should meet the specific needs of Member States. 


112. In conclusion, he thanked the Director General, the Secretariat and, in 
particular, the staff of the Department of Technical Co-operation for the 
efforts they had made in implementing the Agency's programmes. 
113. Mr. ANGUIANO ROCH (Mexico) said that the General Conference, which 
gathered together all Member States every year, was a political act which 
brought with it the duty to make a thorough analysis of the results already 
achieved and to review policies and trends in the development of nuclear 
energy. It also meant taking full international responsibility for the 
peaceful use of a source of energy which involved risks but also had enormous 
benefits for humanity. In that context, the Agency had a vital role to play 
in promoting the safe and reliable use of nuclear technology while ensuring 
that the benefits of its multiple peaceful applications made an effective 
contribution to peace and progress throughout the world. 
114. The Annual Report for 1989 showed convincingly that the Agency had 
achieved positive results in all areas of its activities. His delegation was 
pleased with that success and warmly congratulated the Director General and 
the Secretariat, and in particular the Department of Technical Co-operation, 
for their untiring efforts in conscientiously carrying out their duties, 
despite the constraints imposed by a zero-growth budget. 
115. Mexico was firmly resolved to develop its nuclear power programme and 
was proud of operating one of the largest nuclear power plants in the 
developing world. The first unit of the Laguna Verde power plant had been 
fully operational since July 1989 and every effort had been made to ensure the 
highest levels of safety. 
116. Mexico attached paramount importance to nuclear safety and therefore 
strongly supported the Agency's activities in that area. In many countries, 
the risks of an accident dominated the debate on nuclear power. All 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 32 


Member States had an unfailing duty to stand by the Agency in ensuring the 
highest levels of safety in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Mexico had 
committed itself fully to that obligation. It was party to the Conventions on 
Early Notification and on Emergency Assistance and had acceded to the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and the nuclear 
safety codes (NUSS) were an integral part of Mexican legislation. In 
addition, Mexican experts had participated actively in the preparation of the 
code of practice on the international transboundary movement of radioactive 
waste which had been submitted to the General Conference for its consideration. 
In his delegation's view, safety had thereby been strengthened and the 
international community had provided itself with a broad framework of 
co-operation for improving nuclear safety margins. 


117. Mexico believed that safety and the safeguards system were essential 
requirements for the peaceful applications of nuclear techniques and was 
therefore grateful to the Agency for its unstinting efforts to strengthen the 
safeguards system. His delegation welcomed the accession in 1989 of two new 
States to the NPT. It also noted with satisfaction that, during the same 
year, the Agency had concluded five new safeguards agreements under the NPT or 
the Tlatelolco Treaty, and it hoped that other signatories to the NPT would 
honour that obligation in the near future. 
118. The recent NPT Review Conference had enabled Member States to carry out 
a thorough analysis of the changes in the world situation regarding 
non-proliferation, disarmament and co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. From the frank and comprehensive dialogue which had characterized the 
meeting, it had emerged that it would be necessary, for the following 
five years, to continue to make a complementary and parallel evaluation of 
progress in the areas of non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. 
119. Mexico attached the greatest importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation, which it regarded as an excellent mechanism for supporting the 
development and modernization of countries in the Third World. In that 
connection, he wished to recall Mexico's contribution to the use of the 
sterile insect technique through programmes such as those on the Mediterranean 
fruit fly and the New World screwworm, to which the Director General had 
referred in his opening statement. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 33 


120. It was encouraging to note that in 1989, for the first time, the 
resources allocated to the Agency's technical co-operation programme had 
exceeded $50 million. There was no doubt that the Agency's contribution to 
the development of agriculture, industry, food and medicine had been 
substantial. What the Agency did, it did well, and it deserved praise for 
that. However, consideration must be given to new ways of helping it 
discharge its vital responsibilities, bearing in mind that the extent of the 
Agency's efficiency was dependent on the will of Member States. 
121. The twentieth century was drawing to an end and yet the impressive 
progress of science and technology had not made it possible to stamp out 
starvation, poverty and disease, which were the main threats to international 
peace and security. The Agency had a special, even unique, role to play in 
the battle against those threats. 
122. The technical co-operation programme was an appropriate way of 
promoting progress in developing countries, and the work carried out by the 
Agency in that area was commendable. All the same, it should be recognized 
that its contribution towards meeting the immense needs of the developing 
countries was far from sufficient. It was therefore essential to strengthen 
the technical co-operation programme, but in order to do so, it was not enough 
to pledge and pay higher contributions. The access of developing countries to 
the peaceful applications of nuclear techniques also called for the removal of 
artificial obstacles based on political pretexts or spurious arguments 
regarding safety and non-proliferation. For their part, the non-nuclearweapon 
countries should make a clear commitment to abide scrupulously by their 
obligation to apply nuclear techniques exclusively to promote the development 
and welfare of their populations. The resources allocated to that huge task 
were quite evidently insufficient. Together with the principle of zero real 
growth in the Agency's budget, which tended to favour safeguards activities at 
the expense of promotional programmes, there was reason to wonder about the 
real extent of the commitment which was repeated each year at the General 
Conference. 
123. With regard to the financing of safeguards activities, whatever 
mechanism was adopted should take into account not only financial criteria, 
but also other elements such as the constitutional commitments of 
Member States and the level of development and nuclear capability of each 
country. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 34 


124. In the Agency's policy-making organs, the Mexican delegation had 
stressed that the safeguards system should be flexible enough to be applied 
properly to States which were essentially different with regard to the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy. It had already expressed its doubts about 
interpreting the NPT too restrictively by extending the application of 
safeguards to the civil facilities of nuclear-weapon States. In any case, the 
cost of such an extension should be borne by those States or covered from 
voluntary extrabudgetary contributions. 
125. The attachment to a status quo decided 30 years previously had 
prevented progress towards new co-operation formulas that would enable the 
Agency to adapt to the accelerating changes in the contemporary world. There 
was a lack of political will to modify the archaic structure of the Board of 
Governors, to provide more substantial and assured resources for the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, to make a comprehensive review of the 
financing of safeguards, taking all the relevant factors into account, and to 
pursue efforts aimed at adopting binding principles and standards for 
international co-operation in the area of nuclear energy. Only with a 
constructive attitude and a vision for the future could the inadequacies of 
the Agency be overcome and the foundations for concerted action to provide 
present and future generations with a common hope of survival and prosperity. 
126. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ-BALART (Cuba) said that the General Conference's 
full agenda called for thorough discussion if a consensus was to be reached on 
the priority items. The Agency's Annual Report showed that, in 1989, the 
total installed nuclear capacity worldwide had increased by 3%. The fact that 
12 new nuclear power plants had been connected to the grid reflected both the 
scientific and technical progress of the past decade and the growing attention 
paid by the international community to radiation protection and nuclear 
safety, such attention being the best means of continuing to promote the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
127. The policy of zero real growth of the Regular Budget should be 
reconsidered, because a modest annual increase would add to the resources 
available to the Agency for implementing its programmes while maintaining an 
equitable balance between the total funds allocated to safeguards activities 
and to promotional activities. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 35 


128. The positive impact of the technical co-operation programmes 
implemented through the Agency in developing countries was well known. Since 
voluntary contributions made up a significant proportion of the funds 
available to the Agency for financing technical assistance, his Government 
approved the indicative planning figures and, as every year, would pay its 
share to the TACF. 
129. He thanked the Agency for its valuable co-operation and the support 
which had enabled his country to make substantial progress in the areas of 
radiation protection, evaluation of hydrological resources and the use of 
ionizing radiation in medicine and agriculture. Cuba also contributed to the 
implementation of the Agency's technical assistance programmes. Under the 
ARCAL programme, Cuba had undertaken to co-ordinate the international courses 
on radiation protection in medicine which would be held during 1990 in 
Guatemala and Costa Rica, and it was offering fellowships for three other 
regional courses which were to be held in the near future. During 1990, the 
second regional course on medical scintigraphy for specialists in the region 
had also been held. 
130. With regard to the agenda items relating to Israel's and South Africa's 
nuclear capabilities, his Government maintained the position it had stated 
during previous sessions of the General Conference and in other international 
forums, namely that those countries should place all their nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards, abandon any aggressive attitudes towards neighbouring 
States, and put an end to the policy of apartheid. 
131. During the past decade, his country's nuclear institutions, under the 
authority of the Executive Secretariat for Nuclear Affairs, had helped set up, 
within the framework of the national effort to attain the objectives of the 
nuclear programme, a large number of establishments for production, teaching 
and research. Despite a certain delay, the construction of the Juragua 
nuclear power plant was progressing under very strict quality control, and an 
extensive training programme for future operating personnel was under way. 
132. The technical standard and conscientiousness of the work being 
performed in his country in the area of nuclear power and of the nuclear 
programme in general had been publicly recognized by the specialists from 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 36 


various countries and organizations who had visited his country, which had 
included representatives of the national atomic energy commissions of the 
Soviet Union and Mexico and of the World Association of Nuclear Operators 


(WANO), experts from the Agency and even representatives of the United States 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission. During the coming years, the commissioning of 
units 1 and 2 of the Juragua plant and the nuclear research centre would be 
important milestones for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in Cuba. 


133. His country had also made progress with the applications of nuclear 
techniques. Studies on water resources had been carried out, radioimmunoassay 
techniques had been used more widely, and complex nuclear instruments 
for medical purposes had been designed and built. In addition, a growing 
number of locally produced labelled compounds and radiopharmaceuticals were 
being supplied to the country's medical institutions. Cuba had recently 
welcomed a RAPAT mission which had been able to confirm that the services in 
charge of radiation protection were performing their functions and duties in a 
satisfactory way. 
134. The work on training specialist personnel had continued, and during the 
past decade 700 people with higher-education diplomas had joined the ranks of 
the technical staff in various branches of the economy. The organization of 
the third course on topical problems in nuclear science, co-sponsored by the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste and the Agency and 
attended by lecturers and specialists from more than 15 countries in America, 
Europe and Asia, was proof of the standard attained. 
135. Those results were only a part of his country's effort, in which more 
than 30 000 technical and other specialists had contributed to the advancement 
of science in various areas and to significant progress in human health, as 
witnessed by the development of vaccines against meningitis and hepatitis B 
and work on the epidermal growth factor. His country had even attained 
standards exceeding those given by the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) for all the industrialized countries with regard to the ratio 
of doctors to inhabitants, the reduction of infant mortality, and life 
expectancy and other health indicators. It was precisely those achievements 
which had enabled his country's authorities to propose to the Soviet Union 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 3 7 


that Cuba receive annually up to 10 000 children from the areas affected by 


the Chernobyl accident in order to provide them with highly specialized 
medical treatment. That valuable experience would certainly be of great use 
for the in situ research which the Agency proposed to conduct at the Pripyat 
International Centre and in which his country was ready to participate 
actively. 


136. The development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, must be based 
on a climate of mutual trust and respect of internationally made commitments. 
While it was true that the past years had seen the conclusion between the 
United States and the Soviet Union of agreements to reduce confrontation and 
the danger of nuclear war, that favourable climate should not prevent detente 
from coming to all States, which meant renouncing colonial domination and the 
use of force as the sole argument of persuasion. Unfortunately, the world was 
threatened by a conflict which could attain extraordinary proportions in the 
Middle East. His Government had clearly expressed its position on that 
subject in the United Nations Security Council: it advocated a peaceful 
negotiated solution, as it considered the use of force to resolve international 
conflicts unacceptable. 
137. On another aspect of current world politics, everyone was aware of the 
momentum that various groups were gaining which for various reasons strove to 
sow doubts about the future of nuclear power, in particular by exaggerating 
its potential negative impact on the environment. Those groups, however, 
appeared not to realize that it was industrial development itself which had 
led to an irrational battle between nature and man, a battle in which the 
latter would be the great loser. The environmental alarm very closely 
affected the energy production sector, which was responsible for the thousands 
of millions of tonnes of soot and harmful gases released each year into the 
atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels. It was difficult to say how long 
that situation could last, but it was certain that the biosphere could not 
serve as a vast refuse dump for much longer. The volume of waste produced by 
modern civilization was already stretching the limits of the planet's capacity 
to assimilate them: industry produced as much sulphur dioxide as nature 
itself, 1.2 times more carbon dioxide and an intolerable quantity of 
chlorofluorocarbons, and it consumed a fifth of the oxygen which nature 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 


page 38 


produced. That disturbing trend threatened to unleash the greenhouse effect, 
to destroy the ozone layer and to poison the biosphere. It should be 
recognized that there was no ready formula for resolving environmental and 
energy problems. But that did not mean that the world was condemned to accept 
the consequences passively. Whether one welcomed it or not, the fact was that 
nuclear power, a non-conventional source of energy already exploited on an 


industrial scale, could make an important contribution to solving those 
problems. As the Director General had pointed out in his opening statement, 
if the 17% of electricity currently generated by nuclear power worldwide were 
to be produced by coal instead, some 1800 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
would be added to the 20 000 million tonnes already released by the burning of 
fossil fuels. 


138. Each session of the General Conference offered a new opportunity for 
comparing points of view and reflecting on the approach to be adopted in the 
future for helping to improve the Agency. The many problems which existed 
were complex and, as was well known, had causes that were not purely 
technological in nature. Resolving them called not only for good intentions, 
but above all for concrete action and a common political will. However, as 
long as the inequalities persisted which were the root of starvation, 
fratricidal wars, poverty, cultural backwardness and ill health, those 
intentions would lead nowhere. In those circumstances, international 
co-operation once again presented itself as the key by which - thanks to the 
transfer of the technology, material resources and know-how essential to the 
breathtaking progress of science and technology - the necessary conditions 
could be created for stabilizing the planet's population and meeting its basic 
needs, especially in the areas of education, health and food. Isolated 
actions would not suffice; only a co-operative effort on a global scale would 
give humanity full access to the fruits of progress and to the sources of 
energy which could support that progress. There undoubtedly lay a true 
challenge to human intelligence and activity. 
139. Lord Marshall of GORING (World Association of Nuclear Operators) 
said that WAN0, which had been established by electrical utilities throughout 
the world following the terrible nuclear accident at Chernobyl, was a newcomer 
compared with the Agency, having come into being at an inaugural meeting held 
in Moscow in May 1989. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 39 


140. Comparing the two organizations, he recalled that the Agency had been 
created decades previously to carry out the collective will of governments and 
had been given a very broad mandate covering the use of radioactive isotopes 
and nuclear research, technology, safety and non-proliferation. At the time 
of its creation, governments had believed that nuclear science and technology 
presented great opportunities for people throughout the world. The nuclear 
establishment in all countries had felt instinctively at the time that a 
conscientious application of science, technology and good regulation would 
automatically lead to good safety. 
141. That idea had in fact been mistaken because it had not given sufficient 
recognition to the important role of operators, meaning the electrical 
utilities, in ensuring nuclear safety. It had taken the accident at Three 
Mile Island to make people aware of that. The fact that the United States had 
good technology and detailed regulation and that the Government played an 
important role in the nuclear sector had not prevented that accident from 
occurring. 
142. To their great credit, the producers of electricity in the United 
States had reacted to the Three Mile Island accident in an extremely 
constructive way by setting up in Atlanta (Georgia) the Institute for Nuclear 
Power Operations (INPO) to oversee the management of nuclear power plants 
throughout the country. Although at that time some people had found it 
difficult to understand the need for a new organization, everyone now 
acknowledged that INPO had brought about dramatic improvements in the safety 
of American nuclear power plants by producing a whole new attitude and sense 
of responsibility in the management of nuclear power plants by the utilities. 
143. Unfortunately, the world had not learned the lessons of the accident at 
Three Mile Island: less than a decade later the Chernobyl accident had 
occurred. It had immediately become apparent to the United States utilities 
that there was a need for a world organization with similar objectives to 
those of INPO. That point of view had soon been adopted by Electricite de 
France and other European utilities, and then by utilities worldwide. 
Moreover, the need to establish such an organization had been recognized by 
Soviet operators at a meeting held in Paris in October 1987, and all the 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 40 


operators of nuclear power plants in the world had agreed to it in principle. 
After only a year's discussions, WANO had been inaugurated in Moscow in 
May 1989. 


144. It was not an intergovernmental organization. It was also not an 
organization of researchers or designers of nuclear power plants, and even 
less was it an organization of nuclear regulators. It was concerned only with 
the operational safety of nuclear power plants. Its members were bound 
together by the fear that one of them might let the others down by a 
management error and another nuclear accident. Neither the accident at Three 
Mile Island nor certainly that at Chernobyl should have occurred, and it was 
to be hoped that Chernobyl would be the last. 
145. Whether an accident happened did not depend on what governments, 
regulatory authorities or designers did, but on what was done by the nuclear 
power plant operators. Each of them had a powerful interest in the 
performance and management of the others, and it was for that reason that WANO 
had been created. It was sad that it had taken the accidents at Three Mile 
Island and Chernobyl to convince them of their proper responsibilities. 
146. WANO was only 16 months old. It could therefore not be expected 
already to have transformed the world nuclear scene, but it had made a good 
start. Virtually all the operators of nuclear power plants had come to Moscow 
in 1989 and subscribed to its objectives. They had very clearly expressed 
their commitment to work together to improve the reliability and operational 
safety of their nuclear power plants. The way in which WANO's objectives were 
becoming a practical reality was extremely encouraging. 
14 7. The main work of WANO was done by its members. To assist them, four 
regional centres, in Atlanta, Paris, Moscow and Tokyo, and a co-ordinating 
centre in London had been set up. The necessary communication networks had 
been established, and methods and procedures were being tested. WANO was now 
pursuing the goals which it had set itself. It still had many challenges to 
meet, but its success was assured. 
148. WANO could not be effective if certain nuclear power plant operators 
decided not to join or if the commitment of its members was not complete. 
Fortunately, all the electrical utilities which operated nuclear power plants 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.325 
page 41 


were full members of WANO and, to all appearances, each of them fully 


supported its objectives. The electrical utilities of the People's Republic 


of China and of Romania had not joined WANO at the time of the inaugural 


conference, but they were both expected to do so before they started operating 
nuclear power plants. 


149. One of WANO's objectives was the exchange of information, primarily on 
the safety of nuclear power plants. Each WANO member had an obligation 
immediately to report any incident to other members in a frank and full way. 
Although it was clearly difficult for them to report their own errors, it was 
important that the nuclear power plant operators should do so conscientiously. 
In order to reduce inhibitions, all members obeyed the golden rule that such 
reports were entirely confidential. They were not intended for publication 
nor, of course, to be communicated to the press. That rule was essential to 
ensure frank and effective discussions. After a brief period of hesitancy, 
that event reporting system was working well. 
150. Another of WANO's important objectives was to stimulate direct dialogue 
between nuclear power plant operators. As was well known, while there had 
been a great deal of international co-operation in the past between 
scientists, designers, regulatory bodies and governments, it had been rare 
between nuclear power plant operators. That was a serious omission. For 
example, the station manager or chief engineer of a Soviet power plant would 
not normally expect to be able to visit a plant in a Western country at any 
time, but those were the people who had most influence on the safety of their 
plant. It was therefore important for them to visit plants in other countries 
in order to see how those plants were managed and how similar management 
techniques could be adopted in their own country. 
151. It was equally important that power plant operating specialists from 
Western countries should visit plants in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, 
as a lasting worldwide co-operation could not be established unless 
information flowed both ways to the benefit of all. For that reason he had 
set WANO the target of getting every single power plant in the Soviet Union 
and Eastern Europe to participate in at least one exchange of visits. That 
ambitious programme should be completed before the second biennial meeting of 
the WANO General Assembly, which was due to be held in Atlanta in April 1991. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.325 
page 42 


152. Those exchange visits were already contributing to an evolution of WANO. 
For example, the Zaporozhe plant in the Soviet Union and the Duke Power plant 
in the United States had agreed to repeat their exchange visits, but for 
three months instead of two weeks, and to concentrate on topics specified in 
advance. Thus, the exchange of information was in effect turning into 
technical assistance without there having been any intervention or suggestion 
from the Chairman, the co-ordinating centre or the four regional centres. 
153. To sum up, it was fair to say that WANO was a kind of club where 
nuclear power plant operators having extensive experience gave assistance to 
those in need of it, for whatever reason. Although governments, regulatory 
bodies and, indeed, the Agency could do a lot, only WANO could stimulate 
direct contacts between one nuclear operator and another, and that was the 
unique task it had taken on. Thus, WANO would surely make an important 
contribution to nuclear safety, in a way which no other international 
organization could imitate. He therefore hoped it would assist the return of 
nuclear power worldwide. 
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
8 October 1990 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 18 September 1990, at 5 p.m. 


President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 
later: Mr. MAYORSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 


6 
General debate and annual report for 
1989 (continued) 59 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 1-23 
Zimbabwe 24 - 35 
Federal Republic of Germany 36 - 50 
Saudi Arabia 51 - 59 


Reply by the delegate of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea to the 
statement by the delegate of the 
Republic of Korea 60 - 62 


I*] GC(XXXIV)/914. 


90-4612 
7374e/720e 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989 (GC(XXXIV)/915) (continued) 


1. Mr. GLADOUSH (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) pointed out 
that the present session was being held in a crucial period of world history 
when the East-West dialogue carried out without distrust and confrontation 
created favourable conditions for the solution of world economic problems. In 
a climate of mutual responsibility progress had been made towards the 
elimination of the potential nuclear threat to the very survival of mankind. 
In that process a substantial role belonged to international organizations and 
in particular to the Agency. 
2. The Director General had stated in an article in the journal 
"Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn"' (International Affairs) that the new East-West 
relations would lead to a radical improvement in the international climate 
which was conducive to wider co-operation and which called for fuller, more 
effective use of international organizations. His delegation fully agreed 
with that view especially as the Agency had demonstrated not only in words but 
in deed its ability to promote international co-operation in the safe and 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, to apply effective safeguards, to 
provide practical assistance to developing countries and so on. 
3. The documentation submitted to the Conference showed that the Agency 
had successfully implemented its major programmes, to which his country 
attached especial importance, particularly to those in the areas of nuclear 
and radiation safety, technical co-operation, safeguards, technical 
information services, etc. 
4. His delegation highly appreciated the Agency's constructive role in 
ensuring non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. At a time when genuine nuclear 
disarmament was starting, non-proliferation assumed particular importance, and 
compliance with the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) was one of the factors 
which ensured continuation of the process, as had been confirmed by the recent 
Fourth NPT Review Conference. 
5. That his country had, for the first time, attended the NPT Review 
Conference was indicative of its growing interest and its desire to assist 
actively in strengthening the non-proliferation regime. He recalled that the 
solemn declaration of sovereignty by the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet in July 1990 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 3 


had proclaimed the Republic's intention to be a permanently neutral State in 
future, which would not join any military blocs and would adhere to three 
non-nuclear principles: not to accept, not to produce and not to acquire 
nuclear weapons. 


6. His country would continue by all means to assist in raising the 
effectiveness and authority of the Agency as the guarantor of NPT. He was in 
favour of further enhancing the effectiveness of Agency safeguards and of full 
coverage of the nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States. 
7. He accorded high priority to the Agency's activities on strengthening 
international co-operation in nuclear and radiation safety, especially on 
operational safety of nuclear power plants. The level of such safety should 
be high at all nuclear power plants and other nuclear facilities operating at 
present, no exception being made in the case of any country or facility. 
Repetition of Chernobyl would discredit the peaceful use of the atom 
altogether. It was therefore imperative to ensure utmost interaction and 
co-operation between the national authorities responsible for establishing and 
applying radiation safety standards and the Agency as the verifying body 
helping to enhance operational safety. 
8. Referring to the Chernobyl disaster, he recalled that a detailed 
assessment of all the major aspects (radiation, medical, social, economic, 
ecological, etc.) was contained in document INFCIRC/383. He only wished to 
draw attention to one point in the document - that in spite of the enormous 
efforts made, a reliable system for ensuring the safety of people affected by 
radiation was still not in place (page 2, second paragraph from top). In that 
connection, it was essential to utilize world experience in resolving the 
outstanding problems and to expand international co-operation in that area. 
9. Of great relevance to the organization of such assistance was the 
resolution relating to international co-operation in mitigating and 
eliminating the after-effects of the Chernobyl accident, adopted by the United 
Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in the summer of 1990. He wished 
to express his gratitude to its 63 sponsor States belonging to different 
systems and groups, levels of development and geographical areas. 
10. The main idea behind that resolution was to mobilize the world community's 
efforts to help the Ukrainian and the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic and 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page A 

the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic in overcoming the aftereffects 
of the Chernobyl disaster. The adoption by consensus of the 
resolution was indicative of the world community's support for the new international 
and domestic political and economic policies of the USSR and its 
constituent republics. 


11. The ECOSOC decision on Chernobyl was only an initial step, and there 
was potentially considerable room for action by the United Nations and its 
specialized agencies and in particular the Agency. 
12. His delegation noted with gratitude that the Agency was undertaking a 
number of activities in connection with the problems of mitigating the 
after-effects of Chernobyl. For example, it was providing assistance for a 
project on assessing the effects of radiation on human health and the environment, 
with which an international expert group was associated. Agency experts 
and even the Director General had frequently visited the Ukraine and 
participated in a number of specific activities connected with the disaster. 
13. An agreement concerning the Chernobyl Centre for International Research 
was expected to be signed during the present session of the Conference, under 
which the USSR, Ukrainian and Byelorussian Governments would provide other 
countries and international organizations with facilities for bilateral and 
multilateral research in the area of nuclear safety and radio- logical 
protection. 
14. Following the accident a series of large-scale measures had been taken 
by the Ukrainian Government in order to ensure normal life of the people in 
the areas contaminated by radiation, to improve medical care and to create the 
necessary communal and service facilities. The Republic had mobilized its 
production and scientific potential, manpower and physical resources to 
implement those measures. 
15. The USSR Supreme Soviet had allocated 3600 million roubles for those 
purposes during 1990-92. Those measures were intended primarily to protect 
human health and included further resettlement of families in radiation-safe 
localities, radical improvement in medical care, supply of clean foodstuffs 
for the people, decontamination of areas, ban on environmental pollution and 
so on. Much remained to be done, and in a number of cases international 
co-operation was essential. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 5 


16. The Ukraine was interested in joint research on decontamination, 
processing and use of forest resources under conditions of radioactive 
contamination and on the biological cycle of strontium-90, caesium-137 and 
plutonium-290 in forest ecosystems. It was also seeking international 
co-operation in obtaining the know-how for removal of radioactive silt, 
binding of radionuclides and prevention of their transfer to water bodies. 
17. It was very important to prepare recommendations on agricultural 
practices in contaminated areas, including procedures for soil reclamation, 
crop cultivation and harvesting and animal husbandry. 
18. A number of extremely complex problems had to be handled, for example, 
ultimate disposal of the debris of Chernobyl Unit A, which required extensive 
research in the areas of radiation materials technology, radiogeochemistry, 
engineering geology, etc. A highly disturbing problem was posed by the burial 
sites containing thousands of tons of equipment, household articles, earth and 
foliage with radiation levels above the permissible limit. In that connection, 
his country attached great importance to the programme on evaluating the 
safe dose for residents in contaminated areas, which the Agency and other 
international organizations were carrying out, and was eagerly awaiting the 
results of the Agency experts' work. 
19. It must be pointed out that the Chernobyl disaster had been a severe 
psychological shock to the whole world and had undermined confidence in the 
engineering perfection of nuclear reactors. Despite assurances of scientists 
that all possible precautionary measures had been taken, the Ukrainian 
public's mind was set against nuclear power and the Agency experts' 
conclusions were yet unable to convince them. So a month ago the Supreme 
Soviet of the Ukraine had declared a five-year moratorium on the construction 
of new nuclear plants in its territory. It had also imposed a ban on increasing 
the installed capacity of the operating plants as of 1 April 1990 
(14 000 MW). As a result, the construction of nuclear power plants at 
Chigirin and in the Crimea, and of nuclear district heating plants at Odessa 
and Kharkov had been stopped, while many other facilities had been 
mothballed. The decision on decommissioning the Chernobyl power station 
by 1995 had been taken even earlier. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 6 


20. The Republic's entire energy programme was being restructured. It was 
based on a strict and advanced energy and resource saving policy and 
structural changes in the strategic economic development plans for the Ukraine. 
21. In his opinion, discussion of issues connected with an optimum policy 
for long-term development of energy resources under Agency auspices might be 
useful to all countries and help in the solution of the difficult problem 
facing the world. That topic could be included in the Agency programmes for 
the following years. 
22. The technical assistance programme was an exceptionally important part 
of the Agency's activities. His country was in favour of extensive development 
of that form of assistance and was participting in it to the best of its 
ability. Every year 3-4 groups of specialists from developing countries went 
there on scientific visits and attended training courses. Such collaboration 
was expected to expand with the launching of the Chernobyl Research Centre. 
He wished to recall that the Ukraine regularly made voluntary contributions to 
the Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 
23. In conclusion, his delegation expressed its approval of the annual 
report for 1989. It was confident that the Agency would continue to carry out 
its tasks successfully, and his country would do its utmost to help in that 
process. 
24. Mr. USHEWOKUNZE (Zimbabwe) said that the thirty-fourth regular 
session of the Agency's General Conference was taking place at a turning point 
in the history of international political relations, and it was essential not 
to miss the opportunities offered by the easing of East-West tensions which 
had encumbered inter-State relations for the past four decades. The emergence 
of a North-South divide should be avoided, as that would impede progress in 
seeking solutions to serious global problems. 
25. He commended the Agency for its role in promoting nuclear safety and 
the peaceful use of nuclear technology. It was continuing to work successfully 
towards the fulfilment of its objectives, and Zimbabwe welcomed the 
increased importance attached to safety-related work, and the greater emphasis 
being placed on the needs of developing Member States. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 7 


26. Zimbabwe, along with many other Member States, had benefited from 
expert services under the Waste Management Advisory Programme (WAMAP) and the 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team (RAPAT) missions, particularly with regard 
to the formulation of regulations to govern the handling, usage and disposal 
of spent sources. Developing countries, which had inadequate regulations and 
poor monitoring and enforcement infrastructures were undoubtedly at risk. 
That fact was often not appreciated, the commonest misconception being that 
the risks of irradiation related only to the operation of nuclear reactors. 
27. Zimbabwe had made substantial regulatory changes in order to take 
account of radiation sources, and the most recent set of regulations, 
published in 1990, had been drafted in the light of advice from Agency experts. 
28. It was particularly encouraging to note the efforts made to improve 
operational efficiency as shown by the organizational changes reported by the 
Board of Governors in its draft report. The reorganization of the former 
Division of Technical Assistance and Co-operation was of particular interest 
to developing nations. 
29. The establishment and publication of safety standards had proved 
invaluable, and the achievement of international consensus on exemption 
criteria for radiation sources and practices had been particularly encouraging, 
as it was extremely difficult to obtain international agreement on virtually 
any subject. Current efforts to establish an International Nuclear Event 
Scale (INES) should be encouraged and should be part of a wider effort at 
international standardization in other fields. 
30. Zimbabwe was indebted to the Agency for assistance in the setting up of 
the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Africa (AFRA), which should be of 
great assistance in regional development. African experts from both Member 
and non-Member States of the Agency had met at the Seminar on Africa's Role in 
Nuclear Science for Peace and Development, held in Kampala, Uganda, in 
March 1990 under the auspices of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). The 
Agency had been one of the sponsors of that seminar. 
31. The example of other established regional co-operative agreements, 
namely the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) for Asia and the Pacific and 
the Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 8 


and Technology in Latin America (ARCAL), was encouraging. AFRA would 
undoubtedly help in the more efficient and better organized handling of 
regional problems and regional experts should gradually become available to 
replace extra-regional experts. Such regional self-reliance was the key to 
properly planned and appropriate development, but manpower development 
programmes would be needed in developing countries to achieve that end. 


32. Public opinion concerning nuclear power remained an important issue. 
Although in some countries the nuclear option was receiving less emphasis, it 
would be short-sighted for the world to abandon nuclear power in the absence 
of a practical alternative. Thermal power stations were not free of problems, 
in particular atmospheric pollution and the contribution of carbon dioxide to 
the greenhouse effect and global warming. Those issues had come to the fore 
as the world began to realize the extent of the environmental degradation that 
human activities had caused. However, nuclear accidents did tend to produce a 
sense of panic among the public. Vigorous efforts must continue to simplify 
and improve further the inherent safety of the present generation of nuclear 
reactors. Safer and simpler reactors could also make nuclear power more 
accessible to developing countries which would otherwise find themselves in 
serious difficulties when fossil fuels were no longer available. A similar 
cautionary note was also required regarding the issue of food irradiation. 
Unless the public at large was convinced of the benefits and safety of the 
process, consumer resistance would hinder the expansion of international trade 
in irradiated foods. 
33. The world appeared to be moving into an era of relative security in 
view of the considerable easing of superpower tension in recent times. The 
present opportunity to ensure long-term stability in an atmosphere of trust 
must not be overlooked. At its ninth summit meeting in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 
the Non-Aligned Movement had called for comprehensive disarmament that would 
also include conventional armaments. The massive amounts of money spent on 
the defence budgets of the world's most powerful States could be far more 
usefully employed in alleviating the suffering caused by the present highly 
inequitable distribution of wealth. The international community had welcomed 
the signing by the United States of America and the Soviet Union of the treaty 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 9 


to reduce intermediate nuclear forces and the consensus achieved on the need 
to start negotiations for the ratification of the treaties of 1974 and 1976, 
respectively, concerning nuclear tests and peaceful nuclear explosions. 


34. Pursuant to General Conference resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/524, the 
subject of South Africa's nuclear capabilities was on the agenda once again 
in 1990. Three years had passed since a statement had been released by the 
now former president, Mr. P.W. Botha, implying that South Africa would soon 
like to sign NPT. However, no progress had been made. It was sometimes 
argued that South Africa needed encouragement in its "efforts" to reform the 
apartheid system. Zimbabwe rejected that approach on the grounds that it 
would only assist the racist regime of that country, which continued to refuse 
to submit its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. Apartheid or 
institutionalized racism in any form could not be reformed and must be totally 
eliminated. The international community should continue to apply pressure for 
more profound change in South Africa, a country which had a nuclear-weapon 
capability by which neighbouring countries naturally felt threatened as long 
as tension remained high in the region. 
35. Vigilance should continue regarding the practice of dumping toxic 
wastes, a problem which in the recent past had assumed alarming proportions. 
The practice was most objectionable and showed that the world must urgently 
consider the environmental effects of most of the industrial processes on 
which mankind had come to depend. Simply dumping untreated wastes in other 
countries, in particular the less developed countries, was a short-sighted and 
selfish measure which failed to address the real problem. 
Mr. Mayorsky (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) took the Chair. 


36. Mr. RIESENHUBER (Federal Republic of Germany) said that one of the 
major tasks confronting governments was to assure energy supplies for their 
countries - and thus for the world community - under ecologically and 
economically viable conditions. Even before the recent events in the Middle 
East had once again brought home to everyone the danger of becoming overly 
dependent on oil as a source of energy, he had believed that the world 
community would succeed in attaining its ecological goals during the decades 
ahead only if countries throughout the world united in efforts to restructure 
their energy supply. The goal must be to use energy sources which released 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 10 


little or even no carbon dioxide, namely first and foremost natural gas, 
nuclear fission, solar energy and - in the long term - nuclear fusion. At the 
same time, those energy sources would have to meet a tremendously increased 
demand, especially from the developing and threshold countries, in view of an 
expected explosive growth of the world population to 8 billion by 2020. The 
Agency deserved credit for having emphasized the vital importance of nuclear 


energy in meeting global energy requirements and for having spoken in support 
of a reassessment of that energy source despite all setbacks. The Agency was 
undoubtedly the most appropriate forum for acknowledging the necessity of 
nuclear energy while at the same time calling for joint efforts in taking the 
measures needed to avert the potential hazards arising from the use of that 


energy source. 


37. Although there was no need to panic, swift and radical measures to 
limit carbon dioxide emissions must be taken to counter the threat of a 
profound change in the global climate, with unforeseeable consequences. 
Nuclear energy was no panacea for all environmental problems, but it could not 
be dispensed with as long as other means equally friendly to the environment 
were not available to generate the energy needed for the world's population. 
38. In the Federal Republic of Germany, nuclear energy had become the most 
important source of electrical power, accounting in 1989 for almost 40% of 
public power supply, or approximately 150 billion kW*h. 
39. However, since the hazards involved had international dimensions, the 
development of nuclear energy throughout the world was justifiable only if 
international efforts to counteract its possible misuse or unsafe use were 
successful. Fortunately, the community of nations had learnt that national 
efforts to guarantee the safety of citizens must be supplemented by transboundary 
co-operation. The Agency's Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) and 
nuclear safety codes included minimum requirements for the safety of nuclear 
installations, and it was a major step forward that many countries had already 
stated that they fully complied with those requirements or even exceeded 
them. He renewed his delegation's appeal to all countries to join in that 
approach, and called upon the Agency to present a comprehensive report on 
progress in that respect. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.326 
page 11 


40. It was encouraging to note the increasing use being made of the special 
services offered by the Agency in the field of nuclear safety, such as 
Operational Safety Review Teams (OSARTs), Assessment of Safety-Significant 
Events Teams (ASSETs) and Radiation Protection Advisory Teams (RAPATs); 
together with the relevant reports published by the Agency they provided 
further examples of the new nuclear safety culture and created an atmosphere 
of trust. Gratitude was due both to the Agency staff who shouldered major 
responsibility in tackling those tasks and to all the Member States which 
provided expert advice to that end. In addition, it was gratifying that 
several member countries had shown willingness to submit their older nuclear 
power stations to a new safety assessment based on modern requirements, 
initially focusing on the older WWER reactors. Accordingly, his country 
looked forward to the high-level conference which was to be convened in 1991 
to take stock internationally of the status of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection and of safety research and development five years after the 
Chernobyl disaster. 
41. The other threat which must continue to be countered by joint efforts 
was a possible proliferation of nuclear weapons. Non-proliferation was an 
essential policy goal of his Government and would continue to be so after the 
imminent unification of Germany. His country had already renounced the 
possession of nuclear weapons more than 35 years previously, and had acceded 
to the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) with its first comprehensive 
safeguards system. It was also one of the founder members of the IAEA and a 
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In 
Article III of the treaty signed in Moscow on 12 September 1990, it had 
confirmed that a united Germany, too, would renounce the manufacture, 
possession and control of nuclear weapons and that the commitments resulting 
from NPT would also apply to the united Germany. 
42. One outstanding event of the current year had been the Fourth NPT 
Review Conference, where the discussion had shown the general recognition of 
NPT and the Agency safeguards system as the central instruments for ensuring 
peace throughout the world. His Government considered that NPT had been 
successful and that it should be extended for a long period at the next Review 
Conference, due to take place in 1995. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 12 


43. His Government considered that the acceptance of Agency safeguards on 
the entire fuel cycle did not constitute an unreasonable limitation of 
sovereignty. It had therefore decided to make the acceptance of comprehensive 
safeguards by the receiving State a condition for licensing any new and 
significant nuclear exports. It also supported the Agency in the improvement 
of its various instruments for carrying out safeguards. Its support 
programme, which had been launched in 1978 and had since been constantly 
strengthened, together with the support programmes of other countries, had 
produced a number of new techniques and concepts to enhance the efficacy and 
efficiency of Agency safeguards. However, funds were not everything, and his 
Government was convinced that, even under so-called "real zero growth", it was 
possible to improve and expand the Agency safeguards system - for example by 
concentrating safeguards measures on sensitive parts of the fuel cycle and 
introducing the possibility of unannounced inspections. 
44. The manifold peaceful uses of nuclear energy could not be restricted to 
some highly developed industrialized countries. The provision of technical 
assistance to the countries of the Third World was one of the main tasks of 
the Agency, and his country had not only paid its contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund (TACF), but also supported 
footnote-a/ projects, made fellowships and training courses available, 
provided expert services and offered many other voluntary contributions. In 
1991, as in previous years, it would again be making one of the biggest 
contributions to the TACF. 
45. Among the Agency's many valuable projects, he wished to mention in 
particular the work on the concept of an International Thermonuclear 
Experimental Reactor (ITER) which was being done under the Agency's auspices 
and in which his country was participating as a member of the European 
Community. The ITER project was an extraordinarily important endeavour which 
was developing in a promising manner. In view of the need to secure a 
long-term global energy supply, the efforts to develop a fusion reactor 
through worldwide co-operation were both necessary and justified. It did not 
seem unrealistic to expect that the next step towards building a fusion 
reactor could be taken as early as 1995 or 1996, and his country would be very 
pleased if it were decided to build the ITER as a first worldwide major 
project in Europe. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.326 
page 13 


46. In discussing the possibility of new tasks or increased funding for the 
Agency, it should not be forgotten that the Agency was already encountering 
severe problems in collecting the contributions due to it. He appealed to all 
States to ensure the timely payment of their contributions, not only towards 
the Regular Budget but also to the TACF. It was unacceptable that, on the one 
hand, there were calls for additional responsibilities of the Agency, for 
example in safeguards or in the so-called promotional activities, while, on 
the other hand, Members failed to meet their obligations. 
47. All Germans were at present looking forward to a momentous historical 
event: after years of separation, the two Germanys would unite on 3 October 1990. 
The united Germany would continue to recognize and fulfil its responsibility 
for peace and the welfare of the community of nations. 
48. It was worth emphasizing that that unification in the existing 
situation had been possible only on the basis of increased confidence and 
trust among all nations, which had been brought about by international 
confidence-building measures, including those of the Agency; those measures 
consisted of many small, undramatic steps, and the Agency must be thanked for 
the objective, long-range, patient and painstaking work which it had invested 
in building confidence and trust, trying to remain impartial, to convince 
rather than to persuade, and to bring the world's nations together into a 
community with shared goals. Through its efforts, then, the Agency had 
contributed significantly to the developments which had made possible the 
unification of the two German States. The Federal Republic of Germany and the 
German Democratic Republic were examining, together with the Agency and, where 
safeguards were concerned, also with EURATOM, the question whether additional 
measures would be required as a result of the unification of Germany. 
However, he could assure the Conference that there would be no interruption in 
the implementation of safeguards in Germany and that the united Germany would 
continue as a single member of the Agency to fulfil all its commitments in the 
future. 
49. The present times were seeing an increasing awareness among nations 
that the common opportunities and the problems to be solved jointly carried a 
greater weight than any historical or ideological divisions that might 
separate the various regions of the Earth from each other. In a limited and 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 14 


vulnerable world all nations shared in an enormous responsibility which could 
be met by co-operation, the utilization of new technologies, the careful 
conservation of an increasingly threatened environment, and the awareness that 
the limited Earth would be expected not only to sustain a growing number of 
human beings but to offer them a dignified and prosperous future. If cooperation 
between nations in those matters came to be increasingly taken for 
granted, it would be possible even in difficult times to shape the future 
together to build confidence and peace on the basis of common interests and 
goals. 


50. That was the spirit in which the Agency had been founded and in which 
it had worked over the past years with resolution and patience, success and 
competence. He hoped that further work in the areas of nuclear energy, 
research and technology and the implementation of various kinds of energies 
would continue in that spirit so as to meet the collective responsibility for 
a world which was becoming a global village, meaning not only that everyone 
knew each other, but that everyone must be able to rely on the other's 
objective judgement, confidence in the future, and shared responsibility for 
the Earth. 
51. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) said that the Agency's excellent 
reputation for its efficiency within the United Nations system was commendable. 
By its commitment to serious work the Agency had established a rapport of 
confidence with its Member States, and it had developed and increased that 
confidence over the years. 
52. At its previous regular session, the General Conference had adopted 
resolution GC(XXXII1)/RES/515, entitled "Plan for the production of low-cost 
potable water", in which the Director General had been requested to "assess 
the technical and economic potential for using nuclear heat reactors in 
seawater desalination ..." However, the Director General had informed 
Member States that the time had been too short to achieve those tasks, 
although two meetings had been held, attended by experts from nine States. 
53. The increasing shortage of water was no longer restricted to a few 
States, as it had been in the past. More than 40% of the world population was 
now suffering from a shortage of drinking water, a fact which had been 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 15 


confirmed by several organizations, notably the World Health Organization 
(WHO). That shortage would become increasingly acute in the future, with the 
growth of the world population and the rising prices of traditional fuels. 


54. The Agency had already demonstrated its efficiency by managing to 
implement its four major programmes despite budgetary constraints. Since the 
provision of drinking water was clearly a high priority task worthy of 
attention from concerned international organizations, the Agency should 
include work on seawater desalination in one of its programmes. For almost 
thirty years now, his country had been calling for the pooling of international 
efforts and resources to search for possibilities of providing 
drinking water for the world's population at a moderate cost. 
55. Turning to the subject of nuclear waste disposal, he commended the 
International Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee (INWAC) on its 
proposal to publish a new integrated series of radioactive waste safety 
standards, to be called RADWASS. Member States with advanced programmes for 
the disposal of nuclear waste could use those standards as an international 
reference for the promulgation of principles and regulations. States which as 
yet had no advanced programmes in that field could use them as a basis for 
their own national principles. In that context, his delegation also fully 
appreciated the efforts made by the international technical working group of 
experts in establishing the Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, which, he hoped, would be further 
developed and become more binding. 
56. He commended the Agency on its promotional activities and its 
assistance to developing Member States and encouraged it to continue to 
provide such services as the Operational Safety Review Team (OSART), and 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team (RAPAT) missions which were of great help 
to developing countries. He wished to express appreciation also to those 
Member States which facilitated such missions by making experts available free 
of charge. 
57. The previous session of the General Conference, in its resolution 
GC(XXXIII)/RES/506, had once again called upon Israel "to comply without delay 
with Security Council resolution 487/1981 by submitting all its nuclear 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.326 
page 16 


installations to Agency safeguards"; it had further-requested the Director 
General "to consult with the States concerned in the Middle East area with a 
view to applying Agency safeguards to all nuclear installations in the area". 
Regrettably, Israel had as yet not responded to that resolution, but he hoped 
the Director General would pursue consultations aimed at persuading Israel to 
place all its nuclear installations under safeguards. 


58. Turning to financial matters, he said that the present method for 
financing safeguards placed an additional burden on developing countries, 
particularly those to which safeguards did not apply. His country, for 
example, contributed a relatively large share towards the safeguards budget, 
and felt that those States which had major nuclear activities should bear a 
larger share. 
59. His delegation was also very concerned about the Agency's current 
financial situation, which might lead it to take measures that would affect 
its reputation. Saudi Arabia had paid its contribution in full and called 
upon all States which had not yet done so to do the same as soon as possible. 
REPLY BY THE DELEGATE OF THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA TO THE 
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA 


60. Mr. YUH (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), exercising his 
right of reply, said that his delegation had repeatedly made known its stand 
on the issue of a safeguards agreement and, at the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference in Geneva, had once again clearly stated its views on that issue. 
61. If favourable circumstances allowing full implementation of NPT were to 
be created on the Korean peninsula, his country would be ready immediately to 
conclude a safeguards agreement and implement it. However, South Korea had 
introduced foreign nuclear weapons into the southern part of the Korean 
peninsula and, together with the owner of those nuclear weapons, was 
continually conducting military exercises that included scenarios involving 
nuclear bombing. That was a crime against the Korean nation, which had also 
suffered from the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. 
Koreans today, regardless of whether they lived in the North or the South, 
therefore opposed nuclear weapons and strove hard for their withdrawal. His 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.326 
page 17 


country had put forward proposals for the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the Korean peninsula, as well as several disarmament proposals, 
which South Korea had always rejected. 


62. If South Korea wished for an early conclusion of a safeguards agreement 
by his country, it should ask for the withdrawal of foreign nuclear weapons 
from its own territory and respond positively to his country's proposals 
regarding a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Korean peninsula. It was an 
undisputed fact that the establishment of such a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
would have to be based on appropriate and internationally recognized 
verification measures. 
The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
26 April 1991 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 19 September 1990, at 10.20 a.m. 
President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
Arrangements for the Conference I 12 
(a) Adoption of the agenda and aI location 
of items for initial discussion 
(b) Closing date of the session and opening 
date of the next session 
I II 
10 
12 
Requests for the restoration of voting rights 13 14 
General debate and annual report for 1989 (resumed) 15-134 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Turkey 
Australia 
Ma I ays ia 
Switzerland 
Hungary 
Holy See 
Belgium 
New Zealand 
Egypt 
Israel 
Commission of the European Communities 
15 - 22 
23 - 39 
40 - 48 
49 - 59 
60-7 3 
74 78 
79 - 93 
94 - 102 
103 - 112 
113-124 
125 - 134 
Statement by the delegate of Iraq 135 
[*] GC(XXXIV)/9I4. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXIV)/INF/287/Rev.2. 
90-4444 
(8l33e/772e 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXXIV)/914, 932) 
1. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had recommended that 
the General Conference should include in its agenda all the items listed in 
document GC(XXXIV)/914 except item 22, entitled "Purchase of recreational 
facilities by the Agency on behalf of the Staff Association", and that it 
should also include the additional item proposed by the Board in document 
GC(XXXIV)/932. The General Committee further recommended that the items be 
allocated for initial discussion as indicated in document GC(XXXIV)/914 and 
that the additional item be initially discussed in the Committee of the Whole 
and that it be inserted between the existing items 11 and 12 of the 
provisional agenda contained in document GC(XXXIV)/914. 
2. The General Committee also recommended, with reference to the 
additional item, that the time limit laid down in the last sentence of Rule 15 
of the General Conference's Rules of Procedure be waived. 
3. With regard to the order in which the items on the agenda should be 
discussed by the General Conference, the General Committee had received a 
request from the Israeli delegation, which was reproduced in document 
GC(XXXIV)/INF/286. The General Committee had decided to make no 
recommendation to the General Conference and he therefore proposed to keep the 
order of items as set out in document GC(XXXIV)/914, after inserting the 
additional item and renumbering the other items, on the understanding that 
circumstances and the efficient conduct of business might make changes 
necessary in the plenary meetings or the Committee of the Whole. 
4. Mr. LAVIA (Philippines) said that item 22, entitled "Purchase of 
recreational facilities by the Agency on behalf of the Staff Association", had 
been proposed by his country and inscribed in the provisional agenda of the 
General Conference in total compliance with the Rules of Procedure. The 
inclusion of that item had been approved and recommended to the General 
Conference by the Board of Governors. The General Committee's recommendation 
to have the item deleted was therefore bewildering and shocking. His 
delegation vehemently opposed that recommendation. Whatever the motive of the 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 3 


General Committee, the proposal was illegal and unprecedented. In the view of 
his delegation, it was a patent nullity. 


5. If the General Conference, without pretext or justification, supported 
such an unlawful and unwarranted action, it would never be the same again. 
Among the international organizations of the United Nations system, it would 
stand out as an instrument of repression in the hands of some hidden powers or 
hidden delegations. 
6. His delegation therefore protested strongly and vehemently against that 
illegal, insidious, unwarranted, and unprecedented action by the General 
Conference. The whole affair would only serve to whet the appetite of 
delegations to know more about the item. And perhaps there lay the real 
reason for the proposal to delete item 22. 
7. The proposed decision would undoubtedly create a dangerous precedent in 
the General Conference. Under its Chairman, the General Committee was making 
history, and it was certain that the General Committee and its Chairman would 
go down in history for having taken such a decision. His delegation would not 
request a vote in order to give the General Committee full satisfaction of its 
historic aberration. 
8. He requested that his statement be reproduced in full in the summary 
record of the meeting. 
9. The PRESIDENT suggested that the General Conference accept the 
recommendations of the General Committee concerning the agenda for the session 
and his own proposal concerning the order of discussion of the items. 
10. It was so agreed. 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
(GC(XXXIV)/914, annotation to item 4(b)) 


11. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had authorized him 
to inform the General Conference that it recommended setting Friday, 
21 September 1990, as the closing date of the thirty-fourth regular session 
and Monday, 16 September 1991, as the opening date of the thirty-fifth regular 
session, which would be held in Vienna. 
12. The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 4 


REQUESTS FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS (GC(XXXIV)/INF/283, 289) 


13. The PRESIDENT indicated that the General Committee had had before 
it requests by Bolivia and Peru that the last sentence of Article XIX.A of the 
Statute be invoked in order that they might be permitted to vote during the 
current session of the General Conference. The General Committee recommended 
that the General Conference accept the request made by Bolivia and refuse the 
request made by Peru. 
14. The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989 (GC(XXXIV)/915) (resumed) 


15. Mr. ALP (Turkey) said that while welcoming the major economic and 
political developments in Central and Eastern Europe during the past year, his 
delegation could not overlook the fact that regional conflicts were continuing 
and new conflicts emerging. However, the changes in Europe were having a 
positive effect on disarmament negotiations and on attitudes to regional 
conflicts. There was greater reason than ever to hope for advances in the 
area of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, but continued attention 
must still be given to attempts at acquiring other kinds of weapons of mass 
destruction and to equally irresponsible transfers of technology by industrial 
countries for non-peaceful purposes. It was to be expected that the Agency's 
verification role within the framework of the safeguards system under the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) would become more 
important in the nuclear disarmament process. There was accordingly reason to 
hope that the 1990s, during which the NPT would be under close scrutiny with a 
view to its possible prolongation, would see a drastic reduction in nuclear 
arsenals. Turkey was convinced of the importance of the principles underlying 
the NPT for the efforts towards global disarmament, which was possible only in 
the context of detente and international security, and hoped that opinion was 
shared by all countries without exception and would be acted upon. The 
universality of the NPT regime could increase, and that would improve the 
effectiveness of the safeguards system. So far, that system had functioned 
very efficiently despite financial constraints, but enhanced international 
co-operation was necessary to make it universal. It was to be hoped that 
discussions on the efficiency and the financing of safeguards would lead to 
practical and equitable results. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 5 


16. Nuclear power had an important role to play, at least until the 
development of alternative, renewable energy sources which had no negative 
impact on the environment and were able to meet a significant portion of the 
world's increasing energy and electricity needs. However, nuclear power 
programmes developed slowly, particularly in developing countries handicapped 
by numerous obstacles, such as the lack of financial resources and adequate 
nuclear infrastructures. Energy problems were further complicated by the 
consequences of dependence on oil for worldwide economic and political 
stability and by the impact of the use of fossil fuels on the global 
ecosystem. Unless significant steps were taken quickly, the world would be 
faced in the twenty-first century either with serious shortages or with 
greater risks associated with the use of harmful energy sources. 
17. His delegation had taken note of the Director General's statement on 
the Agency's financial situation, since it was only by receiving adequate 
support itself that the Agency could help developing countries to cope with 
the challenges of economic and social development. He endorsed the 
recommendations made by the senior expert group on mechanisms to assist 
developing countries in the promotion and financing of nuclear power 
programmes. He also appreciated the role which the Agency could play in 
promoting, inter alia, closer co-operation with the World Bank in energy and 
power planning, project studies and finding partners to finance and implement 
feasibility studies for small and medium-size power reactors. 
18. In a world which was increasingly concerned about atmospheric pollution 
and environmental deterioration, the safety of nuclear facilities was 
undoubtedly a prerequisite for eliminating the obstacles, real or imaginary, 
to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. States should therefore abandon their 
traditional reticence and work to strengthen international co-operation in 
order to maintain the highest possible levels of safety in nuclear 
facilities. Similarly, it was essential, in order to overcome justified 
public concerns, to support the Agency's efforts to improve the safety of the 
long-term disposal of nuclear waste. There could be no doubt that a vigorous 
safety policy was a duty for each country, not only towards its own nationals, 
but also towards the international community. In that context, the Convention 
on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 6 


in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, which Turkey had 
recently ratified, should be complemented by bilateral and regional agreements. 


19. Turkey had always supported all activities aimed at promoting greater 
safety and greater public confidence in the use of nuclear energy. There was 
no moral or legal justification for continuing to operate power reactors which 
had dubious safety standards and for shirking international liabilities. The 
work of the open-ended Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage had 
been successful and his delegation fully supported it. It also attached great 
importance to international co-operation relating to the physical protection 
of nuclear materials and strongly supported the efforts made by the Agency to 
encourage countries which had not yet done so to accede to the relevant 
convention. It would like the Agency to play a co-ordinating role in that 
area. 
20. In emphasizing the aforementioned areas, his delegation did not intend 
to overlook the importance of the assistance provided by the Agency to 
developing countries in areas such as dosimetry, agriculture, medicine and 
hydrology. Training and fellowships, in particular, were vital elements of 
the technical co-operation programme, since qualified personnel were essential 
for the improvement of the technological capability of developing countries 
planning to construct research reactors, to produce isotopes and to venture 
gradually into nuclear power production. The Agency should make every effort 
to step up its activities in that area with the support of all its 
Member States. 
21. Within the framework of technical co-operation, Turkey was engaged in 
various important projects aimed at improving public health and environmental 
protection. The most recent projects included radioisotope and radiopharmaceutical 
production, sterilization of medical articles, environmental 
monitoring, and establishment of a cyclotron facility. In addition, since 
October 1989 Turkey had hosted six Agency seminars, workshops and 
interregional training courses in Izmir, Istanbul and Ankara. 
22. In conclusion, he thanked the Department of Technical Co-operation and 
Member States which provided extrabudgetary contributions to finance 
additional fellowships, footnote-a/ projects, expert services and study 
tours. He recalled that his Government had pledged to pay the full amount of 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 7 


its assessed share of the target to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund (TACF) for 1991. 


23. Mr. WILSON (Australia) said that, as a founding Member, Australia 
had always been a strong supporter of the Agency and its Statute. The Agency 
continued to play a central role, through its safeguards system, in the 
maintenance of international peace and security. It was also a major force in 
the provision of technical assistance to developing countries and had 
important responsibilities in the field of nuclear energy. His delegation was 
very satisfied with the Agency's various activities, as outlined in the Annual 
Report for 1989, and with the work done in 1990. 
24. As a major exporter of uranium and a Party to the NPT, Australia 
attached the greatest importance to the Agency's safeguards system, which was 
the core of the arrangements established by the international community to 
verify that commitments to peaceful use were being honoured, and as such was 
also an indispensable factor in international nuclear trade and co-operation 
and in the development of nuclear power to meet the world's energy needs. The 
international community had derived many benefits from the security provided 
by the NPT and the safeguards system, and his delegation welcomed the fact 
that the Director General had been able to state each year that safeguarded 
nuclear material had remained in peaceful nuclear activities or had been 
otherwise adequately accounted for. 
25. Despite the cost involved, the efficient and effective application of 
Agency safeguards served the interests of all Member States. The Agency's 
safeguards responsibilities were continuing to grow and, in view of budgetary 
constraints, there had to be maximum co-operation on the part of all 
Member States in many areas, but particularly in inspector designation, the 
updating of facility attachments and the negotiation of safeguards agreements, 
in order to control those costs. It was equally important that safeguards 
should continue to be financed on a reliable basis, in other words from the 
Regular Budget, and his delegation could not accept the use of cash surpluses 
for the purchase of essential safeguards equipment being regarded as a 
precedent. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 8 


26. Australia welcomed the conclusion of the safeguards agreements with 
Kiribati, Malta and Togo which the Board had approved the previous week, and 
urged all Parties to the NPT which had not yet done so to negotiate without 
delay the required agreements based on the model contained in document 
INFCIRC/153. In that context, his Government was very concerned that the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which had become a Party to the Treaty 
five years previously, had not yet concluded the requisite safeguards 
agreement and urged it to do so as soon as possible. 
27. Australia noted with satisfaction the quantitative and qualitative 
improvements to the safeguards system and believed that efforts to improve its 
efficiency and effectiveness should be continued. In view of the development 
of new types of facilities and progress in nuclear technology, the safeguards 
system must be able to evolve and adapt in order to remain credible. 
Accordingly, Australia strongly supported the Director General's efforts to 
develop safeguards approaches to deal with the increasing number of facilities 
and quantities of material subject to safeguards and to meet the challenges of 
new technologies. It also approved of the Director General's decision to ask 
the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation to examine the 
possibilities for new or improved safeguards procedures. However, it was 
unlikely that any new safeguards approaches could be applied in the short or 
medium term and they could, therefore, not be looked to as a way of reducing 
the cost of safeguards in the short or medium term. 
28. Agency safeguards and the NPT had greatly enhanced international 
security. The NPT, which had 142 Parties since the recent accession of 
Mozambique, was one of the most successful arms control treaties. Twenty-six 
countries had become Parties to the Treaty during the past decade and 
Australia urged countries which had not yet done so to accede to it as soon as 
possible, noting with concern that some countries which had major nuclear 
activities remained outside the NPT or were not implementing measures designed 
by the international community to guarantee the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
29. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had just ended in Geneva. It was 
disappointing that despite substantial agreement by the Parties on the 
majority of the questions before the Conference, it had not been possible to 
adopt a final document. However, positive trends had been clearly evident. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 9 


The discussions at the Conference had generally been constructive, reflecting 
the spirit prevailing in the international community. Some of the most 
important and tangible achievements of direct relevance to the Agency had 
been: common understanding on future priorities for peaceful nuclear 
co-operation, including in particular the needs of the least developed 
countries; specific proposals for strengthening the barriers against the 
further spread of nuclear weapons; proposals for dealing with situations where 
questions had been raised about a State's commitment to non-proliferation 
undertakings; suggestions for future Agency activities relating to fissionable 
material; and, perhaps most significantly, consensus on the need for nuclear 
suppliers to contribute fully to the non-proliferation goal by requiring in 
future that nuclear supply only take place when accompanied by a legally 
binding commitment to non-proliferation and the application of full-scope 
safeguards. The overwhelming majority of suppliers had already taken 
unilateral measures along those lines, and his delegation hoped that those few 
which had not yet done so would act without delay, in accordance with the 
recommendations made at the NPT Review Conference. 


30. The Conference had provided a solid basis for a successful Conference 
in 1995, the prime purpose of which would be to extend the period of 
application of the Treaty either indefinitely or for an additional period or 
periods. A fundamental element of Australia's foreign policy was the search 
for ways of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Australia had 
attempted to strengthen non-proliferation in direct and practical ways, for 
example by defending the principle of application of full-scope safeguards as 
a condition for nuclear trade, and it would continue its efforts in that 
direction. 
31. Australia's support for the Agency's technical co-operation programme 
enabled it to fulfil its obligation under the NPT to assist developing 
countries to benefit from the peaceful applications of nuclear science and 
technology. Australia intended to pay to the TACF for 1991 a contribution 
corresponding to its base rate of assessment. In addition to its 
contributions to the TACF, Australia paid considerable extrabudgetary 
contributions, inter alia, for the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Asia 
and the Pacific (RCA). That agreement, which had excellent results, was a 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 10 


harmonious mechanism for regional co-operation and Australia would continue, 
within its budgetary limitations, to support and promote that important means 
of technology transfer. 


32. During the past year, Australia had hosted Agency training courses on 
nuclear medicine and research reactor core conversion to low-enriched fuel, 
and a third course on improvement of radiation protection infrastructures was 
currently taking place. Australia had also provided places for 24 Agency 
fellows for on-the-job training in areas such as applications of tracers in 
industry, soil erosion and radiation processing techniques. Australian 
experts had undertaken some 40 expert missions in connection with Agency 
technical assistance projects, and Australia had provided a range of advance 
equipment. Much of that assistance was provided by the Australian Nuclear 
Science and Technology Organization (ANSTO), whose training centre gave high 
priority to the provision of training to participants from all countries. 
33. The ANSTO had benefited from the improvement in arrangements for 
government funding of science and technology activities. Work had continued 
on the Synroc process for radioactive waste conditioning developed by 
Australia. In addition to the co-operation projects on Synroc implemented 
with establishments in Japan, Italy and the United Kingdom, new co-operation 
agreements had been concluded with counterpart establishments of ANSTO in 
China and the Republic of Korea. Organizations in the Soviet Union had also 
expressed interest in the subject. The results obtained continued to confirm 
the merits of Synroc as an alternative to the borosilicate glass process 
already used successfully. Nuclear co-operation between ANSTO and the Atomic 
Energy Research Institute of the Republic of Korea and Chiang Mai University 
in Thailand had been extended, reflecting the expansion of nuclear techniques 
in the Asia and Pacific region, the countries of which were relying 
increasingly on those techniques to stimulate their economic and social 
development in various fields. Australia would continue to assist its 
neighbours in developing those techniques in a safe and responsible manner. 
34. Australia had been engaged for many years in research and development 
work in nuclear medicine and science. Its objective had always been to attain 
high safety levels; so far no incident had had adverse consequences on public 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 11 


health. Australia naturally intended to continue to maintain that record. 
High standards of safety were essential for the acceptance of nuclear power by 


the international community and to ensure its credibility. Australia fully 


supported the Agency's safety activities, which were a necessary basis for 
guaranteeing a high uniform level of safety. It welcomed the Agency's 
programme aimed at developing safety standards for radioactive waste 
management operations, and noted with satisfaction the adoption of the Code of 
Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste. 
The Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material were equally 


important particularly the development of regulatory provisions for the 
transport of plutonium by air. 


35. At the invitation of the Australian Government, supported by the 
national mining industry, the Agency had in August organized a regional 
seminar for the media on nuclear energy, science and technology which had been 
attended by some 40 participants from Australia, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, 
New Zealand, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Thailand and 
Viet Nam. That seminar had provided a useful opportunity for the nuclear 
industry to explain its activities and to deal with certain issues before a 
critical audience. A panel discussion on energy and the environment, which 
had included representatives of the environmental movement, had attracted 
considerable interest. 
36. Australia was the world's largest coal exporter and also exported 
petroleum products, petroleum gas and liquefied natural gas. It also had a 
significant proportion of the world's economically recoverable reserves of 
uranium and was currently operating two uranium mines. As a reliable and 
responsible supplier of uranium, Australia helped to meet the energy 
requirements of countries which had opted for nuclear power. It shared the 
concern of the international community about the negative impact on the 
environment of certain human activities and fully supported the United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development which was to be held in Brazil in 
1992 to encourage governments to adopt strategies for the integration of 
economic and environmental decisions. 
37. The achievement of sustainable development posed a range of complex 
challenges for the energy sector. Key objectives would be to manage resource 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 12 


exploitation and use in such a way as to ensure that energy needs could be met 
without irreversible damage to the environment. The most important questions 
were climate change, protection of biodiversity and of life support systems 
and the development of non-polluting, renewable energy sources. 


38. Australia continued its strong support of the Agency's activities to 
promote the peaceful and safe use of nuclear energy while strengthening the 
barriers against misuse, and it attached great importance to the Agency's 
unique role and its statutory functions. As it was essential that the 
Agency's resources should be used effectively, his delegation welcomed the 
idea of preparing a medium-term plan. The Agency was one of the most 
efficient and effective of United Nations organizations, to a large extent as 
a result of the Director General's leadership and the Secretariat's 
dedication, and his delegation wished to reaffirm its confidence in them. 
39. In conclusion, he stressed the need to ensure that extraneous political 
issues or sectional demands did not compromise the Agency's ability to meet 
its responsibilities. It was for Member States to establish conditions in 
which the Agency and the Secretariat could operate with a unified purpose and 
maximum efficiency. 
40. Mr. ALI (Malaysia), reaffirming his country's support for the 
Agency, said that the new and urgent issues mentioned by the Director General 
in his opening statement and the progress made in the implementation of 
earlier decisions of the General Conference pointed to an increase in 
activities which would inevitably put further strain on an already difficult 
budgetary situation. Under those circumstances, it was no longer realistic to 
expect the Agency to function effectively without additional funds. The time 
had come to review the policy of zero real growth of the budget so as to 
enable the Agency to meet the needs of its Member States - particularly those 
of the developing countries - and to discharge its responsibilities in the 
most effective and efficient way. 
41. In that regard, his delegation wished to emphasize once again the 
importance it attached to technology transfer and staff training in the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing countries. To 
that end, Malaysia sought the fullest co-operation with both industrialized 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 13 


and developing countries on a bilateral, regional or multilateral basis. The 
bilateral co-operation programmes with a number of countries in the Asia and 
Pacific region had been very successful, as had a regional co-operation 
programme under the RCA. Regional programmes fostered technical co-operation, 
a greater sharing of resources (including facilities, equipment and human 
resources) and of knowledge, as well as close contacts between scientists. 
They also facilitated technical co-operation among developing countries. It 
was therefore particularly satisfying to note that an agreement similar to the 
RCA had been concluded for Africa. 


42. At the multilateral level, Malaysia received valuable assistance and 
support through the Agency's technical and co-operation programme. 
Recognizing the importance of that programme as a means of sharing knowledge 
and technology among developing countries, Malaysia had contributed to it by 
hosting courses and workshops, providing places for Agency trainees and 
supplying experts. Malaysia was thus firmly convinced of the value of 
co-operation among developing countries as a complement to co-operation 
between industrialized and developing countries. Malaysia stood ready to 
enter into co-operation activities with other developing countries in those 
areas in which it had the necessary expertise. 
43. As a developing country, Malaysia naturally accorded prime importance 
to technical assistance and the Agency's other promotional activities. At the 
same time, however, it was not unmindful of the role played by the Agency's 
safeguards and its safety-related activities. Remaining firm in its 
conviction that international safeguards constituted an effective barrier to 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and that their application served to 
promote international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, his 
delegation urged all non-nuclear-weapon States to submit all of their peaceful 
nuclear installations to safeguards. The extension of the safeguards regime 
would, of course, result in additional budgetary constraints in the context of 
zero real growth, and so he hoped that the working group on the financing of 
safeguards would succeed in finding a long-term solution which would take into 
account the expected growth in activities while ensuring that the balance 
between safeguards and promotional activities was maintained. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 14 


44. It was obvious that compliance with strict safety standards would 
enhance confidence in nuclear energy. In the light of the adverse 
psychological impact of the Chernobyl accident, it was crucial that 
governments and international organizations should make a concerted effort to 
strengthen the nuclear safety regime. Unfortunately, however, even the 
strictest safety standards could not fully eliminate the risk of nuclear 
accidents, and it was therefore essential that the international community 
should establish a mechanism to provide adequate compensation to the victims 
of such accidents. In that connection, the progress made by the working group 
and subsequently the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage was 
encouraging. His delegation firmly believed that a comprehensive liability 
regime covering both civil liability and international State liability would 
constitute an appropriate legal framework which could restore the world's 
confidence in nuclear energy. 
45. A further element in the public acceptance of nuclear energy was the 
question of radioactive wastes and their safe disposal. Despite the existence 
of suitable and effective technologies for the safe handling and disposal of 
radioactive wastes, public fears, whether real or subjective, could not be 
dispelled unless international standards were strictly adhered to. In that 
connection, his delegation welcomed the preparation of documents on safety 
standards for radioactive wastes which would make it possible to demonstrate 
more clearly that those wastes could be managed safely. 
46. The uncontrolled disposal or dumping of radioactive waste should be 
prevented by all possible means. Prevention was better than cure, even though 
there had to date been no report of any such unauthorized dumping. In that 
context, the drawing up of the Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste represented an important step 
forward in the establishment of an effective international instrument aimed at 
preventing the unauthorized storage of radioactive waste and at controlling 
the international transboundary movement of such waste. Malaysia therefore 
called upon all Member States to adopt the Code and to comply with the 
principles embodied in it. 
47. The safe handling of radioactive sources was another area which 
warranted the most serious attention. The accidents at Goiania in Brazil and 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 15 


more recently in San Salvador had resulted in the death of several people, 
thus showing that accidents with fatal consequences could occur even though 
radiation technology was generally used in a safe manner. Only within an 
adequate radiation protection infrastructure was it possible to exercise 
effective controls designed to reduce the probability of radiological 
accidents. As developing countries strove to benefit from the use of nuclear 
techniques, they tended too often to overlook the importance of radiation 
protection, particularly when resources were limited. Malaysia fervently 
hoped that those countries would come to realize that they could not enjoy the 


full benefits of nuclear technology unless its safety was assured, in which 


connection the Agency had a vital informative role to play. 


48. In conclusion, his delegation was deeply convinced that international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear energy, with the Agency playing a crucial 
role, provided an effective means of exploiting the vast potential offered by 
that technology for social and economic development. 
49. Mr. KIENER (Switzerland) observed that nuclear energy was firmly 
situated among the challenges currently facing the world in the areas of 
politics, energy and the environment. The events in the Gulf served as a 
further indication of the need to diversify energy sources. The threat posed 
by the greenhouse effect to the entire world and the urgent need to avert it 
were widely acknowledged by the international community. Nuclear energy must 
continue to help in solving the fundamental problem of satisfying the 
increasing demand for energy while ensuring better protection for the 
biosphere. Confidence in atomic energy was therefore crucial - a fact which 
called into play one of the Agency's vital roles. It was clear from the 
Annual Report that the Agency was operating in that spirit, and in that 
connection his delegation particularly welcomed the efforts made by the 
Director General to highlight the positive contribution of nuclear energy to 
the solution of environmental problems. 
50. The difficulties encountered in seeking a consensus on the budget for 
1991 had illustrated the dilemma in which the Agency found itself, with 
increasing statutory tasks on the one hand and a resource ceiling on the 
other. The suggestions which had been advanced for overcoming that dilemma 
were unsatisfactory. The practices of waiving Financial Regulations and of 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 16 


financing important programmes through extrabudgetary contributions were 
acceptable to his Government only as exceptional measures; for the future, 
solutions going to the root of the problem would have to be found. 


51. With regard to resources, his Government stood by its commitment to the 
zero growth principle and held the view that rationalization and savings were 
still possible. In any case, that principle could only be reconsidered once 
an analysis had been made of the priorities of all the Agency's programmes. 
In that context, his delegation attached great importance to the preparation 
of a medium-term plan and welcomed the steps taken by the Secretariat to that 
end. The aim in drawing up that plan should be to evaluate the existing 
programmes and to identify priorities, bearing in mind the needs which the 
Agency would be expected to satisfy in the future. Particular care would be 
necessary to ensure that the Agency's activities were co-ordinated with those 
of other international organizations, to eliminate any duplication of effort 
and to dispense with any programme which a different organization would be 
better equipped to execute. It also appeared essential that a future 
medium-term plan should in no way impede the Agency's capacity to react in a 
flexible manner to new or unforeseen needs. 
52. The Agency's safeguards activities, which remained vital to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, were one area in which the budgetary dilemma 
was being felt. It was of fundamental importance that the credibility of the 
safeguards system be maintained, and he wondered whether steps to rationalize 
safeguards implementation could not be taken without detriment to that 
credibility - particularly in the inspection of light-water reactors, for 
which a system of random inspections could perhaps be instituted. 
53. During the Fourth NPT Review Conference, which had just ended in 
Geneva, a number of constructive recommendations had been made regarding, 
inter alia, the credibility and financing of safeguards, inspections, and the 
conditions of supply of nuclear materials and facilities. Some of those 
recommendations could usefully be taken up by the Agency. It was regrettable 
that a single delegation's insistence on matters unconnected with the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy should have prevented the adoption by consensus of a 
final document which would have reflected the results of the considerable 
efforts made by delegations throughout the Review Conference. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 17 


54. The past year could be described as a good one for nuclear safety. 
That result was attributable, on the one hand, to the efforts made by the 
nuclear industry and by plant operators and, on the other hand, to those made 
by the various supervisory bodies, and it was essential that all those 
involved should work together in a spirit of mutual respect for each other's 
functions. Safety was the responsibility of each State, whereas the Agency 
must play the pivotal role in the vital area of international co-operation. 
His delegation welcomed and approved the report on measures taken to 
strengthen international co-operation in matters relating to nuclear safety 
and radiological protection, the results of which were impressive. 
55. The Agency's safety-related activities should be focused on the 
co-ordination of programmes, the exchange of information and the formulation 
of innovative recommendations for the benefit of Member States. At the same 
time, there was undoubtedly a growing need for safety-related services which 
the Agency must be in a position to supply to requesting Member States. 
Accordingly, his delegation could also approve the report's conclusions and 
the activities proposed. 
56. The programme on the safety of old reactors was of great interest to 
his Government, which had just decided to provide financial support in the 
amount of 100 000 Swiss francs, as well as expert services for the same 
amount. Given the importance of the work envisaged, it would perhaps have 
been appropriate to include RBMK reactors. At all events, general information 
on the operation of nuclear facilities was becoming increasingly important, 
and he welcomed the recent joint decision by the Nuclear Energy Agency of the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD/NEA) and the 
Agency to apply, on a trial basis, a scale indicating the seriousness of 
nuclear events. 
57. The situation of nuclear energy in Switzerland was characterized by two 
contradictory tendencies: on the one hand, a sceptical - even negative attitude 
to nuclear energy on the part of a large section of the population, 
and on the other hand, a constant increase in energy requirements. The public 
scepticism was finding expression in the form of two popular initiatives 
against nuclear energy. The first called for a ten-year moratorium on 
licences to build any new plants. The second demanded the complete shutdown 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 18 


of all existing nuclear power plants by the end of their service life at the 


latest. The outcome of that far-reaching expression of public opinion 
remained uncertain. The Government and the majority in the Swiss Parliament 
were in favour of keeping the nuclear option open and had called upon the 
population to reject the two initiatives. The main argument in favour of 
keeping nuclear power was the need to meet an ever-increasing demand for 
electricity. Nuclear power currently represented some 40% of total 
electricity production. Furthermore, in order to cover future needs, 
Switzerland had shares in the order of 2450 MW(nuclear) in France, the Swiss 
nuclear capacity being 3000 MW. It was also necessary to take into account 
the diversification of energy resources, environmental protection and the 
maintenance of a technological potential. 


58. The Chernobyl accident had played a central role in the campaign 
against nuclear power in Switzerland. By systematically casting doubt on the 
reliability of nuclear safety, the opponents of nuclear power were quick to 
play on irrational fears. Their line of reasoning was always aimed at 
eliciting emotional reactions to which the supporters of nuclear power could 
respond only with rational arguments. The debate was therefore taking place 
at totally different levels. While advocating a new post-industrial society 
less greedy for resources, the anti-nuclear camp failed to take account of 
unavoidable needs with regard to economic growth, the environment and 
population increase. An abandonment of nuclear energy thus appeared as an 
inappropriate and timorous withdrawal on the part of a well-off, technically 
capable and politically stable country. Moratoriums, which were not unique to 
Switzerland, were myths which gave the illusion that time would change or 
resolve problems. 
59. Given the nationwide criticism which nuclear energy was receiving, 
Switzerland accorded great importance to close international co-operation 
aimed at helping to restore public confidence in it and bringing about a less 
emotional approach. It went without saying that the Agency occupied a central 
role in that international co-operation, not only as a forum, but also as an 
agent, as was demonstrated by the Annual Report. 
60. Mr. CSERVENY (Hungary), speaking on behalf of the new Hungarian 
Government, which was responsible to the freely elected Parliament, reaffirmed 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 19 


the commitment of the Republic of Hungary to the Agency's Statute and to the 
strengthening of the Agency's vital role in preventing the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and promoting international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear technology. 


61. The transition to a market economy and the process of democratization 
currently under way in Central and Eastern Europe and in the Soviet Union were 
among the most promising events to have occurred in the world since the 
thirty-third session of the General Conference. Those developments would 
certainly have a positive impact on international economic co-operation in all 
fields, including peaceful nuclear energy. 
62. The Hungarian Government was facing unprecedented challenges, since 
there was no ready-made path to follow in the transition from a command to a 
market economy. Any progress in the implementation of Hungary's economic 
policy would depend upon the crucial decision it had to take on its energy 
policy. As a result of the false economic policies of the preceding decades, 
the gross domestic product per unit of electrical energy was almost four times 
lower than in developed countries. In working out its new energy policy, his 
Government was concerned above all to assure essential energy supplies. The 
recent events in the Gulf and the suspension of oil deliveries due mainly to 
the production and transport problems facing the USSR, Hungary's traditional 
supplier, served to highlight the precarious nature of his country's energy 
situation. Hungary must, as a matter of urgency, put an end to its exclusive 
energy dependence and adopt measures to ensure greater energy efficiency and 
more rational use while bearing in mind considerations of health and the 
environment. 
63. In view of its own energy situation, Hungary was particularly aware of 
the similar concerns voiced by the Member States of the European Community in 
attempting to formulate a common energy policy. Still, it was vital for 
Europe that that policy be designed and implemented in such a manner as to 
take due account of the transitory situation of the economies of Hungary and 
the other countries of Eastern and Central Europe. In that context, his 
Government highly valued the proposal to establish a European energy community 
now being discussed by the Commission of the European Communities (CEC) and by 
various non-Community countries. His Government was also studying a long-term 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 20 


solution involving the further exploitation of national resources and raw 
materials. It remained aware, however, of the need for wide-ranging 
consultations among specialists and with the general public before taking a 
decision on the type of high-capacity basic power station needed by the 
country and on the timing of its construction. At the same time, given that 
Hungary's only nuclear power plant accounted for about half of the country's 
electricity production, he appealed to the understanding of those who demanded 
a non-nuclear Central Europe and the immediate abandonment by Hungary of its 
nuclear programme. The recent experience of certain Western European 
countries served as a warning against hasty decisions on such a serious matter. 


64. Recalling that his country remained deeply committed to the NPT and to 
the reliability of the non-proliferation regime, he affirmed that Hungary's 
legislation would continue to ensure its full application, and that that would 
include the very important field of nuclear exports. Hungary urged all States 
which had not yet done so to become Parties to the NPT. 
65. His delegation welcomed the keen interest which had been shown by all 
participants at the Fourth NPT Review Conference in the role played by the 
Agency in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. Despite the failure to reach consensus on a 
final declaration, due to differences of opinion on a number of questions 
related to disarmament, a positive evaluation of the Agency's activities had 
emerged from the general debate and the report of the committees. With regard 
to the role and future activities of the Agency, a number of proposals, 
suggestions and expectations had been formulated on issues as important as 
strengthening of the safeguards system, improvement of the safeguards 
information policy, international co-operation on nuclear safety, and 
technical assistance and co-operation. Among the proposals particularly 
deserving of the open-minded attention of the Agency's Member States were 
those aimed at evaluating the experience acquired in 20 years of safeguards 
implementation or at studying the scope and modalities of special inspections 
in cases where the non-proliferation commitments of any State Party to the 
Treaty had come into question. His delegation was also in favour of 
increasing the transparency of the Safeguards Implementation Report, which 
would help to maintain, or even strengthen, confidence in the safeguards 
system. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 21 


66. Welcoming the large proportion of the Director General's opening 
statement which had been devoted to issues of nuclear safety, he associated 
himself with the proposals on that matter put forward by Italy on behalf of 
the European Community and commended the Agency on its activities in that very 
important field. Hungarian specialists had learnt valuable lessons both from 
the Agency's pre-INSARR (Integrated Safety Assessment of Research Reactors) 
mission to Budapest to examine the renovated research reactor prior to its 
return to service and from the first ASSET (Assessment of Safety-Significant 
Events Team) training seminar to have been organized in Hungary. 
67. Hungary also had great hopes for the trial application of the 
International Nuclear Event Scale, which should help to provide proper 
information to the public on nuclear accidents and incidents and, in so doing, 
to increase its level of awareness and confidence with regard to major issues 
such as safety, waste disposal, environmental impact, costs and so on. In 
that context, the overview which would be provided by the 1991 conference on 
nuclear safety would be extremely interesting. 
68. As a country which favoured co-operation at the sub-regional level, 
Hungary was ready to participate, within the framework of the "Pentagonal", in 
the co-operation effort being made in the nuclear field. Negotiations were 
currently under way with a view to reaching a consensus on the rapid exchange 
of information in the event of a nuclear accident and on scientific and 
technical co-operation in the field of nuclear safety. It was to be hoped 
that the "Pentagonal" countries would make a valuable contribution to 
supplementing the NUSS guides and codes for the next generation of reactors 
with inherent and enhanced safety characteristics. 
69. His Government would be following closely the major project recently 
launched by the Agency on the safety of older reactors, which should serve as 
an excellent means of strengthening the effectiveness of all ongoing relevant 
national, bilateral or multilateral programmes. The four reactors of the 
Hungarian nuclear power plant belonged to the second generation of WWER 
reactors. They had been designed in accordance with safety principles meeting 
the internationally accepted requirements in force in the early 1980s. The 
safety systems and confinement ensured the protection of the operating 
personnel and prevented radioactive releases into the environment, even in the 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 22 


event of a design-basis accident. Nevertheless, continuous efforts were being 
made to enhance the safety of the plant, bearing in mind the most recent 
results of research and development programmes and the lessons drawn from 


international operating experience. 


70. In view of the importance of the legal aspects of the use of nuclear 
energy, his delegation considered that the international conventions drawn up 
with the assistance of the Agency had made a major contribution to enhancing 
international co-operation in that field. It continued to be interested in 
the work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage and was 
ready to participate actively in the review and updating of the Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, to which end the drafting 
committee should commence work as soon as possible. 
71. The Director General's report on the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities in 1989 showed that the additional measures taken by the Agency had 
led to an increase in the effectiveness and efficiency of technical 
assistance. The evaluation of various aspects of technical co-operation 
helped to improve the quality of programme implementation. The evaluation of 
the Agency's technical co-operation with Hungary during the period 1976-89, 
which was also mentioned in the Agency's 1990 Yearbook, demonstrated that his 
country had succeeded in making good use of the assistance provided by the 
Agency and showed that even a small country could be very effective in 
transferring nuclear information and technology between the most advanced and 
the developing countries. 
72. He noted with satisfaction that the funds available for the Agency's 
technical assistance had further increased, as had his own country's 
contribution, both in kind and in cash. His Government had decided to pledge 
to the TACF for 1991 a voluntary contribution in local currency equivalent to 
US $102 900 in accordance with its share of the target. 
73. In conclusion, his delegation reaffirmed its confidence in the Agency's 
ability to meet the challenges that lay ahead of it, and, in that connection, 
paid homage to the activities of the Secretariat and to the competence of the 
Director General. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 23 


74. Msgr. SQUICCIARINI (Holy See) said that the Annual Report for 1989 
was an impressive document which well reflected the objectives laid down in 
Article II of the Agency's Statute, namely "to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world". 
75. The delegation of the Holy See noted with satisfaction the work carried 
out by the Agency and its Member States in one of the Agency's main areas of 
activity, nuclear safety, and in particular radiation protection. In the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy, the Agency's main task was to promote and 
support all activities related to safety and environmental protection. As a 
general rule, in every sphere of science and technology and their use for the 
benefit of all, the highest standards of safety should always be observed in 
the interests of mankind and the natural environment. Experience had shown 
that safety and protection played an important, indeed essential, role in the 
conservation of the environment. Nature, understood as a creation of God for 
the benefit of man, was not meant to be exploited irresponsibly, but rather to 
be cultivated wisely: taken advantage of and at the same time protected and 
preserved for the good of everyone, including future generations. In his 
message delivered on World Peace Day, Pope John Paul II had made reference to 
that idea when he had said: "a new ecological awareness is beginning to 
emerge, which rather than being downplayed ought to be encouraged to develop 
into concrete programmes and initiatives". For example, in satisfying the 
present demand for energy and in searching for new sources of energy to 
replace non-renewable ones, efforts should be made to find solutions which 
promoted and ensured safety, enhanced the welfare of humanity and provided a 
healthy environment in which to live. 
76. However, safety and environmental protection could and should also be 
seen in much wider terms. The political events and major economic changes 
which the world had recently witnessed in Europe and elsewhere seemed to 
reflect not only detente between the major powers, but also a trend towards 
broader international co-operation in many areas. Optimistically speaking, 
all those changes provided new perspectives and a real possibility for 
international co-operation on a scale which few had even dreamt of several 
years earlier. The Agency's activities during the past 33 years could serve 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 24 


as a model to illustrate the functioning of such broad international 
co-operation. International, regional and interregional organizations should 
be strengthened in order to build up existing channels and to open up new ones 
to promote mutual assistance and partnership. 


77. On 25 June, addressing a group of representatives of the United Nations 
and other institutions, Pope John Paul II had spoken of "channels for 
effective communication and dialogue within the international community". He 
had also said: "Today, at a time of rapidly changing geopolitical realities, 
this task remains essential to the development of that new solidarity among 
nations and peoples, based upon an unstinting respect for the dignity and 
fundamental rights of the human person, which can provide the moral 
foundations and sure guarantee of a just and lasting peace in our world". 
78. Once the doors were open, all the benefits of co-operation were to be 
had. Indeed, the recent political and economic developments could be the 
great chance for international organizations such as the Agency and the United 
Nations to work together for the welfare of humanity. By sharing experiences 
and exchanging information, nations engaged in peaceful competition could 
promote safety and environmental protection in nuclear-related areas. There 
was reason to hope that such a genuine partnership and co-operation on a 
global scale would also help to solve many other problems which had created 
anxiety and mistrust among peoples. Although that scenario might appear 
overoptimistic, the Holy See supported and encouraged all efforts in that 
direction. 
79. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium) said that his country naturally shared 
the views on various aspects of the Agency's activities expressed the previous 
day by the Italian delegation on behalf of the European Community and its 
Member States. 
80. Following the Fourth NPT Review Conference, and, in view of the very 
serious events which had been taking place since the beginning of August in 
the Middle East, Belgium believed that it was more essential than ever to 
maintain and, if necessary, to reinforce the Agency's safeguards 
capabilities. The Agency should be able to guarantee that nuclear activities 
placed under safeguards were directed exclusively towards the declared, 
peaceful purposes and not towards the manufacture of explosive devices. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 25 


81. It was not enough to obtain political declarations of intention from 
the States concerned, it was necessary also to verify those intentions, and it 
was not without reason that the Statute prescribed that the Agency's 
activities should be accompanied by specific checks on the peaceful use of the 
materials and services provided. It was equally not without reason that 
Article III of the NPT provided for the application of safeguards to all 
nuclear source or special fissionable material in the territory of 
non-nuclear-weapon States in order to verify the fulfilment of the political 
obligations assumed by those States through their accession to the NPT. 
Lastly, it was not out of a spirit of domination that countries supplying 
nuclear materials and equipment required verification by the Agency of their 
use for peaceful purposes and not for the manufacture of explosive devices. 
82. It was also necessary that all nuclear material that ought to be 
safeguarded should in fact be declared to the Agency. In the event of doubt, 
appropriate measures to help restore confidence should be taken by the Agency 
and the State concerned within the framework of the safeguards agreement 
between them. Belgium attached great importance to the recommendation put 
forward at the Fourth NPT Review Conference that the Agency should not 
hesitate to make full use of its rights, including that of carrying out 
special inspections. His delegation would be grateful to the Director General 
if he would make known his considered opinion regarding the application of 
special inspections to corroborate certain information made available to the 
Agency, both in the case of States Party to the NPT and States not Party to 
the NPT but having facilities under safeguards. The possibility of such 
interventions would trouble only those that might intend to divert some of 
their nuclear activities from the officially declared uses. 
83. while it was regrettable that certain States had still not acceded to 
the NPT, it was just as alarming that others which were Parties had not yet 
concluded the safeguards agreement with the Agency required under 
Article III. Failure to do so could cast doubt upon the real political 
commitment of those States, particularly when they had major nuclear 
facilities, as was the case for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
which had signed the NPT in 1985. His delegation therefore urged that country 
to conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency without further delay. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 26 


84. There had been a great deal of discussion during the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference of the need to apply full-scope safeguards. For Belgium, the 
ultimate goal remained the application of such safeguards to all civil nuclear 
facilities in all States, whether or not they were Parties to the NPT and 
whether or not they had nuclear weapons. Belgium would be ready to require 
the application of full-scope safeguards as a condition for the export of 
nuclear materials and equipment if all exporter States did the same. It 
therefore urged those States, whether or not they were Parties to the NPT, to 
take a joint decision to that effect. 
85. Alongside safeguards, which were essential for the further development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, it was also necessary to continue to 
ensure universal compliance with the strictest regulations governing the 
safety of nuclear reactors and facilities and the protection of workers and 
the public against ionizing radiation. Environmental conservation having 
become one of the major international concerns, it was essential to prove to 
the public and the politicians that nuclear power could help meet a 
substantial proportion of the world's energy requirements, without impairing 
the environment, public health or the energy independence of States. It was 
in that spirit that his delegation supported the activities carried out or 
planned by the Agency with regard to the drafting of codes of practice (NUSS 
programme), recommendations or guidelines, and to the publication of 
comparative information on nuclear energy and other energy sources. It was 
important to have reliable information on the risks to human health and the 
environment caused by the whole cycle of the world energy system, particularly 
in view of the 1992 Conference on Environment and Development. That concern 
was also reflected in the proposal by the Member States of the European 
Community to organize a conference on nuclear safety in 1991. 
86. All the parties concerned, constructors, operators, States and 
international organizations had a role to play in the major challenge posed by 
the safety of nuclear facilities, but the final responsibility must always 
remain with the operator and the State. The Agency's role could only be one 
which complemented bilateral or multilateral initiatives. It was therefore 
necessary to realize that the safe operation of nuclear facilities, 
particularly power plants, called for lengthy and complex studies carried out 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 27 


by many experts acting on behalf of their employers and consequently 
conferring responsibility for their judgements and recommendations upon their 
employers. 


87. It was in relation to that fundamental responsibility that the Agency's 
responsibility in organizing expert missions should be seen. Despite the high 
qualities of the experts participating in them and given the very short time 
available, those missions had limited goals and could not be compared with 
thorough studies providing a complete analysis of the safety of a facility. 
While recognizing the usefulness of such missions, his delegation encouraged 
the Agency to weigh carefully the degree of responsibility it was able to take 
in that area, where its credibility was at stake, and there was a risk of 
provoking hasty reactions from a highly sensitive but not very well-informed 
public. The Agency had a key role to play as a source of information and 
expertise and as a means for promoting all forms of co-operation. However, it 
did not have the necessary financial and human resources to assume the leading 
role, particularly with regard to site selection or the design and backfitting 
of nuclear facilities. 
88. Where international co-operation was concerned, Belgium attached 
particular importance to the substantial co-operation which was being 
established to guarantee nuclear safety in the whole of Europe and was 
therefore participating in that activity; it particularly appreciated the 
effective co-operative links with the Polish Government in that area. 
89. Safety reviews of Belgian reactors were conducted every ten years. 
Major modifications had been decided and carried out to ensure that their 
operation was based on the latest criteria applied to new nuclear power 
plants. Those modifications had been made within a reasonable time and at an 
acceptable cost. In order to improve the training of operating personnel, two 
centres equipped with simulators had been set up in 1989 at Doel and Tihange. 
90. In the area of radiation protection, the Belgian Government had decided 
to construct a remote radiation monitoring network. Covering the whole 
national territory, that equipment should make it possible to estimate any 
exposure of the public to contamination and to take swift counter-measures in 
the event of a serious nuclear accident. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 28 


91. The problem of the disposal of radioactive waste was being considered 
with the greatest attention by the Belgian authorities, which had launched a 
major investment programme for a completely new waste processing and 
conditioning infrastructure to be set up on the Belgoprocess site at Mol and a 
decommissioning programme for facilities which had already been shut down or 
would be in the near future. Also, a committee of Belgian and foreign experts 
had given a favourable opinion on the choice of Boom clay for burying 
high-level wastes. 
92. The importance of nuclear energy for Belgium was illustrated by the 
fact that the production of its seven power reactors had increased in 1989 to 
39 000 million kilowatt-hours or 61% of total electricity production. The use 
of nuclear fuel, which did not pollute the environment, had saved Belgium 
21 000 or 13 000 million Belgian francs (US $650 or 400 million) in foreign 
exchanges, depending on whether the cost of imported fuel oil or of coal was 
considered. 
93. In conclusion, he reaffirmed the importance Belgium attached to the 
essential role played by the Agency, its confidence in the Agency and the 
Director General, and lastly its readiness to continue to co-operate actively 
in achieving common objectives. 
94. Mr. BROOKS (New Zealand) said that the Agency played a vital role 
in the non-proliferation regime. As the Director General had recently 
indicated, the Agency had the largest on-site inspection system in the world. 
It was designed to provide vital reassurance that safeguarded nuclear material 
was not being diverted for use in nuclear explosive devices. New Zealand 
welcomed the Agency's statement that it had not detected any diversion of 
safeguarded nuclear material or misuse of safeguarded facilities in 1989. 
Maximum reassurance was, of course, provided by States' adherence to the major 
legally binding arms control agreements governing non-proliferation and the 
associated verification mechanisms. New Zealand was a Party to the NPT and to 
the Treaty of Rarotonga. The latter established a South Pacific nuclear free 
zone and provided for the application of full-scope safeguards to all source 
and special fissionable material used in all peaceful nuclear activities of 
Parties to the Treaty. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 29 


95. Nevertheless, the Fourth NPT Review Conference had shown.that 
improvements in the non-proliferation regime were still possible. New 
Zealand, which had participated in that Conference, regretted that there had 
been no consensus on a final document. Committtees II and III had reviewed in 
detail the application of the articles which had particular relevance to the 
Agency's activities, and it was unfortuntate that it had not been possible to 
include their recommendation in a final document. 
96. However, the problems which had been discussed at the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference remained, and it would be necessary to examine carefully the 
recommendations on which there had been consensus in order to see how they 
could be implemented. For instance, some 50 countries had still not met their 
safeguards obligations under the NPT. New Zealand noted with interest that 
the safeguards agreement between a South Pacific country and the Agency had 
recently been approved by the Board of Governors. It would continue to 
encourage the few countries in the South Pacific region which had not yet 
concluded such an agreement to do so. However, those countries did not have 
significant nuclear activities. It was much more important that countries 
with significant nuclear activities should conclude full-scope safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. There were also the so-called threshold States 
which remained outside the NPT regime. Inevitably, the intentions of those 
States which refused to accept safeguards on all their peaceful nuclear 
activities were a source of concern, and the Agency deserved full and 
unanimous support in its negotiation of safeguards agreements with such key 
States. 
97. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had also discussed the means open to 
the Agency in the event of doubts about an NPT Party's commitment to 
non-proliferation objectives. Attention had been drawn to the special 
inspections provided for under paragraphs 73 and 75 of document INFCIRC/153. 
His delegation believed that such inspections could help to restore confidence 
in cases where serious questions concerning compliance with commitments arose, 
and it would like the Agency to prepare a report on that subject. 
98. Consistent with its dual role of encouraging peace and improving living 
conditions, the Agency also established guidelines for the safe use of nuclear 
technology and provided technical assistance to those countries which 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 30 


requested it. It should be congratulated on its valuable role in 
strengthening the safety standards of the nuclear industry through the work of 
the International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group (INSAG) and by updating the 
Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material. 


99. The recently adopted Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste had been drawn up following fears 
over the dumping of nuclear waste. It was essential to guard against the 
possibility of such practices'. New Zealand was a party to a comprehensive 
regime to ban the dumping of radioactive wastes in the South Pacific, and both 
the Treaty of Rarotonga and the Convention for the Protection of the Natural 
Resources and Environment of the South Pacific Region contained important 
provisions preventing, as far as legally possible, the dumping of radioactive 
wastes in the region. 
100. The use of nuclear energy carried with it the heavy responsibility of 
ensuring that the strictest safety standards were applied. New Zealand was 
fortunate in having sufficient energy resources without needing to use nuclear 
power. However, questions about the safe application of nuclear energy 
transcended national boundaries, and the world had had dramatic evidence of 
the risks involved in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was therefore 
essential to observe strict principles to ensure that nuclear technology was 
used with the maximum safety for the public and the environment. The Agency 
was carrying out remarkable work in the area of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection and his country was pleased to be associated with that work. There 
was a marked trend toward greater international co-operation in the 
application of stringent guidelines and mechanisms for nuclear safety. 
101. The Agency should also be commended for its comprehensive technical 
assistance programme, which had grown steadily during the past few years. 
In 1989, there had been more than 1000 ongoing projects involving over 
2000 technical experts. More than 2000 people had received training under the 
fellowship programme. New Zealand continued to provide places for Agency 
fellows and its experts had contributed to the development of non-power 
applications of nuclear technology, especially in the areas of agriculture and 
medicine. All those activities gave rise to hopes for better living 
conditions. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 31 


102. More than 400 power reactors were currently in operation worldwide, 
generating as much electricity as the whole world had produced from all 
sources in 1955. There were more than 300 research reactors of all types. 
Pandora's box was open and technology could not be disinvented. The challenge 
currently facing the world was to use and control that technology in a 
responsible manner. One vital mechanism had already been put in place: the 
International Atomic Energy Agency. It was essential to worlc together to 
ensure that it retained its enviable record of achievement. 
103. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) said that the scientific and technological 
progress achieved during the last two decades had had a major effect on the 
international political changes taking place at present, and the thirty-fourth 
session of the General Conference was opening in a favourable world climate. 
The rapprochement between East and West gave rise to hope and optimism, but it 
must be realized that world security did not stop at the boundaries of Europe 
and that it was affected by events elsewhere, such as those in the Gulf. Her 
delegation therefore hoped that the same political will would reach other 
geographical regions, particularly those which had been ridden with armed 
conflicts for a long time. The question of world peace and security must be 
considered as an indissoluble whole. The current international upheavals were 
having major repercussions. Thus, a spirit of co-operation and mutual 
understanding was tending to replace the policy of confrontation and war and 
attempts were being made to use science and technology to build a better world 
rather than to accumulate weapons and other instruments of destruction. The 
peaceful uses of nuclear techniques were an important means of tackling the 
problem of development and the nuclear option should be available to all. The 
Agency should therefore be given increased responsibility and freed from the 
financial and administrative constraints which were hampering its smooth 
functioning. 
104. While it was regrettable that the Fourth NPT Review Conference had not 
been able to agree on a final document, the positive aspects should not be 
overlooked. There had been an increase in the number of observers, the 
presence of Chinese and French observers being of particular interest. 
Furthermore, it had been possible to agree on extremely important ideas and 
formulas and to reach an understanding for the first time on questions such as 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 32 


safeguards, peaceful uses and regional disarmament. Despite the lack of a 
final declaration, her country, which was convinced of the need to prevent 
proliferation, to strengthen safeguards and to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, would work together with other interested delegations in 
following up those issues in various specialized international forums. 


105. The NPT was a key element in nuclear disarmament and the safeguards 
system was an essential tool for the maintenance and strengthening of 
international peace and security. Her delegation therefore believed that all 
States should accede to the NPT, particularly those situated in areas of armed 
conflict. She urged South Africa and Israel to respond favourably to the 
calls by the international community to accede to the NPT and to place all 
their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. She recalled the Cairo 
Declaration of 1964 advocating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa and the 
Egyptian initiative of 1974 to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East. The Director General had noted in his opening statement that 
there was an increasing awareness of the need to conclude arms limitation 
agreements in the Middle East and to define specific modalities for the 
application of safeguards in that region in order to build up confidence. Her 
delegation supported those remarks and urged the Director General to continue 
his efforts to apply full-scope safeguards to all nuclear facilities in the 
Middle East. 
106. During the past year, activities in the African continent had been 
stepped up and a regional co-operation agreement (AFRA) had been signed. 
Egypt had had the honour of hosting the first AFRA meeting in Cairo, which had 
been opened by the Director General and had gathered together participants 
from Tunisia, Algeria, Nigeria, Madagascar and Cameroon who had agreed on 
various areas of co-operation. Egypt had taken that regional co-operation 
initiative because it believed in the importance of South-South co-operation 
and the need to promote technical co-operation between developing countries 
and to endow each region with independent capabilities on the principle of 
collective self-sufficiency, thereby facilitating regional co-operation and 
thus international co-operation. Her delegation therefore urged all donor 
States and all international financial institutions to support AFRA, and it 
thanked the Agency and those responsible in the Department of Technical 
Co-operation for their commendable efforts in achieving those results. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 33 


107. Although Egypt had decided to review its nuclear power programme after 
the Chernobyl accident, it still considered the nuclear option to be one of 
the main ways of meeting its growing electricity needs. It was therefore 
continuing the preparation of its nuclear power programme by carrying out 
various activities. It continued to follow the studies being carried out on 
the experience acquired by various countries in reactor operation and nuclear 
safety and was providing training in different areas to technical personnel 
who would be needed to run Egypt's nuclear power programme. It was also 
developing its industrial potential in order to increase its share in the 
fabrication of nuclear fuel and the manufacture of parts and components for 
conventional and nuclear power plants. It was also interested in new models 
for small or medium-size power reactors, since they fitted in better with the 
development of nuclear power and its market, were better adapted to developing 
countries and were more economical. 
108. Egypt attached great importance to uranium prospecting activities in 
its territory, particularly in the desert areas in the East, and to the 
preparation of sites for the production of source materials and nuclear fuel 
fabrication. It hoped that the Agency would provide developing countries with 
increased assistance in exploiting their uranium deposits so that those 
countries could determine what underground source materials they had and be 
trained in extraction and fabrication techniques. In addition, Egypt devoted 
special efforts to the development of its nuclear facilities. It had improved 
its first research reactor and was about to put a second one into operation. 
It had also improved and developed isotope production plants and would shortly 
begin commissioning tests for a radioactive waste processing facility and an 
electron accelerator to be used for industrial applications, sterilization of 
medical supplies and the irradiation of food products. 
109. Egypt attached great importance to regulatory activities in the area of 
nuclear and radiation safety, particularly the concept of a "safety culture", 
to the establishment of a radiation protection network, and to the preparation 
of emergency plans. 
110. It was preparing to start using nuclear techniques in the life sciences 
and agriculture. The Egyptian Ministry of Agriculture was carefully 
monitoring the progress of the New World screwworm in North Africa, had taken 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 34 


all the necessary steps to protect Egypt from that pest, and was currently 
preparing a training programme for the use of nuclear techniques to control it. 


111. Her delegation appreciated the activities carried out in previous years 
by the Agency in the area of nuclear safety. It particularly welcomed the 
preparation of a Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement 
of Radioactive Waste and the work on international liability for nuclear 
damage. It hoped that the Agency would work unstintingly to strengthen and 
support those activities, which were of capital importance since they helped 
to dispel fears created by the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It also 
believed that the Agency's efforts to inform the public about the problems 
associated with those uses were essential and should receive additional 
financial support. 
112. Like any other advanced technology, nuclear technology provided new 
prospects for humanity. All States should therefore make constructive use of 
it, employing it not to destroy civilization, but to promote its development. 
113. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) expressed regret at an item singling out his 
country again appearing on the Conference's agenda. As his delegation would 
be unable to take part in the discussion and ensuing vote on that matter, he 
would have to take it up during the general debate. He was thus obliged to 
depart from a constructive discussion on technical and scientific matters and 
devote part of his statement to political issues forced upon the General 
Conference. 
114. During the past few years, it had become increasingly evident that 
there was no economically viable way to eliminate, or even significantly 
reduce, the carbon dioxide emissions associated with the burning of fossil 
fuels. Even at the present levels of coal, oil and gas consumption, the 
increase in carbon dioxide concentrations threatened to raise the temperature 
of the atmosphere, with disastrous, irreparable and, in part, unpredictable 
consequences. Increased electricity production in developing countries, while 
essential for raising their standard of living to levels comparable with those 
in the developed world, would accelerate and aggravate that process. 
115. The General Conference needed no convincing that nuclear power was the 
only technologically and economically sound alternative for producing 
electricity. Yet world public opinion was extremely wary of any significant 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 35 


development of nuclear applications. Even the educated public and the media 
seemed much more impressed by the hazards associated with radioactivity than 
by the greenhouse effect, a more serious but still theoretical and unfamiliar 
problem. The Agency should be commended for its tireless efforts to dispel 
those misconceptions and prejudices. The excellent specialist conferences on 
reactor safety and on accident prevention and management, as well as the 
growing list of titles in the Safety Series and other publications, could 
serve as a basis for the ongoing campaign to achieve public acceptance (or 
rather, awareness) of the merits of nuclear power. It was hard to imagine any 
progress in that difficult task without the groundwork done by the Agency. 


116. Attempts to make nuclear power more acceptable to the public should not 
be limited to educational measures; technical improvements and new inherently 
safe reactor designs would play an important role in regaining the trust of 
government decision-makers and the public. Those smaller and more economical 
units, of simpler design and easier to operate and maintain, were better 
adapted to the needs of relatively small but rapidly growing power grids. 
117. The smaller reactors were also particularly suited for another 
important application, the large-scale desalination of sea water. In many 
countries, particularly in the Middle East, the shortage of water was fast 
becoming a critical problem, aggravated by increasing pollution and 
contamination of water supplies. According to recent estimates, by the end of 
the millenium the world would be in need of an additional 20 million cubic 
metres of potable water per day, half of it in Mediterranean countries. Since 
state-of-the-art technologies for desalination required 6-10 kilowatt-hours of 
energy per cubic metre, the desalination of 20 million cubic metres of water 
per day would demand the production of at least an additional 5000-8000 MW(e). 
Water distribution costs and other economic considerations limited the maximum 
capacity of a desalination plant to less than 500 000 cubic metres per day, 
with a power consumption of 100-150 MW(e). There was thus a need for 
relatively small electricity-generating units, especially if they were to be 
used exclusively for desalination. His country had acquired substantial 
expertise and experience in that area, including the invention and development 
of two of the most advanced desalination techniques: low-temperature multieffect 
distillation and low-temperature vapour compression. Israeli experts 
had performed studies on the use of nuclear power for desalination, and the 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 36 


conventional desalination plant at Ashdod had been operated commercially as a 
full-scale simulation of a dual-purpose nuclear plant. His country was 
prepared to make its expertise and know-how available to the Agency. 


118. The licensing of nuclear facilities in general and of nuclear power 
plants in particular was a crucial element in ensuring their safety and in 
protecting the public and the environment from radiological hazards during 
normal operation and from the consequences of accidents. However, excessive 
and superfluous safety regulations could increase costs to unacceptable 
levels. The preparation and review of safety analysis reports, an essential 
part of the licensing process, should be done with the greatest care. 
Increased efforts to share the knowledge and experience acquired in many 
countries could prove very useful when regulations and standards were 
discussed. Such sharing would also be extremely useful to smaller and less 
experienced countries which lacked both skills and know-how in that area. It 
might therefore be useful to prepare and disseminate, under the auspices of 
the Agency, one or more sets of standardized guidelines and criteria for 
safety analysis reports and other licensing procedures. Those recommendations 
would become even more important with the advent of new reactor designs which 
might present previously unrecognized failure modes and hazards. 
119. With regard to his country's so-called nuclear capability and threat, 
an issue which he regretted having to address once again, one of the 
underlying characteristics of the debate was that it in no way took account of 
the actual climate and perilous circumstances which prevailed in the Middle 
East. The atmosphere of peace, tranquility and stability which reigned at the 
international level had unfortunately not reached the Persian Gulf or the 
Middle East as a whole. The aggression and actions perpetrated recently in 
the Persian Gulf by Mr. Saddam Hussein, especially his statements openly 
threatening Israel with destruction, were disquieting not only for Israel but 
also to other States in the region and should serve as a warning to the entire 
international community. The real situation was perfectly clear: Israel, for 
its part, had never threatened the existence of any country. On the other 
hand, it faced a real, immediate and openly declared threat from Iraq. 
120. Item 7 of the General Conference's agenda and the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXIV)/935 had nothing to do with the Agency's 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 3 7 


mandate. That text singled his country out only to misinterpret its policy, 
make false accusations and camouflage the real issues, threats and dangers 
facing the Middle East. Israel reaffirmed the need to approach in a 
constructive and positive spirit the promotion of the idea of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and urged delegates to relegate 
the issue to its proper forum - the United Nations General Assembly or the 
Conference on Disarmament - and thereby to remove a repetitive political issue 
from the agenda of the Agency which was a technical organization. 


121. Such an attitude would be in line with the efforts of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the group of experts on the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. It would also 
conform with the views expressed by the Director General at the Board's June 
meetings, namely that the IAEA was not a disarmament agency, nor could it 
engage in negotiations on a non-proliferation treaty or on nuclear-weapon-free 
zones!*]. Israel believed that the Agency had almost exhausted all the means 
of helping the cause of nuclear-weapon-free zones which came within its 
mandate, consisting in the suggestion of various solutions for the application 
of safeguards. A constructive debate on the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone and on confidence-building measures in the Middle 
East could only be held between the States of that region. Such a debate 
would have to take into consideration the studies conducted by the Agency and 
the United Nations. His country's policy, expressed on several occasions, had 
been reiterated in the letter from the Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs to 
the Director General dated 29 January 1990 which was reproduced in document 
GC(XXXIV)/926. 


122. In his report on the issue to the previous session of the General 
Conference (document GC(XXXlII)/886), the Director General had said that he had 
nothing to add to his previous report of 19 September 1988 (GC(XXXIl)/849), in 
which he had stated that: 
"Statements in the General Conference last year made it clear 
that the term nuclear capabilities as used in resolution 
GC(XXXI)/RES/470 was intended to mean nuclear weapon 
capabilities. The Secretariat of the IAEA has not concerned 
itself with studies of nuclear weapon capabilities in any 
Member State;" 


[*] GOV/OR.732, para. 87. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 38 


Indeed, the Agency had never debated the question of any State's nuclear 
capability. His country considered that the issue of full-scope safeguards 
could be settled satisfactorily only within the framework of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone. An appeal to his country alone to accept full-scope 
safeguards would be singling it out. Several of the many States which were 
not Parties to the NPT and were not subject to full-scope safeguards had 
proven scientific and technical capabilities. They were somehow immune to 
such appeals and at the same time they presumed to sit in judgement on 
Israel. However, Article 111.A.5 of the Statute stipulated that safeguards 
would be applied at the request of the State concerned. The voluntary nature 
of the acceptance of safeguards was also recognized in the technical study 
contained in document GC(XXXIIl)/887 and entitled "Modalities of Application 
of Agency Safeguards in the Middle East". 


123. The alarming information that Iraq was pursuing activities aimed at 
acquiring a nuclear weapon capability, against its obligations under the NPT, 
was now widely known. There was thus an urgent need to attain stability and 
security in the troubled region of the Middle East. Israel considered that 
direct negotiations and mutual reassurances were the only constructive way of 
creating a measure of confidence among the States of that region. 
Regrettably, there had so far been no sign or attempt reflecting a 
constructive attitude towards reaching agreement on the basis of principles 
which had demonstrated their effectiveness and were common practice in 
settling regional disputes. Instead, the same accusations against his country 
were being repeated and criteria different from those generally prevalent were 
being applied to it. 
124. The General Conference should decide to drop such a futile and 
potentially damaging debate and stay within the framework of its Statute. The 
Agency should be allowed to concentrate on its statutory obligations and 
responsibilities instead of being diverted from its proper functions. It was 
well known that the Agency faced urgent fundamental problems. It was in the 
interest of all Member States that the Agency should not be distracted from 
its activities relating to essential matters. His delegation therefore urged 
all responsible delegations to reject the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXIV)/935. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.327 
page 39 


125. Mr. CACCIA DOMINIONI (Commission of the European Communities - ChIC) 
said that the Single European Market would not be complete as of 
31 December 1992 unless energy markets were opened up. Energy often accounted 
for a substantial proportion of production costs, and if those markets were 
kept separate, the competitive position of many Community industries would be 
threatened. The Community had therefore recently adopted a directive for a 
Community procedure regarding the transparency of gas and electricity prices 
to the final industrial consumer, which was a first important step towards 
transparency in the markets concerned. Another directive aimed at 
facilitating the transmission of electricity through the major grids was also 
expected within a few weeks. 
126. At the initiative of the CEC, a conference on energy in the next 
century had been held in Brussels in May as part of the step-by-step approach 
which was to lead to new energy policy guidelines. Among the concerns 
expressed at the conference, the security of supply had been the most 
important. The recent events in the Middle East had clearly shown that the 
security of supply was economically vital. A worldwide increase in demand was 
inevitable alone because of the population growth in the developing 
countries. Although the changes taking place in Central and Eastern Europe 
should lead to significantly more efficient utilization of energy, that did 
not preclude an increase in overall energy requirements. Another major 
concern, that of environmental protection, had become an absolute priority 
both on a global scale and, more particularly, for all the industrialized 
countries. The need for fast, joint action was recognized by all. What to do 
still remained to be defined, and that was a difficult problem in itself. In 
any case, it was for the industrialized countries with energy know-how to do 
their best to limit their consumption of energy, so as not to place too much 
pressure on world markets and thus jeopardize the economic development of the 
poorer regions, since such a development was a guarantee for the social and 
political stability which would permit positive changes to take place in 
Worth-South relations. Thus, policy-makers at the national and international 
levels were being asked to square the circle: to ensure security of supply, 
to protect the environment in a context of increasing world energy consumption 
and to limit that consumption of energy. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 40 


127. In that situation, nuclear energy certainly had a role to play. In the 
medium and long term, providing the public could be persuaded that safety was 
assured and that waste could be managed in an acceptable way^ nuclear energy 
should be able to consolidate its current position and claim its place as an 
increasingly significant source of energy. In that connection, it should be 
remembered that the highest political authorities, including the Houston 
summit in July 1990, had recognized that nuclear energy helped to reduce 
polluting emissions from the burning of fossil fuels, which was a clear 
political message regarding the role of nuclear energy. 
128. The European Community had within it a strong concentration of nuclear 
activities. That situation required both Member States and Community 
authorities to provide vigilant management which was none the less open to the 
broadest co-operation with all parties concerned. In that spirit, the CEC 
especially welcomed the fact that its co-operation with the Agency had both 
strengthened and widened to include the continuing implementation of the 
agreements signed in 1988 and 1989 on the placement of fellowship holders from 
Asia and Latin America with centres in the Community, the participation of the 
Commission in the preparatory work for the international research centre at 
Chernobyl, and the Commission's active participation in the post-accident 
evaluation project at Chernobyl. 
129. EURATOM safeguards also played an important role and, in response to a 
request from the European Parliament, the Commission had in 1990 for the first 
time published a comprehensive report on the operation of that safeguards 
system. It highlighted the ways and means for determining, inter alia, that 
there had been no diversion of ores, source materials and special fissionable 
materials from their intended uses, as declared by the users, in the 
territories of the Member States. The report also described the very close 
co-operation links between EURATOM safeguards and the Agency's Department of 
Safeguards. In that context, it was worth remembering that the European 
Council, in its statement on non-proliferation at its June meeting, had 
reaffirmed the need for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to be covered by 
credible, effective and efficient international safeguards. While recognizing 
the essential role played by Agency safeguards, it had recalled the 
considerable contribution of EURATOM safeguards. Similar conclusions had been 
drawn at the Houston summit in July. In addition, the Commission had attended 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 41 


the Fourth NPT Review Conference as an observer, noting that the Review 
Conference had been unable to reach agreement on a joint declaration but that 
it had made an in-depth review of the implementation of the Treaty. 


130. The future development of nuclear power depended on how the public 
viewed the safety of waste management. In 1989, the Community had adopted a 
new programme for 1990-94 aimed at contributing to the demonstration and 
implementation of a complete and safe system of waste management. With regard 
to nuclear safety in general, the Council of Ministers had concluded in 
March 1990 that activities within the Community were aimed at achieving an 
optimum degree of protection with the highest possible safety levels. It had 
recognized the existence, at Community level, of a process of co-ordination 
between the safety authorities of Member States designed to ensure an 
equivalent degree of protection among all of them. The Council had also 
considered it important for the nuclear safety philosophy resulting from such 
co-ordination to contribute to the establishment of an internationally 
accepted philosophy through the Agency. To that end, the Commission would 
seek to ensure consistency between all of its international nuclear safety 
co-operation activities and the Community co-ordination process. Also, at the 
Agency's Board of Governors meeting in June, the Commission had reaffirmed its 
support for the nuclear safety conference to be held under the auspices of the 
Agency in 1991. 
131. On the subject of reactor safety, the Commission was continuing its 
research programmes, giving priority to present and future generations of 
light-water reactors; at the same time, it would study in greater detail the 
prevention, phenomenology and management of serious accidents. The Community 
was also conducting radiation protection research which would cover all 
relevant topics in that area. 
132. Turning to nuclear fusion, he mentioned that the current phase of the 
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project started 
in 1988 under Agency auspices by the four parties which had major programmes 
in that field (the European Community, Japan, the United States of America and 
the Soviet Union) was approaching its conclusion. The work done by the 
participants during that phase was an excellent example of international 
co-operation in the field of science and technology, and the supporting role 
played by the Agency had fully satisfied th*5 parties involved in the project. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 
page 42 


It was to be hoped that negotiations on the signing of an agreement for the 
engineering studies would start soon. 


133. The past 12 months had been a remarkable turning point in the history 
of Europe and the world. The Commission was deeply aware of that and was 
acting accordingly. As part of its policy of opening up towards the East, 
including the Soviet Union, the Community planned to conclude an agreement in 
three areas of co-operation: nuclear safety, trade in nuclear materials, and 
controlled nuclear fusion. Furthermore, in April, the Community had announced 
an initiative to promote contacts and exchanges of experience between 
producers of nuclear power in the Community and in Central and Eastern Europe, 
with the principal aim of capitalizing on the experience accumulated by both 
sides. Some Central and Eastern European countries had expressed concern 
regarding the safety of some of their nuclear power plants and had sought 
financing for projects to evaluate the safety of those plants and suggest 
possible improvement measures. In the very near future, the Commission would 
be entering into specific commitments with regard to Czechoslovakia, but it 
planned to take a strategic approach to the whole region with a view to 
systematically dealing with all the practical issues raised by the safety of 
the power plants in question. 
134. Lastly, it was worth mentioning that the action taken by the Community 
complemented the Agency's own activities and those of the World Association of 
Nuclear Operators (WANO), which would benefit from a certain synergistic 
effect. The Agency, in particular, would be kept informed on a regular basis 
of the activities undertaken by the Community and the results obtained. 
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF IRAQ 


135. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), exercising his right of reply, said that he 
did not wish to dwell on the wholly senseless and groundless statement made by 
the delegate of Israel about the Iraqi nuclear programme, which was devoted to 
peaceful purposes and under Agency safeguards. He wished simply to reiterate 
his country's willingness to accept the establishment in the Middle East of a 
zone free from weapons of mass destruction, including the nuclear weapons 
owned by Israel about which the General Conference had been debating for many 
years. 
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
27 February 1991 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH and 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


FRENCH 


THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 19 September 1990, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 
later: Mr. ZHOU (China) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


General debate and annual report for 1989 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Tunisia 1 - 13 
Nigeria 14 - 21 
Indonesia 22 - 30 
Chile 31 - 45 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 46 - 49 
Peru 50 - 56 
Phi 1ippines 57 - 67 
Denmark 68 - 76 
Uruguay 77 - 82 
Norway 83-88 
Finland 89 - 93 
Yugos1av ia 94 - 100 
German Democratic Republic 101 - 107 
Sweden 108 - 119 
Iraq 120 - 129 
Nether 1ands 130 - 143 
1 re 1 and 144 - 158 
Colombia 159 - 166 
Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy 167 - 172 
Statement by the delegate of Iraq 173 


C*3 GC(XXXIV)/939. 


The composition of delegates attending the session is given in document GC(XXXIV)/INF/287/Rev.2. 


90-4456 
(7377e/757e) 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989 (GC(XXXIV)/915) (continued) 


1. Mr. AMMAR (Tunisia) said that the Annual Report for 1989 reflected 
the successful efforts of the Secretariat and Member States to reinforce 
international co-operation in the field of peaceful nuclear applications. 
2. He welcomed the increase in the volume of Agency co-operation with 
Tunisia, which covered a number of areas such as nuclear power planning, 
radiological protection, food and agriculture, animal production and 
industrial applications. The results of that co-operation included the 
establishment of a nuclear agriculture laboratory, the introduction of 
advanced techniques for non-destructive assay in industry and an expansion of 
activities at the National Radiation Protection Centre. Tunisia, which was 
soon to acquire a research reactor, wished to further expand its co-operation 
with the Agency and would be requesting assistance in the form of equipment, 
expert services, training and fellowships. 
3. He welcomed the increase in both the quality and quantity of technical 
assistance to Africa and hoped that that positive trend would continue in 
future years. Tunisia had been the first signatory to the African Regional 
Co-operation Agreement (AFRA), which had come into force in April 1990 and 
would complement and strengthen current arrangements for co-operation between 
the Agency and African Member States. 
4. Tunisia had hosted various regional scientific meetings in the past 
year, including a workshop on radiological protection and a co-ordination 
meeting for the Maghreb countries, which had been followed by a workshop to 
train technicians in medfly control. 
5. The Arab Maghreb Union also offered new opportunities for sub-regional 
co-operation which was a valuable complement to co-operation with the Agency. 
6. The economical production of potable water was an urgent issue, not 
only for the Maghreb sub-region, but for the African continent as a whole, 
which suffered from a serious shortage of potable water. The use of nuclear 
reactors for the desalination of sea water would be of great benefit to 
agriculture, an area vital to sustainable development in the African countries. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 3 


7. Assistance was urgently required to deal with the New World Screwworm, 
which had continued to spread in Libya and posed a serious threat, not only to 
the region, but to the Mediterranean basin and the African continent as a 
whole. The Agency was continuing its substantial efforts to eradicate the 
pest, in close co-operation with other specialized agencies, especially FAO. 
8. The Agency's activities in promoting nuclear applications and nuclear 
power were of vital importance to the majority of developing countries, whose 
needs must be taken into account. It was essential for the Agency to maintain 
a proper balance between its promotional and regulatory activities. 
9. Tunisia, which had always supported the Agency's Statute and objectives, 
had signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in 
1970 and had ratified a safeguards agreement in February 1990. It had also 
signed the conventions on early notification and emergency assistance, which 
had come into force in June 1988. Tunisia's continued strict observance of 
the regulations governing peaceful nuclear applications reflected a concern to 
work towards peace, stability and international security. 
10. On 3 September 1990, Tunisia had established a single body - the 
National Commission for the Peaceful Application of Nuclear Technology - to be 
responsible for co-ordinating all peaceful nuclear applications. The 
Commission was expected to give new impetus to the use of nuclear techniques 
in various fields of development. 
11. His country welcomed the draft Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste which had been submitted to the 
Conference for approval, but felt that it should be accompanied by binding 
measures that would strengthen international co-operation in the field of 
nuclear safety. 
12. Tunisia continued to pay close attention to the changes taking place in 
South Africa and to the actions taken to put an end to the unjust and 
anachronistic apartheid system. South Africa was still refusing to comply 
with the Agency's resolutions, and his country therefore wished to associate 
itself with the draft resolution submitted by the African Group concerning 
South Africa's nuclear capabilities. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 4 


13. The nuclear capability of, and threat posed by, Israel remained a cause 
of concern to the international community. That country had failed to respond 
to the repeated calls of the United Nations Security Council and the Agency's 
General Conference for it to accede to NPT and to submit all its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. In that connection, it was very important 
for the Director General to continue his consultations with all the States 
concerned in the Middle East, where it was hoped that sincere efforts to 
achieve peace would lead to a settlement of the Palestinian question. The 
longer it took to begin real peace negotiations, the greater the risk of the 
situation in the Middle East becoming explosive and out of control. 
14. Mr. CHIKELU (Nigeria), reviewing the events of the past year of 
Agency activities, welcomed the organizational changes which had taken place 
in the Departments of Technical Co-operation and Safeguards, the introduction 
of a two-year programming cycle for technical co-operation activities, the 
conclusion of the African Regional Co-operative Agreement (AFRA) and the 
establishment of the International Radioactive Waste Management Advisory 
Committee. Delegates at the 44th session of the United Nations General 
Assembly had indicated their broad support for the Agency, its safeguards 
system, technical co-operation programme and its work in the field of nuclear 
safety. 
15. His delegation attached great importance to the training courses and 
seminars held by the Agency and appreciated the enormous contribution made by 
training to nuclear development in Africa, particularly in the area of 
maintenance. It hoped that more places would be offered to Africans to train 
in the operation, servicing and maintenance of X-ray analytical equipment at 
the Seibersdorf Laboratory. The Agency's activities in the field of nuclear 
applications in food and agriculture, mining, water resources, medicine and 
industry were particularly useful and the nuclear applications areas in the 
Agency's programme and budget for 1991 were well conceived and responded to 
the essential needs of developing countries. Since nuclear applications 
provided the most tangible benefits of membership of the Agency to the 
majority of developing countries, his delegation welcomed the fact that 
Regular Budget resources allocated to that area by the Agency would continue 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 5 


to increase. His delegation also hoped that the African Regional Co-operative 
Agreement, which had been established at the previous General Conference, 
would receive the necessary support from donor countries in order to enable it 
to contribute to Africa's progress in nuclear science and technology. 


16. Nigeria was concerned about the lack of adequate resources for the 
Agency, particularly as the Agency was at present in its sixth year of zero 
real growth. It was regrettable that expenditure in the programme and budget 
for 1991 and 1992 had been limited to an increase of only 0.2%. A Regular 
Budget based on zero real growth could not respond effectively to the growing 
and changing needs of Member States and therefore it was time to have some 
modest real growth. Nigeria would also welcome a substantial increase in the 
extrabudgetary resources for footnote-a/ projects. While Nigeria was grateful 
to the United States of America and the United Kingdom, which had continued to 
make such resources available, it would appreciate additional support to 
enable it to complete the Biological Insect Control Project (BICOT) aimed at 
the eradication of the tsetse fly in Nigeria. 
17. Although his delegation was encouraged by the consensus reached by the 
informal working group on the financing of safeguards, the issue of long-term 
funding of technical assistance remained unresolved. While the indicative 
planning figure approach was useful, efforts should be made to find a more 
predictable and assured means of financing technical assistance. His 
delegation would also like to see a reasonable balance in the financial 
resources allocated to safeguards and technical assistance, although that 
desire in no way detracted from the importance his delegation attached to 
safeguards. 
18. His delegation fully supported the steps being taken by the Agency to 
promote the highest levels of nuclear safety and radiological protection and 
welcomed the convening of a conference in 1991 on nuclear safety. It was also 
impressed by the activities of the RAPAT missions in strengthening the 
radiological protection infrastructures of developing countries, as well as 
the increased activities of the Waste Management Programme (WAMAP) in helping 
developing Member States to plan and implement national radioactive waste 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 6 


management programmes. The draft Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, contained in document 
GC(XXXIV)/920, was very useful in serving as a guide for governments to ensure 
that no radioactive waste was exported to any country that lacked the 
technical or administrative capacity to manage and dispose of such wastes 
safely. It was a useful mechanism for controlling international transboundary 
movement of radioactive waste pending the elaboration of a convention. 

19. Another issue of concern to his delegation was the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. It was a matter of regret that the gross 
under-representation of the regions of Africa and the Middle East and 
South Asia had been on the Conference's agenda for the past decade with no 
solution in sight. The Agency should intensify its efforts to find an 
equitable solution to the problems of under-representation of the two 
regions. His delegation had also been giving considerable attention to the 
amendment of Article VI as a whole. While it wished to emphasize the 
independent nature of the proposed amendment of Article VI.A.2, it was 
prepared to consider a formula that would be fair and equitable to all parties 
concerned. 
20. As his delegation had informed the Conference the previous year, an 
energy commission had been established in Nigeria to co-ordinate national 
energy policy and to chart the course of energy development and utilization in 
the country. The issue of sustainable development and the impact of energy 
sources on the environment were being reviewed and all options, including 
nuclear energy, considered. 
21. The issue of South Africa's nuclear capability remained a matter of 
grave concern to his delegation. The resolution adopted by the General 
Conference in 1989 had strongly condemned South Africa for its persistent 
refusal to comply with successive resolutions of the United Nations General 
Assembly and the Agency's General Conference. That General Conference had 
also resolved to consider and take a decision at the present session on the 
1987 recommendation of the Board of Governors calling for the suspension of 
South Africa from the exercise of the privileges and rights of membership of 
the Agency. There had been high expectations that South Africa would join the 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 7 


Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) before the present 


session of the General Conference and that the racist regime would take 


irreversible steps towards the complete abolition of racial discrimination and 
accord political rights to all its citizens. Those expectations had not been 
realized. The South African authorities should, as a matter of urgency, take 
the necessary steps to dismantle apartheid and submit all South Africa's 
nuclear facilities to full-scope safeguards. While his delegation did not 
want to discourage the process of change, pressure on South Africa had to be 
maintained until the international community was convinced that the full 


abolition of apartheid was no longer in doubt. His delegation therefore urged 


every delegation to join it in sending a clear, strong message to South Africa 
when the relevant agenda item was considered. 


22. Mr. LOUHANAPESSY (Indonesia) pointed out that many aspects 
relevant to the Agency's activities, such as the role of the Agency in 
international co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and various 
aspects of non-proliferation, including Agency safeguards, had been 
extensively discussed at the recently concluded Fourth Review Conference of 
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 
His delegation again urged the nuclear-weapon States to respect the 
commitments made under NPT and to put an end to the nuclear arms race. 
23. As a party to NPT, Indonesia attached great importance to the Agency's 
safeguards system, which had served to prevent the horizontal proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, and supported the idea of full-scope safeguards. In 1989 
Indonesia had accepted a modified version of the designation of safeguards 
inspectors in order to facilitate the execution of inspection missions. 
Furthermore, the Indonesian Government had recently decided to take part in 
the IAEA safeguards support programme and was ready to welcome Agency experts 
to utilize facilities in Indonesia for the further development of safeguards. 
24. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had also called upon the Agency to 
take appropriate steps to increase technical assistance funds in order to 
ensure the implementation of the maximum number of technically sound 
projects. In addition, the Conference had encouraged greater support for 
regional co-operative arrangements. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 8 


25. Indonesia had made significant progress in the development and 
utilization of nuclear energy and had derived considerable benefit from the 
scientific and technical information provided by the Agency and from its 
technical assistance, particularly in the form of expertise, equipment, 
software and fellowships. Indonesia was currently applying nuclear science 
and technology in the fields of agriculture, food preservation, health and 
industry. 
26. While 75% of the world's population lived in developing countries, more 
than 75% of the world's primary energy resources were being consumed in 
developed countries. It was therefore obvious that the growth of the world's 
population and the decrease in energy resources, particularly non-renewable 
ones, had a particular impact on developing countries. 
27. Although Indonesia had a variety of primary energy resources, its oil 
reserves, which constituted a very significant proportion of those resources, 
were being depleted and, with the present level of technology, it would be 
environmentally irresponsible to rely on coal. Indonesia had therefore 
adopted a policy for the domestic conservation of oil and the development of 
renewable energy resources such as geothermal resources. In view of the 
uncertainty of oil exploration, Indonesia was also forced to turn to nuclear 
power although it was fully aware of the obstacles faced, especially by the 
developing countries, in introducing nuclear power, such as the availability 
of an adequate infrastructure, public acceptance of nuclear power and 
financial difficulties. 
28. In that connection, Indonesia had hosted a seminar on the financing of 
nuclear power projects in developing countries, which had been attended by 
more than 100 experts from 17 countries representing governments, electric 
companies, financing institutes and nuclear suppliers. The meeting had turned 
out to be a successful forum for the exchange of information on various 
approaches to the financing of large electricity projects, including nuclear 
power projects. His delegation hoped that the papers presented at the 
seminar, together with a record of the discussions, would be published in a 
technical document in order to disseminate the information. In view of the 
importance of nuclear safety for nuclear power programmes, his delegation 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 9 


welcomed the establishment of the Chernobyl Centre and the increased research 
on nuclear power plant safety and the implications of accidents at such plants. 


29. In the area of nuclear applications, his delegation was proud to report 
that since the end of 1989 Indonesia had brought into operation a number of 
new facilities at its science and technology centre at Serpong. Its 
radioisotope centre, including a cyclotron, had recently been put into 
operation and was currently meeting Indonesia's domestic radioisotope needs. 
Indonesia hoped that at a later stage the centre could help to meet regional 
needs as well. Indonesia's new experimental nuclear fuel facility and the 
nuclear engineering centre, also located at the Serpong complex, were geared 
towards providing support for its nuclear power programme through the 
development of nuclear power reactor fuel and design and engineering support 
activities. Another research centre, situated near Jakarta, was currently 
developing the industrial applications of radioisotopes and radiation, such as 
the vulcanization of rubber, treatment of wood, and irradiation of food. 
30. With regard to the revision of Article VI of the Statute, his 
delegation hoped that a balanced geographical representation could be 
achieved. His delegation welcomed the recommendation to re-establish the 
working group and hoped that it would make rapid progress. His delegation 
also welcomed the Board's recent decision to provide every opportunity for 
Member States to participate fully in the deliberations of the Board's 
Committees. 
31. Mr. LORENZINI CORREA (Chile), stressing the growing importance of 
nuclear safety and the need to develop it further, said that Chile had been 
implementing the necessary measures to ensure that adequate safety levels were 
maintained on its territory. In 1989 it had published a report entitled 
"Environmental radioactivity in Chile during 1988" containing data from a 
large number of samples taken at 18 sampling stations, and showing that the 
background radiation had remained normal. It had also initiated a National 
Radioecology Programme to study the incidence of environmental anomalies 
affecting the radiation dose received by the public. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 10 


32. The Agency's concern for the environment was commendable, but he urged 
the international community to act upon that concern in a manner which would 
not hamper the development of the least developed countries. Access to clean 
technologies and the financial support necessary to apply them were the 
logical means of achieving a just balance between environmental and 
developmental concerns. 
33. It was to be hoped that the meetings of the group set up to consider 
liability for nuclear damage would lead to a revision of the Vienna Convention, 
since a redefinition of the corresponding guidelines - in the interests of 
enhanced safety through clearer and more accessible information - was a 
prerequisite for the increased use of nuclear energy. 
34. Also essential were the Agency's safeguards activities, which formed an 
integral part of the non-proliferation regime and which Chile fully supported. 
35. The very valuable technical assistance provided by the Agency to Chile 
had been channelled into the agricultural, industrial and mining sectors in 
the interests of enhancing the country's export capacity, as well as into the 
health sector. 
36. In the field of mining, Chile had been working on improving heap 
leaching techniques and other processes used in the production of copper and 
other elements. 
37. With regard to agriculture, it was applying nuclear techniques with a 
view to making more rational and effective use of fertilizers. It had 
conducted studies on fruit and vegetables with the aim of using irradiation 
for quarantine purposes, and it had decided to set up in the current year a 
plant for the production of sterile insects as part of the effort to keep the 
country free of the Mediterranean fruit fly and to combat isolated outbreaks 
in the north of the country. Systematic studies were also being carried out 
on animal reproduction and health in the interests of increasing the 
production of domestic livestock and indigenous species. 
38. In medicine, Chile had continued to acquire modern imaging units for 
use in diagnosis and had developed the ability to prepare and label reagents 
for in vitro diagnosis. That in turn had led to the development of new 
radiopharmaceuticals for specific treatments and diagnoses. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 11 


39. Chile was now producing 90% of its own requirements in terms of 
radioisotopes for use in medicine and as tracers for hydrological, industrial 
and mining studies. 
40. Also important was its work in the field of nuclear analytical 
techniques, especially those of high sensitivity used in the analysis of trace 
elements and in the maintenance and repair of nuclear instrumentation - both 
areas being important to problem-solving in the biomedical, mining and 
environmental fields. 
41. With regard to its research reactors, Chile had through its own 
resources effected the modifications necessary to ensure that they served 
their purpose in a manner that was both safe and reliable. In particular, it 
had succeeded at one such reactor in converting the core from high to medium 
enrichment, thereby acquiring experience which could be of great value to 
other countries with similar reactors. 
42. In the field of co-operation, the ARCAL programme, in which Chile 
played an active part including the hosting of various international courses 
and workshops, contributed significantly to the development of technical 
co-operation in the nuclear field among participating Latin American States. 
Also, where bilateral relations were concerned, Chile and Argentina had 
recently agreed to improve their mutual arrangements for co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
43. There were, however, certain problem areas in the Agency's work which 
remained to be resolved, and on which his delegation had already expressed its 
views at various meetings of the Board and the General Conference. For 
example, the Agency still needed to achieve an effective and lasting balance 
between its safeguards activities and its equally necessary promotional 
activities, the financing for both of which should be assured through clear 
and stable procedures. To that end, the efficiency of safeguards activities 
needed to be enhanced, while in the case of technical assistance it was 
necessary to ensure that a lack of funding did not result in cutbacks on 
programmes which in the long run would benefit the entire international 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 12 


community. In that connection, he was pleased to announce that Chile would 
for 1991, as in previous years, be making a voluntary contribution to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. 


44. As to the falling rate of implementation of the technical assistance 
programme, the Secretariat should revise the whole modus operandi of the 
Department of Technical Co-operation, as well as the Agency's financial and 
administrative regulations, which were no longer adequate for the purpose of 
administering the programme. 
45. In conclusion, the common desire to further develop the uses of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes was an important element in bringing countries 
closer together, and Chile fully supported the Agency in its valuable work to 
that end. 
46. Mr. STEPANENKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) welcomed 
the recent positive changes in international relations which had created a 
climate where there was a growing tendency to reduce weapons arsenals and 
improve trust and multilateral co-operation between States, and commended the 
Agency on another successful year in 1989. 
47. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had shown that the principles of NPT 
were widely accepted and had become an integral part of international law. 
Its importance was evidenced by the fact that more States adhered to that 
Treaty than to any other international agreement on arms limitation. The 
Agency played a worthy role in that area via its safeguards system, which 
effectively and reliably prevented diversion of nuclear materials from 
peaceful applications to the production of nuclear weaponry. Those monitoring 
activities were being implemented without any infringement of the sovereign 
rights of States or hindrance to the development of their peaceful nuclear 
activities and international co-operation in that area. Once again in 1989 
the Agency had detected no diversions of nuclear material. In view of the 
limited resources available to it, it would be sensible if the Agency were to 
concentrate its efforts on monitoring activities covering the more important 
stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. He informed the Conference that, pursuant 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 13 


to the bitter experience of the Chernobyl accident, the Supreme Soviet of the 
Byelorussian Republic in its declaration of sovereignty had recently announced 
its intention to turn the area into a nuclear-free zone. 


48. Byelorussia supported unconditionally the Agency's important activities 
in the area of technical assistance and, despite the difficulties it was 
experiencing after the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident, it regularly 
paid its voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund (TACF) in full. Byelorussia was grateful to the Agency for the help it 
had given with the Chernobyl accident both under the technical assistance 
programme and in other ways. The Agency was currently playing an active part 
in the organization and co-ordination of an international project on the 
radiation consequences of the Chernobyl accident, and an evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the measures taken in contaminated areas to protect public 
health; that work should provide additional information on the situation and 
point to possible additional measures which might help alleviate the 
consequences. The results of the current investigative mission might also 
encourage greater involvement on the part of the Agency and other parties in 
such areas as health monitoring for persons exposed to radiation, monitoring 
of the environment, etc. The insufficient measures of the preceding 
four years had had negative consequences on the health of children in 
particular, and had engendered economic difficulties and general social and 
psychological tension. The Republic had been declared a national ecological 
disaster area. Although the Agency's technical assistance programme was 
oriented on the whole towards helping the developing countries, in view of the 
extreme situation he urged the Agency to grant Byelorussia special help. 
49. The whole question of nuclear power had been undergoing a re-evaluation 
during the preceding few years as a result of the Chernobyl accident in 
particular. There was widespread concern over the safety of nuclear power, 
disposal of waste from nuclear power plants, and the possibility of 
accidents. The Agency should play a leading role in solving the problems of 
nuclear energy and its social acceptability. It should participate actively 
in discussions of world energy and ecological problems, notably at the United 
Nations Conference on Environment and Development to take place in 1992. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 14 


Agency involvement in the environmental issue as it related to the safe use of 
nuclear power and the disposal of nuclear power plant waste was one of the 
best ways of restoring public confidence in nuclear power. 


Mr. Zhou (China) took the Chair. 


50. Mr. SAN MARTIN CARP (Peru) stressed the continued importance of 
diplomacy in the present post-cold war era. Despite the rapprochement between 
the superpowers, it was clear from the present regional crisis that the threat 
of military conflict had not been eliminated. His country would continue to 
pursue its peaceful vocation notwithstanding its own serious difficulties and 
supported any international action aimed at limiting increases in military 
nuclear capabilities or promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
51. He noted the difficulty of the task before the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference and emphasized the need to bear in mind the progress made in almost 
all the issues tackled, despite the wide divergence of views on one item. The 
Conference's consolidated working document referred to the outstanding role 
played by Agency safeguards in building up confidence and thus promoting the 
safety of the entire international community, thereby providing a crucial tool 
in endeavours to limit the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Review 
Conference also reaffirmed the importance of nuclear-weapon-free zones based 
on regulations established by the States of the region concerned in accordance 
with their own requirements. 
52. Other subjects which had stimulated useful discussions were the 
efficacy of the safeguards system as a means of ensuring the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, the introduction of a new type of inspection 
which the Agency might carry out and the introduction of possible new criteria 
and legal categories with a view to convening a conference on attacks on 
nuclear installations. 
53. The Agency had an important role in universalizing the safeguards 
system and applying coherent and consistent policies. His country was 
therefore deeply concerned that many countries had not yet concluded 
safeguards agreements with the Agency and urged them to do so. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 15 


54. Technical co-operation could also be regarded as a weapon in the cause 
of peace, since it alleviated the social and economic imbalances which 
generated conflict. The developing countries therefore had every 
justification to pursue their efforts to attain a balance in the Agency's 
budget between safeguards and technical co-operation and to find formulas 
ensuring adequate and secure resources for the TACF. In that connection, he 
urged those States that were able to do so to pledge contributions to the 
TACF. Furthermore, technical assistance activities should be geared to the 
requirements, realities and development programmes of the recipient States, 
thus ensuring the optimum use of the resources available. 
55. His country wished to express its gratitude to the Secretariat for its 
efforts in implementing major projects in Peru. His delegation was also 
pleased with the progress of the ARCAL (Regional Co-operative Arrangements for 
Latin America) programme, which should aim at achieving greater integration of 
the Latin American countries in general and the Andean area in particular. 
Problems such as health, agriculture and food were considered regional rather 
than national. The Agency had fully appreciated the need for the Latin 
American countries to utilize their resources to their mutual advantage and to 
develop common projects, as demonstrated by its negotiations with the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) aimed at introducing into the latter's 
plan of action important projects such as those for the improvement of 
irrigation and fertilization methods and the boosting of food exports through 
the use of irradiation techniques. 
56. With regard to legal and institutional matters, he wished to highlight 
the Secretariat's efforts in studying, evaluating and adopting measures to 
strengthen international co-operation in the field of nuclear safety and 
radiation protection. The various relevant international agreements were 
aimed not only at ensuring the safe use of nuclear energy, but also at 
providing for international action in the event of nuclear accidents or 
emergencies. Peru had taken an active part in the working group established 
by the Board to consider international liability for nuclear damage, which had 
made considerable progress. The standing committee which succeeded the 
working group now faced the challenge of developing up-to-date and 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 16 


satisfactory mechanisms in relation to civil liability. In the light of the 
desires expressed by various States that had not yet signed the Vienna 
Convention, his country was in favour of convening a conference to revise the 
Convention in the hope that its revision would attract wider adherence. 


57. Mr. ALETA (Philippines) said that although the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference had discussed new ways of reinforcing and strengthening the Treaty 
to enable it to fulfil its objectives, divergent positions continued to 
present obstacles. However, one thing which the Conference had agreed on was 
the Agency's critical role in the attainment of the NPT's goals. 
58. The Agency's safeguards system had contributed significantly to 
building international confidence by helping to prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices and his delegation 
welcomed the voluntary offer agreement between China and the Agency which 
entered into force in 1989. Since the Safeguards Implementation Report was a 
very important document, which could help to increase confidence in 
safeguards, his delegation hoped that it would ultimately be given wider 
circulation. The Secretariat's efforts towards improving efficiency in the 
use of safeguards resources should be continued in the light of the growing 
demands for safeguards activities and the current policy of a zero-real-growth 
budget. Any increase in the Agency's Regular Budget should ensure that there 
was a balance between safeguards activities and promotional activities. In 
the Working Group on the Financing of Safeguards, in which the Philippines had 
participated actively, the Philippines had maintained the view that 
Member States which owned, possessed or operated facilities should be 
primarily responsible for the financing of safeguards. 
59. Since May, 1986, when his Government had halted the 620 MW PWR project 
in the Bataan Peninsula, the Philippine nuclear power programme had been at a 
standstill. The activities now being pursued in the nuclear field were 
applications of radioisotopes and radiation in agriculture, biology and 
medicine, industry and research. The current five-year nuclear science and 
technology programme, up to the year 1993, covered four major areas: 
radiation protection and nuclear safety, radiation technology and engineering, 

GC(XXXIV)/ORi328 
page 17 


radioisotopes and:nuclear? techniques applications and special projects, 
including manpower development, infrastructure development and upgrading of, : 
existing facilities^ '-v .''.' '-> 

60. The assistance provided by the Agency to tne Philippines covered a wide 
range of activities, including the application of isotopes and radiation in 
medicine arid agriculture. In 1989, the Agency had provided support for the 
establishment of a pilot-scale irradiation facility, which was currently being 
used for studies of food irradiation arid the sterilization of medical products 
and tissue grafts. Assistance for the*repair of the 3 MW reactor was also 
being provided by the Agency. In addition, the Philippines had been 
participating in-13 of the 18 regional projects being undertaken under i.1ie 
Regidnal Co-operative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA). It was '<> 
heartening to:note that that agreement had paved the way for other regional 
co-operation agreements in Latin;America-and in Africa. ' 
61. His delegation hoped that the organizational change in the Department 
of Technical Co-operation and the adoption of a. two-year programming cyfcle for 
its activities would lead to greater efficiency and enhanced programme quality 
and delivery. Notwithstanding the contiriued growth of the Techriical ,r '. 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund and -the substantial increase in 
extrabudgetary contributions, the question of the financing'of technical .--"'~ ! 
assistance was. a matter on which the Agency should foeusogreater attention^, 
since it was important to have amore secure source of financing. :-62. 
Two major iriternatiorial developments had prompted renewed interest in 
nuclear energy as the most viable source of energy in the future^ One was the 
environmental concern about the greenhbUse effect and global warming resulting 
from the use of fossil fuels and the other was the concern, created by 
international"conflicts, about the stability of oil supplies at affordable 
prices. The current crisis in the Gulf had led the Philippines to consider 
other energy alternatives, including nuclear powervfin order to "reduce its "- ' 
dependence on oil. ' ;< T " ."<. .-..".. r -I.: -'''. ...:..'.;.";... ...-' -K; : -.:> ..;;.. 
63. Safety remained the primary consideration when reviewirig*the riuolear ^ 
power option."- The Agency'syefforts*to*strehgthen iribernational^co-operatiori .--,,. 
in nuclear safety and..radiological-protection would-provideadded confidence; 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 18 


if the Philippines decided to resume its nuclear power programme. His 
delegation welcomed the Agency's expanded safety programme focusing on the 
design and construction of nuclear power plants with improved safety features, 
nuclear waste management systems, assistance in the preparation of nuclear 
safety regulations and in the establishment of authorities responsible for 
their supervision, its various safety missions as well as its initiatives to 
promote wider acceptance of nuclear safety standards. However, his delegation 
was convinced that an enlightened public information campaign could play a 
crucial role in increasing public confidence in nuclear power. 


64. Nuclear safety and radiation protection legislation and regulations in 
his country generally conformed with the standards and guidelines set by the 
NUSS Codes. The Goiania incident had prompted the Philippines to establish a 
list of all radiation sources held by licensed users. That had led to the 
discovery of some missing sealed sources and action had been taken to recover 
them. 
65. The Philippines attached great importance to the management of the 
radioactive wastes resulting from its increased utilization of nuclear 
techniques. A mission had visited the Philippines under the Waste Management 
Advisory Programme and the recommendations of the mission were being 
reviewed. In that connection, the National Atomic Energy Authority had 
relaunched its search for a suitable site in the Philippines for a radioactive 
waste repository. His delegation had expressed some reservations about the 
Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive 
Waste, because it believed that an internationally binding instrument would be 
a more satisfactory way of meeting the concerns of developing countries. It 
continued to maintain that position and therefore considered the Code, in its 
present form, as only an initial step towards that ultimate objective. 
66. With regard to Article VI of the Statute, his delegation maintained its 
view that the Board, in designating its members, should unequivocally state 
which criteria mentioned in Article VI.A were applied. 
67. Finally, with reference to the rule and policy on the appointment of 
the Director General, resolutions had been adopted by the General Conference 
in 1981, 1985 and 1989, recommending to the Board of Governors that, in 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 19 


appointing the Director General after the expiry of the term of the incumbent 
Director General, due regard be given to the principle of equitable 
representation and that particular consideration be given to candidates from 
developing areas who met the requirements of the position. His delegation 
believed that the principle of rotation that was followed by other agencies in 
the United Nations system should also govern the Agency's selection of its 
Director General. 


68. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) said that several statements during the current 
session of the General Conference had stressed the need for developing energy 
policies which would bring about a substantial reduction in emissions of CO 
and other damaging pollutants. Two main conclusions were being drawn: the 
first conclusion was that far-reaching energy policy decisions were required. 
The second conclusion was that the utilization of nuclear power in national 
energy policies should be an indispensable element in combating the problem. 
Denmark strongly supported the first conclusion but disagreed with the second. 
69. The World Commission on Environment and Development had stated in its 
report that it was a precondition for worldwide sustainable development that 
the industrialized countries reduce their energy consumption by 50% over the 
coming 40-50 years, and make strong efforts to curb emissions of greenhouse 
gases. The Toronto Conference on the Changing Atmosphere had recommended a 
20% reduction in CO emissions at least before the year 2005. Denmark's 
energy policy was in strict accordance with those recommendations. The main 
targets of the Danish energy action plan for the year 2005 were to reduce the 
CO emissions by at least 20% and to reduce the consumption of energy by 
15%. The main instruments to be used were substantial conservation in 
electricity and heat consumption, combined heat and power production based on 
natural gas, a substantial conversion from coal to natural gas resulting in a 
45% decrease in coal consumption, and a 100% increase in the utilization of 
renewable energy. Cost-benefit analyses of the action plan based on the OECD 
assumptions of economic growth and energy prices demonstrated that the 
investments required to implement the plan would have been paid back by 2005 
even assuming a stable oil price of $16 per barrel up to that date. Higher 
oil prices would increase the economic benefits of the investments. The 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 20 


Danish energy action plan demonstrated that it was possible to reach very 
ambitious targets in energy and environment policies without any utilization 
of nuclear power and without cost increases. The decision to abstain from 
using nuclear power in Denmark had been taken even before the Chernobyl 
accident and had been motivated by unsolved nuclear safety and nuclear waste 
storage problems. 


70. During the preceding few years the foundation had been laid for 
expanded co-operation in key areas of nuclear safety. The Convention on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the 
Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency had been acceded to by an 
increasing number of States. The five NUSS safety codes and a number of 
safety guides had been improved. The International Nuclear Safety Advisory 
Group (INSA6) had developed basic safety principles for nuclear power plants 
reflecting the most advanced policies and practices. Furthermore, the 
establishment of stronger and more restrictive safety principles and criteria 
had been supplemented by more frequent use of various types of safety 
mission. It was encouraging that countries with major nuclear activities were 
showing greater openness towards proposals to improve the safety of nuclear 
installations, though the availability of technical and financial resources 
for such improvements remained a problem. The Agency should intensify the 
assistance it provided to countries with the modernization of safety systems 
in older nuclear power plants. Denmark attached great importance to the 
establishment of a network of bilateral agreements as a supplement to the 
multilateral agreements concluded within the framework of the Agency or in 
other forums. One important element in such bilateral agreements should be a 
clear and unequivocal commitment to inform neighbouring countries about the 
planning of new installations or about major changes in existing nuclear 
installations, in order to provide the country concerned with an opportunity 
to express its views before a decision was taken. 
71. Recently there had been increased interest in nuclear-powered 
non-military vessels, though the current number of such vessels was relatively 
low. Accidents involving nuclear-powered vessels during the preceding few 
years had underlined the potentially disastrous consequences that accidents 

GG(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 21 


involving seaborne reactors could have. The code of safety for nuclear 
merchant ships should therefore be revised to bring it in line with the state 
of the art in nuclear safety technology. The possibility of extending the 
code to apply to all types of non-military ship should also be examined. 
Denmark, together with the Governments of the other Nordic countries, had 
submitted a proposal to the General Conference suggesting that the Director 
General conduct a study on the need to revise and extend the code of safety 
for nuclear merchant ships. 


72. The safeguards activities of the Agency were an outstanding example of 
effective multilateral co-operation on the prevention of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. Full-scope Agency safeguards were a crucial element in the 
non-proliferation regime. All States which had not yet done so should place 
all their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. More than 50 of the 
non-nuclear-weapon States party to NPT had not yet fulfilled their treaty 
obligation to conclude safeguards agreements, and he urged them to do so as 
soon as possible. 
73. Denmark supported the work done by the Agency to develop new safeguards 
approaches with a view to increasing efficiency. Since the amount of nuclear 
material under safeguards would substantially increase in the coming years, it 
was important to ensure the continued effectiveness and credibility of the 
safeguards system. In that regard, the current temporary financing 
arrangement for the safeguards system should be replaced by a viable long-term 
arrangement based on clearly defined elements. 
74. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had just completed its'work. 
Regrettably, the conference had not been able to agree on a final document. 
However, many important issues had been aired. 
75. With regard to the question of civil liability for nuclear damage, 
Denmark strongly supported the work of the open-ended working group which was 
studying the matter, and hoped its important work would be brought to a 
successful conclusion at an early date. 
76. Denmark placed a high value on the Agency's technical assistance 
activities which continued to show substantial growth, and approved the target 
of $49 million for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1991. 
Denmark would contribute its full share of the target. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 22 


77. Mr. MONTESDEOCA (Uruguay) said that in recent years his country, 
convinced of the importance of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, had been 
engaged in the introduction of nuclear technology, to which end it had 
received valuable assistance from, among others, Argentina, Brazil and Chile. 
It had also participated actively in various forums set up to consider matters 
relating to nuclear energy, where it had held to its view that the key to 
success in the peaceful uses of atomic energy lay in its rational utilization, 
in radiation protection and in nuclear safety. In that connection, Uruguay 
had in 1990 been visited by a RAPAT mission; its Government was currently 
considering adherence to the Convention on Liability for Nuclear Damage; and 
it was in the process of ratifying the Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material. 
78. Another important area was that of environmental radiological 
protection, and he urged the international community to work toward the 
establishment of a co-ordinated system to monitor environmental radioactivity. 
That would require a reallocation of the Agency's limited resources, although 
his country would also like to see the economically more powerful countries 
taking a leading role in developing such a mechanism. For its part, Uruguay 
stood ready to contribute to those efforts. 
79. The principle of universality was particularly applicable and effective 
in the case of a technical organization such as the Agency. Situations 
involving local or regional tensions should therefore not be allowed to 
interfere with policies aimed at increasing the safe use of nuclear technology 
for socially beneficial purposes. 
80. At the recent Fourth NPT Review Conference, Uruguay, in raising the 
question whether NPT was the only possible way to prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, had stated that although it was the most important way, it 
was certainly not the only one: there were also the Tlatelolco and Rarotonga 
Treaties, which were designed to ensure the maintenance of nuclear-weapon-free 
zones, and which, unlike NPT, did not create two different classes of State 
with regard to the fabrication, use and supply of nuclear weapons. There were 
also unilateral or bilateral agreements between States aimed at preventing the 
spread of nuclear weapons. For its part, Uruguay - a Party to the Tlatelolco 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 23 


Treaty - was involved in the efforts now being made to find formulas to enable 
Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Cuba to join the Tlatelolco Treaty, in the 
interests of making the whole of Latin America a nuclear-weapon-free zone. He 
also urged all Member States to work toward the creation of other such zones 
around the world, and, in the case of those which had not yet done so, to 
enter into full-scope safeguards agreements with the Agency. 


81. The whole region of which Uruguay was a part was engaged in a great 
effort to improve the social and economic conditions of its inhabitants. 
Developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was a key element in that 
effort, and one to which Uruguay was committed. One way in which it could 
achieve progress was to place a number of its well-trained specialists within 
the Agency*s Secretariat, thus eventually providing the country with 
invaluable technical and organizational experience. 
82. It was no less important that Uruguayan nationals receive adequate 
training in the nuclear field, to which end the National Directorate for 
Nuclear Technology (DNTN) would shortly be engaging new staff who had already 
specialized in nuclear activities in other countries, and would also be 
setting up the laboratories at the Nuclear Technology Development Centre. In 
all of those developments the Agency had been providing its traditional and 
much-valued support. 
83. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) welcomed the idea of establishing medium-term 
plans for the Agency's scientific and technical activities and hoped that it 
would be possible to introduce a medium-term plan in the biennial programme 
for 1993 and 1994. He also supported the target of US $49 million for 
voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 
1991 and was pleased to announce that, pending Parliamentary approval, Norway 
would contribute its assessed share to that fund. The rate of growth in 
resources for technical assistance clearly demonstrated that the present 
system of indicative planning figures and voluntary contributions worked 
well. His delegation did not therefore see a need, for the time being, to 
change to any other method of financing. The low overall financial implementation 
rate of the technical co-operation programme during the past few years 
and the further fall in that rate from 1988 to 1989 were to be regretted. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 


page 24 


Although there were various reasons for the low implementation rate, it was 
partly a result of understaffing in the Department of Technical Co-operation. 


In the long run, it seemed likely that some expansion of promotional activies 
would be required in order to overcome the problem of understaffing, but such 
expansion could not be combined with a zero-growth budget without detrimental 
effects on the Agency's regulatory activities and, as his delegation had 
pointed out in the past, it was important to maintain a balance between the 
Agency's promotional and regulatory functions. 


84. In order to ensure that the Agency could operate continuously, his 
delegation could accept the Board's proposal to increase the level of the 
Working Capital Fund for 1991 to US $8 million. One of the most pressing 
administrative problems facing the Agency was the threatening cash flow 
situation caused by late and uncertain payments. His delegation, therefore, 
appealed to States that were in arrears to make their payments as soon as 
possible. 
85. His delegation deplored the fact that there had been reductions in the 
1991 budget in the area of nuclear safety and radiation protection and in the 
area of safeguards. Those were important Agency activities which needed to be 
strengthened, even if that entailed future increases in the budget. 
86. His Government recognized the considerable contribution of the nuclear 
applications programme to environmental protection and sustainable 
development. Extensive use of nuclear energy in the long run would be 
acceptable only if the strictest safety and environmental protection standards 
were observed. His delegation was pleased to note that the number of 
ratifications of the conventions on early notification and on assistance in 
the case of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency had increased 
considerably in 1989. The Agency had a vital task in promoting international 
co-operation in the field of safety and it should have the necessary resources 
to enable it to respond to Member States requests for its services and advice 
in that field. His delegation welcomed the Agency's activities to assess the 
radiological consequences of the Chernobyl accident and to upgrade the safety 
of older power reactors and the proposed Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 25 


87. While regretting that the Fourth NPT Review Conference had failed to 
reach agreement on the wording of a final document, it was encouraging to note 
that there had been widespread support for the texts which were of direct 
relevance to the Agency and its activities. His delegation welcomed the 
accession to NPT of Kuwait and Qatar in 1989 and the recent accession of 
Mozambique. It also welcomed the various new safeguards agreements which had 
entered into force. However, it noted with regret that at the end of 1989 
51 non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT, including States with 
significant nuclear activities, had not concluded safeguards agreements with 
the Agency within the prescribed period of 18 months after ratification. He 
urged those States to fulfil their NPT obligations. 
88. Failure to ensure that effective safeguards were maintained would have 
serious repercussion on continued international co-operation in the nuclear 
field. The Agency should therefore pay close attention to any indication of 
possible irregular procurement of nuclear material in any State. Although the 
quantities of nuclear material and the number of new facilities coming under 
safeguards would continue to increase, there had been severe budgetary 
constraints in the Department of Safeguards for the past few years. It was 
essential that the safeguards budget was sufficient to ensure a level of 
activity that maintained confidence in the safeguards system. Norway was one 
of 21 Member States which had accepted a simplified procedure for inspector 
designation and it invited those Member States with safeguards agreements 
which had not done so to follow suit. 
89. Mr. KAHILUOTO (Finland) said that, since the last General 
Conference, the world had witnessed events in both the economic and political 
spheres which would have far-reaching repercussions also with regard to energy 
supplies. Those who bore the responsibility for new energy and environment 
policies were facing greater and more complex challenges than ever before. 
They had to find an acceptable balance between the unavoidable need to produce 
energy and the environmental effects thereof. Efforts to alleviate the 
environmental damage caused by burning of fossil fuels would not be successful 
without the widest possible co-operation at an international level. Thus, 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 26 


Finland attached great importance to the work of the Inter-governmental Panel 
on Climatic Change (IPCC), and was in favour of the conclusion of new 
international agreements on reduction of sulphur dioxide emissions. The use 
of nuclear energy to produce electricity reduced emissions of so-called 
greenhouse gases and thus contributed to the prevention of global climatic 
changes. As such, it was an option which could not be disregarded. Nuclear 
power was currently in a period of stagnation, but growing awareness of the 
seriousness of environmental problems would change the public's attitude 
towards it and revive the industry. Finland also attached great importance to 
the Senior Expert Symposium on Electricity and the Environment to be held in 
May 1991 in Helsinki. The effects of the Gulf crisis on international energy 
markets could not at present be predicted. The conflict had already caused 
increases in crude oil prices and uncertainty in international oil markets 
which, in turn, was likely to raise the market prices of other fossil fuels. 
Those developments would no doubt have a substantial effect on national energy 
policy strategies and priorities. A reassessment of nuclear power was 
inevitable. Nuclear power continued to be one alternative in the future 
energy plans of Finland. The question of whether Finland would install 
additional nuclear power capacity was to be decided upon after the coming 
parliamentary elections. 


90. The Agency had performed remarkably well in the nuclear safety area, in 
particular after the Chernobyl accident. Its role in that area could be much 
expanded. It was now up to Governments and operators to implement the rules 
and guidelines prepared by the Agency, and to ascertain that they were 
strictly observed. The Chernobyl accident had shown the world that nuclear 
safety and environmental protection were no longer local and national tasks 
but international ones. Universal acceptance of internationally agreed codes, 
such as the NUSS codes, and other recommendations could greatly contribute to 
a general qualitative improvement in reactor safety. He welcomed the 
increasing number of safety missions being undertaken. Finland was also fully 
in support of the new and central role the Agency had assumed, at the request 
of the USSR, in the clean-up activities following the Chernobyl accident. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 27 


91. For more than 30 years the Agency had been introducing numerous nuclear 
techniques in various fields of science and technology, in developing areas of 
the world in particular. The Agency's programme should be reviewed from time 
to time in order to keep it up to date. Finland attached great importance to 
the preparation of a medium-term plan and special efforts should be made to 
identify global common problems, preferably in co-operation with other United 
Nations agencies. At the same time, activities which relied on methods that 
had already been fully developed, or where the role of atomic energy was 
negligible or non-existent should be phased out. Such activities came within 
the domain of other United Nations organizations. If future biennial 
programmes could be planned in line with the above criterion, it would be 
easier to judge whether it was appropriate to continue with a zero-real-growth 
budget. 
92. The safeguards programme comprised a major part of the Agency's work. 
Safeguards methods and concepts could, however, still be further developed and 
refined. Efforts in that direction should continue and a review of basic 
concepts might be in order. The Agency's right to make ad hoc inspections 
should be more often considered and implemented. The model safeguards 
agreements gave the Agency sufficient authority in that respect. 
93. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had recently been concluded in 
Geneva. It was regrettable that no consensus had been reached on a final 
document. However, in substantive discussions the Agency's work had been 
generally commended and a number of recommendations concerning the work of the 
Agency agreed upon. The latter could serve as guidelines in the planning of 
the Agency's future activities. 
94. Mr. BRNELIC (Yugoslavia) said that, having witnessed the start of 
a relaxation of tension in one area, the world was now witnessing a dangerous 
confrontation in the Middle East which had unforeseeable consequences for 
economic and social development and peace well beyond that region. The 
Conference should therefore consider what positive contribution it could make 
to solving the problem. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 28 


95. The Annual Report for 1989 provided a concise account of the numerous 
activities which had been undertaken within the scope of the Agency's 
programme. The main objectives and tasks had been fulfilled, and the 
Secretariat was to be congratulated for a job well done. His delegation 
approved the Annual Report for 1989 and also the Agency's programme and budget 
for 1991 and 1992. 
96. Yugoslavia had not deviated from its principles and long-standing 
policy concerning the peaceful use of nuclear energy and, although it had 
passed a law prohibiting the construction of new nuclear power plants, it 
continued to be interested in constructive co-operation with the Agency. One 
nuclear power plant and several research reactors in operation and a large 
number of experts provided a solid basis for such operation. His Government 
strongly supported the Agency's programme, including its safeguards 
activities, which should be guaranteed adequate resources. The efforts made 
by the Agency's safeguards inspectors were commendable, and that function of 
the Agency should be strengthened in order to implement fully the 
non-proliferation treaties. Yugoslavia welcomed the recommendation of the 
Fourth NPT Review Conference that NPT should be unlimited in time. 
97. The Agency's technical co-operation programme had made a considerable 
contribution to Yugoslavia's development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Among the significant projects implemented was one concerning 
research reactor modernization. The Agency should increase its efforts to 
enhance the transfer of technology to developing countries in order to speed 
up their socio-economic development. 
98. His country attached great importance to nuclear safety and 
radiological protection and expressed its satisfaction at significant results 
achieved by the Agency in that area in the past year. The growing demand for 
the Agency's various safety services however would require more resources. 
Yugoslavia welcomed the progress achieved towards creating a universal legal 
liability system for nuclear damage, and supported the Code of Practice on the 
International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste. An effective 
solution for radioactive waste disposal was vitally important for the future 
of nuclear energy and, although theoretically and technically there were 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 29 


solutions, no practical solution had yet been found, especially for high- and 
intermediate-level wastes. The Agency should intensify its efforts and 
assistance in that area. 


99. One issue which was inseparable from economic development was the 
ecological aspect of nuclear energy, to which his Government attached special 
importance. No effort should be spared to protect life on the planet. The 
initiatives and measures taken by the Agency in that area were most welcome. 
100. His country was extremely interested in participating in research in 
the field of nuclear fusion. It had a solid scientific base and other 
necessary conditions for such activity. 
101. Mr. SCHEEL (German Democratic Republic) said a radical political 
change had been achieved in his country since the thirty-third session of the 
General Conference. The people of the German Democratic Republic had decided 
in favour of unification with the Federal Republic of Germany, which would 
take place on 3 October 1990. The conditions thus created provided the 
possibility of pursuing an ecologically sound environmental policy with the 
aim of substantially improving the critical environmental situation. 
102. The major contributor to environmental devastation and pollution in his 
country was the heat and electricity generating industry, based predominantly 
on local lignite. That was one of the reasons why nuclear power would 
continue to form part of the power supply system, but highest priority would 
be given to nuclear safety and radiation protection. All power reactors, 
those in operation and those under construction, were being subjected to a 
thorough reassessment of safety and reliability. Analyses carried out since 
the mid-1980s had resulted, in July 1989, in the establishment of safety 
requirements by his country's regulatory body in co-operation with the 
competent authorities of the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria. A 
thorough safety reassessment had been carried out by a German-German working 
group on units 1 to A of the Greifswald nuclear power plant. The report 
prepared by the group, in whose work experts from the Soviet Union and France 
had also participated, identified safety deficiencies in plant design and 
operation and set out the requirements to be met in order to enhance safety to 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 30 


a level commensurate with international standards. His Government wished to 
thank the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany for the valuable 
support given in that matter. 


103. On the basis of the results, the Minister for the Environment, Nature 
Conservation, Energy and Nuclear Safety had decided, on 1 June 1990, to shut 
down unit 4 of the Greifswald nuclear power plant. Units 2 and 3 had already 
been shut down in February. Unit 1 would continue operation until 
December 1990 at the latest. If the safety requirements put forward by the 
experts were met through, inter alia, extensive improvements in the engineered 
safety systems, operation could be continued for a limited period. The 
necessary backfitting would be very expensive, and cost-benefit analyses had 
to be carried out before definite decisions could be taken. 
104. Unit 5 of the Greifswald plant, which was in the commissioning stage, 
and units 6 to 8, now under construction, as well as units 1 and 2 of the 
Stendal nuclear power plant, also under construction, would be subjected to 
the same safety assessment procedure. Regulatory decisions on all nuclear 
installations would be made on the basis of the Nuclear Energy Act and other 
regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany, which had come into force for 
the German Democratic Republic on 1 July 1990. 
105. Another area opened up for investigation as a result of the political 
changes was the uranium ore mining district in the southern part of his 
country. The programme drawn up for the district aimed at obtaining a 
comprehensive picture of the radiological situation created by mining in past 
centuries and, in particular, by uranium ore mining over the past four decades. 
The programme also called for the adoption of systematic corrective action. 
106. Just as nuclear safety and radiation protection were integral parts of 
all nuclear activities, so safeguards were inseparably associated with all 
uses of nuclear material. The Agency's efforts at verifying, through its 
safeguards system, that nuclear material was not diverted to the manufacture 
of nuclear weapons were of great importance. The assurance thus provided that 
States were complying with their non-proliferation commitments contributed 
fundamentally to an atmosphere of mutual confidence among States and 
facilitated international nuclear co-operation. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 31 


107. For twenty years, NPT had been instrumental in creating such an 
atmosphere. It was therefore regrettable that the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference had been unable to reach consensus on a final document. The 
participating States parties to NPY had, however, expressed their conviction 
that the Treaty was essential to peace and security, and had pledged continued 
support for its objectives. They had urged all States not party to the Treaty 
to accede to it and to bring into force the required safeguards agreements. 
Proposals aimed at furthering the implementation of Articles III and IV could 
be a valuable input for future Agency activities. That applied particularly 
to the promotion of international co-operation with due regard for nuclear 
safety and for full-scope, effective safeguards. 
108. Mr. ALER (Sweden) said that the past year had again demonstrated 
the global interdependence of the energy market and the inevitable problems, 
particularly in developing countries, of meeting future energy needs without 
damaging health and the environment. Leading experts from a large number of 
countries had recently met in Sweden for the fourth session of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and had predicted a more rapid 
increase in global mean temperatures than over the past 10 000 years unless 
greenhouse gas emissions, not least from the energy sector, were considerably 
reduced. 
109. He hoped that the political conclusions of those findings would be 
drawn at the Second World Climate Conference in November and that binding 
commitments should be agreed upon in the negotiations on a climate 
convention. Such a convention ought to be finalized during the United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development in 1992, where energy policies would 
be a key issue because of their close interrelationship with environmental 
policies. 
110. The Swedish Parliament was expected to decide on the country's future 
energy policy during its coming session. It would be based on a previous 
decision to phase out Sweden's considerable nuclear power capacity by 2010 and 
to reduce the use of fossil fuels as much as possible. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 32 


111. Technical co-operation was an important part of the Agency's work. The 
system of voluntary contributions to an agreed planning figure for the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund was a satisfactory form of 
financing, provided that all donors paid their share of the target in a 
reliable and timely manner. Sweden had already pledged its share of the 
target for 1991 and, aware that Agency resources could not meet all sound 
requests, had in recent years paid more than twice its share of the Fund in 
support of multi-year projects, primarily in agriculture and environmental 
protection. He urged other donor countries to make similar extrabudgetary 
contributions for such national or regional projects. 
112. Although the Fourth NPT Review Conference had not managed to reach 
agreement on disarmament measures, he was pleased to note that there had been 
complete unity on the central role of the Agency in furthering international 
co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy and that new emphasis had 
been given to nuclear safety and safeguards. The participants in the 
Conference had agreed to join Sweden and other countries in requiring 
full-scope safeguards as a condition for the export of significant nuclear 
supplies in the future. That policy was expected to be implemented 
universally without delay. The Review Conference had also recognized the 
non-proliferation benefits of the conversion of research and test reactors 
from high-enriched to low-enriched uranium fuel and, in cases where that was 
not feasible, of significantly lowering the level of enrichment. Sweden 
strongly endorsed the recommendation to continue international co-operation in 
order to reduce the proliferation risks associated with direct-use material. 
Particular attention must be given to the physical protection of such material 
in handling, storage and transport. States which had not already done so were 
urged to accede to the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
Finally, there had been general agreement at the Review Conference that any 
transfer of nuclear materials and facilities from military to civil use should 
be verified by Agency safeguards. His delegation welcomed the confirmation by 
the Soviet Union that it would open all its civil power reactors and most 
research reactors to Agency safeguards, thus following other NPT depositary 
States. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 33 


113. In spite of the general support for safeguards, the financing of those 
activities remained an unsolved problem. The progress made in the working 
group established by the General Conference in 1989 was encouraging, but he 
wished to underline the importance of reaching agreement on the main features 
of a new financing arrangement during 1991 so that a firm foundation could be 
laid for the budget process that would end in the spring of 1992. 
114. Sweden was one of the Board members which had agreed to the safeguards 
budget for 1991 only with the greatest hesitation. Also, it had strong 
reservations on the 1992 estimates in view of the postponement of important 
items that had been necessary in order to balance the 1991 budget. Several 
delegations had urged that the present safeguards criteria be revised in order 
to reduce Agency costs. The Secretariat, with the advice of the Standing 
Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) was working in that 
direction, but in the meantime the Agency should follow the present rules 
strictly and must maintain the political trust vested in its safeguards system. 
115. The report by the Board and the Director General on the strengthening 
of international co-operation in nuclear safety presented an ambitious plan 
for the 1990s covering the whole area of nuclear safety, radiological 
protection and waste management. Sweden welcomed the holding of a special 
conference on nuclear safety in August 1991 and was willing to contribute to 
its financing. It hoped in particular that agreement would be reached on 
safety fundamentals for the guidance of national authorities. The General 
Conference should be able to codify such an agreement at its 1991 session. 
116. In addition to the topics contained in the report just mentioned, the 
safety of seaborne reactors was of special interest to Sweden and the other 
Nordic countries. The present IMO code of safety for nuclear merchant ships 
had been established in 1981, but, given the rapid development of safety 
principles since then, the Nordic countries were proposing that the Agency 
review the code and study its possible application to other categories of 
nuclear vessels. 
117. Another topic worth highlighting was the disposal of spent fuel from 
research and test reactors. Such spent fuel might in the future present 
serious storage and reprocessing problems because of the limited availability 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 34 


of specialized facilities for such purposes. Those problems should be given 
proper attention, and suppliers and operators of such reactors should work 
together to find satisfactory solutions with regard to safety and security. 
The management of spent fuel from research and test reactors should be given 
early attention in the elaboration of the new series of RADWASS recommendations 
and the Agency should, if requested, assist Member States with any acute 
problems. 


118. The financial constraints on the Agency were a recurrent theme in all 
fields of its activities, particularly after the long period of application of 
the principle of zero real growth in the Regular Budget. Sweden did not 
support that principle as a management tool. Flexibility was needed in 
reallocating the Agency's resources in response to the rapidly changing needs 
of Member States. Sweden had supported stringent measures considered 
necessary for improving the use of Agency resources in the past, but now saw a 
need to strengthen nuclear safety and safeguards programmes. 
119. The previous year his delegation had called for the resumption of 
medium-term planning in the Agency and it noted with great satisfaction that 
there now appeared to be general agreement in that regard. The Board had 
approved a plan submitted by the Director General for work on a medium-term 
plan for the years 1993-98 that would serve as a framework for future biennial 
programmes and budgets. The planned elaboration of strategies for the main 
areas of the Agency's activities and the consideration of certain in-house 
issues, in particular human resource development and the structure and 
organization of the Secretariat, were most welcome. 
120. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that his country had always considered 
that the Agency's essential role, as laid down in its Statute, was to expand 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that spirit, Iraq had continuously 
endeavoured, despite the financial difficulties which it might have experienced 
at certain times, to pay its full contributions to the Regular Budget 
and to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund. It had also always 
been an active member of the Agency, contributing to most of the organization's 
scientific and technical activities, and had conscientiously discharged 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 35 


its obligations in the Agency's policy-making and subsidiary organs. Furthermore, 
it had always faithfully implemented agreements concluded with the 
Agency and had never contravened a single provision of those agreements. 


121. Consequently, his delegation considered that the remarks made by the 
Director General in his opening statement of 17 September 1990 on the subject 
of the provision of technical assistance to Iraq could only be understood in 
political context in which the Agency had been forced to give in to strong 
pressure from States that were hostile to Iraq and preparing to launch a military 
attack against it. 
122. Recalling that, in his opening statement, the Director General had 
referred to a "suspension" of technical assistance to Iraq, he noted that the 
Director General was an experienced legal expert who ought to be well aware of 
the legal significance of the word "suspension" as defined in the Agency's 
Statute, and to know which organs were competent to decide on such a suspension 
and which legal and disciplinary measures were to be taken in such 
cases. The Board of Governors was the organ which approved the technical 
assistance programmes and which, therefore, was competent to decide on the 
suspension of technical assistance. The Director General, and any other 
member of the Secretariat, were bound to comply fully with decisions taken by 
the Board. 
123. It was to be hoped that the use of the word "suspension" was a mere 
slip which the Director General would swiftly correct. In his opening statement 
he had said that the sanctions decided upon by the Security Council had 
made it unpractical for the Agency to provide technical assistance to Iraq. 
On that subject the delegation of Iraq had a number of comments to make. 
124. Firstly, Security Council resolution 661 was an unjust and arbitrary 
resolution. It deprived Arab States of the possibility of finding an Arab 
solution to the problem, and certain States had used it as a pretext for concentrating 
naval forces and troops in the Arab region in anticipation of a 
military attack against Iraq. It had also served to justify the use of food 
and medical products for the purposes of a political and military offensive. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 36 


125. Secondly, that resolution applied to States and not to international 
organizations. It was quite clear and unambiguous on that point. To attempt 
to apply its provisions to the Agency was therefore an illegal step which 
constituted a violation of that resolution and was contrary to the Agency's 
Statute. 
126. Thirdly, resolution 661 did not extend to technical assistance and 
training activities. That view had been clearly expressed by several permanent 
members of the Security Council. 
127. Fourthly, the Director General was well aware that certain States were 
ready to welcome Iraqi trainees within the framework of the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation activities, as had been confirmed in the Board of 
Governors on 14 September 1990. While circumstances might make it impractical 
for the Agency to provide technical assistance to Iraq, for example in the 
form of equipment, they did not prevent the training of Iraqis abroad. The 
Director General was legally and administratively bound, in accordance with 
the Agency's Statute, to do everything to find means of providing technical 
assistance to Iraq, and his delegation was convinced that he would carry out 
that duty. 
128. It was true that the Middle East was going through an extremely serious 
crisis. However, experience had shown that all crises could be solved, that 
the worse a crisis became, the more necessary it was to show a sense of 
balance and reason, and that far from facilitating peaceful solutions, 
precipitate measures were likely to complicate matters and to impede efforts 
to create a favourable climate for defusing the conflict. 
129. There was a danger that the hasty steps proposed would have consequences 
which it would be very difficult to remedy. Iraq and the Agency were 
united not only by the ties of technical assistance, but also by other types 
of agreement. If technical assistance activities were to be affected, Iraq 
would be forced to reconsider entirely its relations with the Agency. It was 
difficult to understand how practical circumstances could be unfavourable to 
sending experts to Iraq under the technical co-operation programme while 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 37 


allowing visits by other people associated with the Agency. Iraq wanted its 
relations with the Agency to remain undamaged and hoped that the Agency's 
organs would continue to share the same desire. 


130. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that during the past year the 
world political situation had been characterized by rapid and profound 
changes. Countries in Eastern Europe had made great strides towards democracy. 
Relations between Eastern and Western Europe had improved considerably 
and the two parts of divided Germany were soon to be reunited. All those 
changes offered possibilities for new forms of co-operation and for improving 
the peaceful relations between States, not only in Europe, but throughout the 
world. 
131. The energy sector was one area in which European countries should 
co-operate more closely and pool their resources to a greater extent than 
before. In June, his Government had proposed to the European Council in 
Dublin the establishment of a European energy community. Just as the 
establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community after the Second World 
War had become the symbol and instrument of reconciliation and renunciation of 
war, the establishment of a European energy community could help to prevent 
new walls from dividing Europe again. 
132. In other parts of the world, the chances of settling long-standing 
conflicts and differences had also improved. In southern Africa, Namibia had 
gained independence and new policies in South Africa offered the prospect of 
an end to apartheid and a solution to that country's problems which could 
facilitate regional co-operation. In South East Asia, the warring parties in 
Cambodia had reached a basic agreement as a result of the efforts made by the 
permanent members of the Security Council and the Indonesian Government. In 
Latin America, remarkable progress had been achieved on the road to democracy. 
133. Nevertheless, the crisis in the Middle East, caused by Iraq's aggression 
against Kuwait, was a reminder that the maintenance of international 
peace and security could not be taken for granted. However, the collective 
efforts made by the international community to restore peace and security in 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 38 


the Gulf were impressive. His country entirely supported what the Director 
General had said in his statements to the Board of Governors and at the 
opening of the General Conference on the subject of technical assistance to 
Iraq and believed that he had taken the steps required by the circumstances 
and by the Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the 
United Nations Charter. 


134. That encouraging and positive development highlighted once again the 
importance of the Agency's activities in the areas of peace, disarmament, arms 
control and co-operation. His country attached great importance to the Treaty 
on the Non-Pro1iteration of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)and the 1990 NPT Review 
Conference. Despite the initial optimism and the achievements with respect to 
the implementation of various articles of the Treaty, including Article VI, 
the Review Conference had been unable to agree on a final document. Although 
that was disappoint- ing, the Review Conference had nevertheless proved to be 
extremely useful. The participants in Geneva had found common ground on a 
number of points and it was on that basis that the Agency also should continue 
its work. As in 1985, fundamental agreement had been reached in the Review 
Conference on all aspects of direct relevance to the Agency. 
135. Recent facts underlined once again how important it was to implement 
and improve the Agency's safeguards system in order to prevent any further 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, to increase mutual confidence between 
nations and to promote the peaceful use of atomic energy. His delegation 
noted with satisfaction and accepted the conclusion of the Safeguards Statement 
in the Annual Report that in 1989, as in previous years, no safeguarded 
nuclear material had been diverted for non-peaceful purposes. 
136. It was necessary to continue to improve the effectiveness and efficiency 
of safeguards, and in that connection, he recalled two recommendations 
in the draft final document of the Fourth NPT Review Conference, on both of 
which there had been consensus and which called on the Agency to carry out 
studies. The first recommendation related to questions which might arise 
regarding the commitment of certain States party to NPT to the Treaty's nonproliferation 
objectives. The Review Conference had noted that there was 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 39 


no experience with special inspections as outlined in Articles 73 and 77 of 


document INFCIRC/153 and that it would welcome a study by the Agency of the 
possible scope, application and procedures of such inspections, including 
their implications for the information requirements and policy of the Agency. 
His delegation urged the Director General to carry out such a study. The 
second recommendation was a call for the wider application of safeguards to 
peaceful nuclear facilities in nuclear-weapon States. The Review Conference 
had invited the Agency to consider the implementation of a scheme under the 
nuclear-weapon States' agreements consisting of full reporting in combination, 
where appropriate, with verification based on randomization. His delegation 
also urged the Director General to carry out such a study. In that connection, 
his Government welcomed the offer made by the Soviet Union to increase 
the number of reactors under its voluntary-offer safeguards agreement with the 
Agency. 


137. The regrettable lack of agreement in Geneva had not shaken his 
country's conviction that the NPT was the most effective instrument for 
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. His delegation welcomed the 
accession to the Treaty of other States, such as Mozambique. It also welcomed 
the more positive attitude with regard to the Treaty reflected in the paper 
presented by some observers to the Review Conference. It noted with much 
interest the statement made by Argentina and Brazil that full implementation 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty was currently the subject of an active and intense 
exchange of views among interested parties. It urged countries of the Middle 
East to enter into similar co-operation agreements on the peaceful application 
of nuclear energy and non-proliferation and noted with interest, in that 
connection, the comments made by the Director General in his opening statement. 
It deplored the fact that South Africa had not yet acceded to NPT, but 
welcomed with much interest the statement made by the South African Minister 
for Foreign Affairs on 17 September. It urged all countries in southern 
Africa to become party to the Treaty without further delay. 
138. It was his country's policy to require full-scope safeguards in a 
recipient country as a condition for new nuclear exports. Furthermore, 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.328 
page 40 


the NPT Review Conference had made important progress towards a consensus that 
the acceptance of full-scope safeguards by recipient countries should be a 
condition of supply. Despite differences of view between Agency Member States 
on some aspects of non-proliferation policy and the NPT, there was undeniably 
a common area of political and economic interest between States party and 
States not party to NPT and between traditional and new nuclear suppliers. 
His delegation believed that there was justification for the Committee on 
Assurances of Supply to resume its formal meetings without delay. Almost all 
States accepted the need for effective practical non- proliferation measures 
and themselves required that nuclear material or equip- ment which they 
exported should be subject to safeguards. It was important to recall that the 
Director General had the previous year requested all suppliers to ensure that 
exported nuclear material or equipment was subject to Agency safeguards and to 


inform the Agency in a timely manner of all relevant intended exports and 
actual shipments. 


139. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had paid more attention than earlier 
review conferences to nuclear safety, recognizing its vital importance for the 
future of nuclear energy. For the same reason the Board of Governors had 
decided to hold a special conference on nuclear safety in 1991. Since the 
Chernobyl accident in 1986, nuclear safety had received increased attention, 
and it was appropriate for the Agency to re-evaluate the situation in the 
affected region. His Government, which had also offered to implement a bilateral 
co-operation programme with the Soviet Union on the consequences of 
the Chernobyl accident, awaited with interest the results of that evaluation. 
It also welcomed the Agency's activities on the evaluation and improvement of 
the safety of ageing reactors, particularly WWER-440 reactors, and had offered 
a contribution of US $150 000 for the financing of those activities as a 
demonstration of its interest in them. 
140. International co-operation between countries in Western, Central and 
Eastern Europe in the area of nuclear energy, especially with regard to safety, 
was a vital component of the European energy community proposed by his 
country's Prime Minister in Dublin, and energy questions should have an 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 41 


important place in the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development 
to be held in 1992. The role of energy production in sustainable 


development was of primary importance. However, a sustainable energy path had 
not yet been found. Nuclear energy was not the solution, but it could cer


tainly be part of the final solution. The conference on nuclear safety 


in 1991 and the Helsinki symposium should provide the elements of the Agency's 
contribution to the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. 


141. The Netherlands had decided to leave the nuclear option open for the 
future. Additional research started after Chernobyl was continuing, and an 
additional research programme had been approved to preserve the country's 
nuclear know-how and infrastructure. 
142. Technical co-operation was the third vital element of the Agency's 
mandate. His Government had pledged to pay its share of the target, amounting 
to nearly $800 000, to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund in 1991, 
and it would continue to finance the co-ordinated research programmes on the 
productivity and health of African livestock. His country did not object to 
technical assistance being financed from the Regular Budget, since that would 
clearly show the importance of the Agency's work for developing countries. 
143. All States had an interest in the safe and peaceful development of 
nuclear energy. All States were therefore entitled to full membership in the 
Agency in accordance with its Statute. The Netherlands would continue to 
defend that principle of universality. In conclusion, he expressed his 
Government's gratitude and admiration to the Director General and his staff 
for the exemplary manner in which they had conducted the Agency's affairs. 
144. Mr. SMALL (Ireland) associated himself with the statement made by 
the delegate of Italy on behalf of the 12 Member States of the European 
Community and recalled that, at the previous session of the General Conference, 
his delegation had expressed his Government's concerns at the idea of 
promoting the role of nuclear energy as a solution to problems of pollution 
and global warming. The international debate on those issues was going on in 
other forums, and his Government's concerns, which were shared by many other 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 42 


States, remained unchanged. More recently, the situation in the Middle East 
had affected and threatened oil markets and thereby introduced another element 
of uncertainty into energy supply systems. Difficult as it might be to find 
solutions to all those problems, both environmental and political, his Government 
convinced of the view that large-scale and widespread recourse to nuclear 
energy was not an acceptable solution in view of the serious health and environmental 
risks which were intrinsic to the nuclear industry. The analysis 


and conclusions presented on that subject in the report of the World 
Commission on Environment and Development were still valid. 


145. The question of safety and risks of serious accidents with transboundary 
implications was still at the heart of the nuclear question. His 
Government fully recognized and respected the considerable efforts made by the 
Agency to promote nuclear safety. It had supported the expanded safety 
programme which the Agency had undertaken after the Chernobyl accident. 
During 1990, his country, in its capacity as President of the European 
Community, had been pleased to propose, on behalf of the Community's 
Member States, the holding by the Agency of a conference on nuclear safety in 
September 1991, and it looked forward to the deliberations and conclusions of 
that conference, which it hoped would make a timely contribution to 
determining the nuclear safety agenda for the following decade. 


146. His delegation stressed once again that nuclear countries had to 
recognize the legitimate concerns of their non-nuclear neighbours and that, 
accordingly, operators of nuclear power plants should respect the highest 
standards at all stages of their activities, from siting and construction to 
operation and decommissioning. That was equally valid for all aspects of 
final disposal of nuclear waste. The NUSS codes were an appropriate minimum 
standard for application by Member States within the context of their own 
national standards, and that should be formally confirmed by countries with 
nuclear programmes. 
147. In that context, he reiterated that it would be extremely useful to 
have independent reviews of Member States' regulatory systems on a voluntary 
basis by teams of Agency experts and along the same lines as OSART missions. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 43 


Because of various national factors, it was inevitable that structures and 


procedures would be different from one country to another and it was therefore 


necessary to ascertain whether that had implications for nuclear safety. His 


country supported initiatives to gather as much information as possible on 


areas where regulatory practices differed and to use that information to 
promote consistency among regulatory approaches to common safety objectives. 
The holding of specialist meetings of regulators could make a useful 


contribution to achieving those objectives. However, there was also an urgent 
need for peer reviews. A new and real openness was needed to improve safety 


and verify that it was in keeping with present and future requirements. Peer 


reviews could be undertaken by teams of experts put together by the Agency at 


the request of Member States. In requesting such reviews, the regulatory 
authorities of Member States with nuclear power programmes would clearly 
demonstrate to the international community their commitment to nuclear 
safety. His country would press for such an initiative at the conference on 
nuclear safety planned for 1991. 


148. Any discussion of nuclear safety clearly had to consider the question 
of damage resulting from an accident, including the problems of liability and 
compensation. The Working Group and the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage had met a number of times under the very able chairmanship of 
Ambassador van Gorkom (Netherlands), and the Irish delegation welcomed the 
progress which had thus far been made. It believed that a comprehensive 
liability regime was well overdue and hoped that substantial progress could be 
made at forthcoming meetings. 
149. During the previous year, the question of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection had been evaluated and had given rise to animated debate in many 
different forums. Competent international bodies such as UNSCEAR and the ICRP 
had recognized that the radiation risk coefficient should be revised upwards 
to take into account developments in scientific knowledge. Despite the doubts 
and uncertainties which Member States had expressed on that subject, his 
country was convinced that that was fully justified if, as seemed likely, the 
current individual dose limits for workers and members of the public had to be 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 44 


reduced. His delegation hoped that the matter would be extensively discussed 
and that recommendations made by the ICRP the following year would meet with a 
positive response. 


150. His delegation strongly supported the activities which were under way 
in the co-ordinated research programme on radon. That natural source of 
radiation continued to pose a serious problem and contributed significantly to 
the average annual dose throughout the world. Accordingly, his delegation was 
in favour of accelerating and extending radon research and believed that, 
given the increasing significance of that work, the Agency should invest more 
resources in it. 
151. Ireland encouraged the Agency to maintain the contacts established with 
the Soviet authorities after Chernobyl and particularly welcomed the 
co-operation in the epidemiological studies, the treatment of patients, the 
talcing of counter-measures and the transfer of studies. 
152. A solid foundation of knowledge had already been established in nuclear 
safety, to which the Agency had made a significant contribution, but much 
remained to be done, particularly in the area of human error, the principal 
factor behind incidents which might lead to accidents. 
153. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had completed its work a few days 
previously in Geneva, and his delegation, a strong and unconditional supporter 
of NPT, regretted that the participants in the Conference had been unable to 
agree upon a final document. Nevertheless, his delegation was convinced that 
the comprehensive review which had taken place would strengthen both the NPT 
and the commitment of States parties to it. Those States intended to build on 
the basis of the consensus reached at the Conference on a large number of 
issues so as to ensure the continued viability of NPT and a successful meeting 
of the States parties in 1995. 
154. His delegation had been particularly struck by the degree of consensus 
reached in Geneva on matters of great importance for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. The fact that all the parties to NPT had agreed to urge 
nuclear suppliers to make their supplies conditional on full-scope safeguards 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 45 


was historic. His delegation was also pleased with the importance which had 
been given at the Conference to nuclear safety issues and in particular to the 
need for international co-operation in that area. It hoped that, as a 
follow-up to the Review Conference, the Agency would seek further ways of 
enhancing that co-operation. 


155. Ireland welcomed the growing number of signatories to NPT and urged 
those countries which had not yet adhered to it to consider doing so. The 
existence of a universal and effective non-proliferation regime was the best 
way of ensuring international peace and security. His delegation accordingly 
appealed to signatories which had not yet done so, in particular Member States 
having significant nuclear programmes, speedily to conclude a safeguards 
agreement in conformity with Article III of the Treaty. The voluntary-offer 
safeguards agreements already in force with the five nuclear-weapon States 
contributed substantially to achieving the objectives of NPT. However, all 
civil facilities in all non-nuclear-weapon States should be under safeguards. 
156. His delegation fully supported the efforts made by the Department of 
Safeguards to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of safeguards as well 
as to expand their coverage. It encouraged the Agency to consider the implementation, 
under agreements with nuclear-weapon States, of a system combining 
full reporting with - where appropriate - verification based on randomization. 
157. His delegation paid tribute to all those who had been involved in the 
impressive technical assistance programme implemented by the Agency in 1989 
and described in the Annual Report, a programme which his country had been 
glad to contribute to and to benefit from. 
158. Lastly, his delegation fully associated itself with the remarks made by 
the delegate of the Netherlands with regard to the suspension of technical 
assistance to Iraq and strongly supported the action taken by the Director 
General. 
159. Mr. LASERNA-PINZON (Colombia) said that the circumstances and 
events which made up the world's present historical situation had been 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 46 


referred to and analysed during the current session, particularly in the 
brilliant opening address by the Director General. Consequently, rather than 


looking at new facts, it would perhaps be useful to come to some conclusions 
and to highlight trends which called for decisions and measures to be taken. 
The historical facts which had given birth to the Agency would serve as a 
point of departure for some of those conclusions. The author of an article 
had wondered whether the world had come to the end of its history. The answer 
was perhaps that it was the end of an era, the end of well-established 
balances which had made up a certain "life style" for centuries. Could it be 
that that historical change had its origins in science's access to atomic 
phenomena? 


160. The importance of the discovery of nuclear processes for the awakening 
of a new perception of the world lay less in the emergence of new sources of 
energy and new ways for man to dominate nature than in the creation of a 
global scenario which called for an intelligent and vigilant solidarity 
between people and between man and nature, or, more precisely, with the whole 
cosmic balance which made life possible. Perhaps without knowing it, the 
world was approaching a stage where facts could not be judged in isolation, 
but had to be seen in a global context. 
161. The need to globalize, to universalize the different aspects of 
existence, as well as the need to go from the particular to the general and 
from the regional to the global - and not only in matters of climate - was 
something new in the history of Homo sapiens. The existential-institutional 
mode ushered in by the atomic era and its applications for both war and peace 
was equally unaccustomed. The paradox was that the microcosm had engendered a 
radical transformation of the conditions not merely of life but of survival in 
the macrocosm. 
162. That unwanted change of scale was at the root of the crisis of adaptation 
which the world was currently going through and which went back to the 
beginning of the so-called modern age, an age which had commenced with the 
radical change in the scale for measuring the universe brought about by the 
cosmology associated with the name of Newton. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 47 


163. The current crisis stemmed from the globalization of a situation which 
had been known previously only at group level, and for which institutions were 
therefore not prepared. The world was becoming aware that it was not only 
possible to respond to that crisis but also that there was an urgent need to 
do so, as had been said at the Helsinki meeting with regard to events in the 
Gulf. The nuclear revolution was explosive not only because it had given rise 
to phenomena associated with nuclear explosions for peaceful and other 
purposes, but also because it had exploded the order which had governed the 
Newtonian cosmos, not on the intellectual but on the material plane. 
164. Though it was necessary to wonder about facts, their sequence and their 
origin, priority had to be given to asking where the world was going, towards 
what historic scenario, under the impulsion of the Faustian energy of subatomic 
phenomena. It was John von Neumann who, with an admirable and universal 
creative vision, had explicitly posed that disturbing question, or at 
least glimpsed the parameters of a possible answer. That physicist and mathematician 
had known well what he was talking about since he had contributed 
much to the understanding of both atomic and mental and institutional 
processes. In an article published in 1955 in Fortune magazine, he had anticipated 
the crisis of the 1980s while at the same time proposing a diagnosis 
for analysing it. He had explained that the entire world was in the throes of 
a rapid process of maturation towards a crisis which was attributable neither 
to fortuitous events nor to human errors, but to the fact that the environment 
in which technological progress necessarily took place had two characteristics: 
it was both undersized and underorganized. Any attentive reader of 
that noteworthy futuristic but realistic study must come to the conclusion 
that unless reorganization succeeded in time - and the author had not been 
very optimistic on that point since he knew the limitations of tribal consciousness 
as opposed to world consciousness - there would be repercussions 
beyond anything thus far experienced, leading to the destruction of the 
balance of the biosphere which was essential to survival. The author's vision 
of the environmental crisis, including the greenhouse effect, in his article 
entitled "Can We Survive Technology?" deserved further elaboration. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 48 


165. He would indicate briefly how his country planned to respond to the 
need to end the underorganization which characterized the world. Colombia, 
and other countries members of the Andean Group whose heads of State had met 
in Machu Picchu on 22 and 23 May 1990 had declared that, in preparing and 
implementing their respective economic policies, the appropriate measures 
should be taken to ensure that those policies were compatible with the obligations 
stemming from the process of integration. As many delegations had 
reaffirmed at the General Conference, they had highlighted the importance of 
atomic energy for the development of the Andean countries. It would consequently 
be highly desirable and beneficial for the Agency to meet with the 
Board of the Cartagena Agreement and with the Andean Development Corporation 
with a view to establishing the necessary links to promote development 
projects for countries in that region. The Agency was therefore cordially 
invited to take the measures it considered appropriate to carry out that task, 
which fitted in so well with the process of globalization characterizing the 
current era. 
166. At a national level, his country was engaged in a process of reassigning 
its resources devoted to nuclear research, as it was fully aware that 
both the technology and the national and international context had changed. 
That opened up new promising perspectives for research and development 
activities in industry, energy, agriculture and health. The new legal order 
which was being established provided for close collaboration between public 
bodies, the private sector and the universities on nuclear activities, in 
accordance with available resources and national interests and taking into 
account, as always, co-operation with the Agency and its stated and pursued 
objectives. 
16 7. Mr. BOBAK (Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy TUIWE), 
after warmly thanking the Agency for giving him the opportunity to 
attend the thirty-fourth session of the General Conference as an observer, 
said that the Agency's activities to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy were of great interest to the TUIWE and all its affiliated organizations 
throughout the world. The TUIWE greatly appreciated the efforts made 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 49 


in that direction by the Agency's Member States and considered that the work 
done by Agency experts on the Code of Practice on the International Transboundary 
Movement of Radioactive Waste and on measures to strenthen international 
co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological protection was of 
great importance. 


168. The generation of nuclear power involved special technologies which, 
above all, called for assurances of absolute safety. In that connection, he 
recalled the dreadful consequences of accidents such as the disaster at the 
Chernobyl nuclear power plant, which had affected thousands of people. The 
fact that the Soviet authorities and trade unions had just adopted - four 
years after the accident - a programme of action for the years 1991-95 to deal 
with the ecological situation, which was making life impossible for the inhabitants 
of the region, showed the seriousness of the consequences which continued 
to be felt by the people affected. More than four million people lived 
in the contaminated area and about 600 000 of them who had been involved in 
clean-up operations after the accident were still suffering from the effects 
of the radiation to which they had been exposed. It was thought that, in 
addition to the 360 000 inhabitants who had been evacuated in the months 
following the explosion, another 200 000 should still leave the region. 
169. The TUIWE understood the significance of the data on the situation 
published by the Agency's experts and much appreciated the role the Agency 
played in providing an accurate picture of the accident, which had been given 
a great deal of useless publicity by the press. The media had indeed published 
sensational and alarming information on the contamination of land in 
Byelorussia, on the many cases of the cancer called Chernobyl AIDS, on the 
disastrous condition of the forests, where the trees were changing colour, on 
vegetation suffering mutations, etc. 
170. As it had repeatedly stated, the TUIWE shared the view of scientists 
who considered that the future of mankind lay in the development of nuclear 
power with perfect mastery and control to guarantee safety and confidence. 
The TUIWE was firmly convinced that the opponents of nuclear power, who were 
still very numerous and who were winning popular support in various regions of 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.328 
page 50 


the world, would abandon their intransigent position once those conditions 
were fully met in all the countries concerned. 


171. Although many studies had been carried out as to causes of the 
Chernobyl accident, too little had been done for the inhabitants who were 
suffering from the consequences of the accident. It was no coincidence that 
the trade unions were closely involved with those problems, even on a purely 
technical level. The international scope of the accident made necessary the 
help of international specialists and in particular of the Agency, which was 
the body most competent to play an effective role in that area. 
172. The TUIWE was organizing an international conference of trade unions of 
workers in energy which would be held from 11 to 15 December 1990 in Paris. 
Problems related to energy and nuclear power had a priority place on the 
agenda. Participants would pay the greatest attention to the results of the 
current session of the Agency's General Conference, and he was convinced that, 
for its part, the Agency would show interest in the TUIWE conference in the 
mutual interest of the two organizations. 
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF IRAQ 


173. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) rejected the remarks made by the delegate of 
the Netherlands, in particular with regard to Iraq. He wished to make it 
clear that his Government had never associated itself with acts of aggression 
against the Netherlands whereas that country, as the news showed, was involved 
in aggressive activities against Iraq. 
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
10 June 1991 


International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 20 September 1990, at 10.10 a.m. 


President; Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


General debate and annual report 
for 1989 (resumed) 1 - 124 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Namibia 1 6 
Greece 7 - 16 
Czechoslovakia 17 - 28 
Viet Nam 29 - 35 
Morocco 36 - 46 
Ecuador 47 - 59 
Kenya 60 - 67 
Kuwait 68 - 73 
Bangladesh 74 - 86 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 87 - 97 
Portugal 98 - 109 
Qatar 110 - 115 
Albania 116 - 124 


[*] GC(XXXIV)/939. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC (XXXIV) /INF/28 7/Rev. 2. 


90-04462 
7782e/0763e 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 2 


Item of the 
agenda* 


Paragraphs 
Election of Members to the Board 
of Governors 125 - 142 
General debate and annual report 
for 1989 (resumed) 143 - 159 
Statement by the delegate of: 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 143 - 150 
Statements by the following countries: 
Iraq 152 154 
United States of America 155 - 156 
Kuwait 157 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 158 
Republic of Korea 159 


GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989 (GC(XXX1V)/915) (resumed) 


1. Mr. HANGALA (Namibia) said that his country, which was for the 
first time taking up its rightful place in the Agency as an independent and 
democratic nation, welcomed the election to the Presidency of the General 
Conference of a representative of Hungary, a country which had provided 
political and material support throughout Namibia's struggle for national 
liberation. He conveyed to the Director General and his staff the best wishes 
of the President of the Republic of Namibia, who assured the Agency of his 
country's full co-operation. Lastly, he thanked all Member States which had 
supported his country in its struggle for independence and which continued to 
assist it in the reconstruction and development of its devastated economy. 
2. Namibia provided a significant percentage of the world's uranium 
production from its mine at Rossing. That mine, which had started work 
in 1976 and could produce about 5000 tonnes of uranium oxide per year, had 
never achieved its full capacity, largely as a consequence of the uncertain 
political situation in the country. Since independence, the negotiation of 
new contracts in a depressed uranium market had been difficult, and in 1990 
sales of Rossing uranium had been 30% below production capacity, with 
significant financial implications not only for the industry but for the 
country as a whole. In years to come, access to previously closed markets and 
the improving fortunes of the world uranium industry should enable Namibia to 
exploit its full potential. 
3. In addition to the one at Rossing, several other uranium deposits had 
been discovered in the western part of the country, mainly in Tertiary to 
Recent sediments and calcretes. The development of those deposits was subject 
to an increase in uranium prices and improved investment in the country. The 
uncertain situation in the country before independence had resulted in a 
capital drain, particularly during the past 10 years. To remedy that trend, 
his Government was currently formulating an investment code as well as mining 
and taxation policies which would encourage foreign investment and stimulate 
economic growth. His Government was firmly convinced that the democratic 
values enshrined in his country's Constitution, together with advantageous 
investment and fiscal regimes, would help attract investment. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 4 


4. Namibia had exported uranium concentrates for the past 14 years and 
would continue to do so in the foreseeable future. No uranium enrichment or 
conversion or development of a nuclear capability was envisaged. Consequently, 
source material legislation would be simplified, as in the case of 
other non-nuclear countries, covering only the issues of prospecting, mining, 
selling and exporting uranium. Under Article 140 of the Constitution of the 
Republic of Namibia, whereby existing legislation remained in force until it 
was specifically amended or repealed, the industry was currently subject to 
source material legislation which was more complex than necessary. Namibia's 
uranium exports had to pass through the contentious enclave of Walvis Bay, of 
which South Africa still arrogantly claimed ownership, and were thus also 
subject to South African legislation under which that country required the 
certification of such exports by the Namibian Government. His country thus 
found itself ensnared in a web of legislation and regulations - as a novice in 
the field of international trade and handling of source materials with a 
limited knowledge of international source material agreements, conventions and 
safety standards. In that situation, his country would be grateful for the 
Agency's assistance in providing a sound basis for a safe uranium industry. 
In addition, it would like to benefit from progress made in nuclear know-how 
and applications in the areas of hydrology, medicine, soil fertility and agroindustry. 


5. In taking up its long overdue seat in the General Conference, the 
Namibian Government wished to state categorically that it would honour and 
adhere to the provisions, regulations and guiding principles of the Agency. 
It had indicated its firm intention of developing its uranium industry as its 
export earnings depended increasingly on sales of uranium concentrates. Conversion 
and enrichment facilities were not envisaged, since the country had 
cheap hydroelectric power potential. As to exports of uranium, the Namibian 
Government was fully determined to apply all safeguards and regulations 
designed to ensure the responsible and safe utilization of uranium worldwide. 
6. Finally, the issue of foreign nuclear and toxic waste dumping in 
Namibia had been addressed in Parliament and a provision of the Namibian 
Constitution categorically denied any possibility of using the country as a 
dumping ground for any toxic or radioactive waste. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 5 


7. Mr. PROUKAKIS (Greece) said that the statement made the previous 
day on behalf of the Member States of the European Community by the delegate 
of Italy, the country which currently held the Presidency of the Community, 
fully reflected the views of the Greek Government. However, he wished to make 
some points which were of particular importance for his own country. 
8. His delegation greatly appreciated the Secretariat's tireless efforts 
to attain the Agency's objectives, commended it on its effective management 
during the fifth consecutive year of zero real budget growth, and assured it 
of its full co-operation for the future. It fully shared the Director 
General's concerns about the Agency's serious financial situation, which was 
due to late and uncertain payments. In that respect, he was happy to announce 
that his Government, despite severe financial constraints, had recently 
transferred to the Agency's account its full contribution to the Regular 
Budget and its voluntary contribution to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund (TACF) for 1990. 
9. His delegation greatly appreciated the activities undertaken by the 
Agency to promote co-operation between Member States in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. It also noted with great satisfaction the 
role which the Agency continued to play in maintaining world peace and 
security through its safeguards system and the fact that, in 1989, no event 
had been detected which would indicate the diversion of a significant amount 
of safeguarded nuclear material for any military or unknown purpose. It 
further noted the efforts made by the Agency to improve the safety of nuclear 
reactors, sharing its concerns regarding the effects of ageing on reactor 
safety, and welcomed the Agency's activities aimed at ensuring the safety of 
nuclear reactors worldwide. 
10. In the area of safe long-term disposal of radioactive waste, his 
delegation supported the proposal to establish a new integrated series of 
publications under the Radioactive Waste Safety Standards (RADWASS) 
programme. It also commended the Agency on the encouragement it was giving to 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy in areas such as health, environmental 
research and electricity generation, and attached great importance to numerous 
other activities of the Agency such as the radiation dosimetry services, the 
promotion of nuclear medicine, the sterilization of medical articles including 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 6 


biological tissue graft implants, the monitoring of fallout radioactivity, the 
formulation of recommendations concerning the transport of radioactive 
materials, the study of new safe techniques for the preservation of food and 
the prevention of food-borne diseases, and the establishment of scientific 
data networks. 


11. Greece had no nuclear power plants, but it was following closely both 
the activities aimed at enhancing the safety of power reactors and the 
research on renewable energy sources. It had always striven to avoid all 
forms of local or global pollution, especially that associated with energy 
production. Fear of nuclear accidents and of climatic changes due to the 
greenhouse effect thus acted as obstacles to electricity production, whether 
by nuclear or conventional techniques. 
12. No effort should be spared to minimize the risk of a nuclear accident 
and to study more extensively the phenomena related to the greenhouse effect. 
In that connection, international co-operation under the auspices of the 
Agency and other international organizations was extremely important for 
further clarifying the greenhouse effect. His country's attitude towards 
nuclear power would depend, among other factors, on an in-depth examination of 
the potential harmful effects which the generation of electricity by either 
nuclear or conventional techniques could have on the environment. Greece was 
following with interest the work being done on climate change and the . 
potential role of nuclear power in avoiding carbon dioxide emissions. It was 
observing the development of nuclear energy and noted that, in 1989, 12 new 
nuclear power plants had come on line, construction work had started on five, 
and five reactors had been shut down permanently. 
13. Greece was proud to be a member of both the Agency and the European 
Community. In the important sector of radiation protection, the new Greek 
regulations guaranteed the utmost safety of peaceful nuclear activities 
carried out in the country. Those regulations followed the trends prevailing 
both in the Agency and in the Community and were based on the recommendations 
of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP). 
14. In addition, his country was trying to establish close co-operation 
with other Agency Member States to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
and research on related subjects. Since the previous session of the General 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 7 


Conference, it had paved the way for co-operation with Argentina, developed 


the second technical stage of a bilateral agreement with Bulgaria for early 
notification of nuclear accidents, and undertaken, under the auspices of the 
Agency, the necessary preparations for concluding a co-operation agreement 
with the Chernobyl International Research Centre. 


15. During 1990, Greece had also become one of the 35 Member States of the 
International Consultative Group on Food Irradiation, set up under the 
auspices of the Agency, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to improve the 
preservation of foodstuffs and prevent food-borne diseases. 
16. In conclusion, he stressed that his country, which played the dual role 
of donor and recipient in the Agency's technical assistance programme, would 
continue to support Agency activities in all areas, and reiterated the 
importance it attached to international co-operation through the Agency to 
meet the new challenges of a changing world. Joint efforts by all would help 
to make the world more productive, peaceful, pleasant and safe. 
17. Mr. WAGNER (Czechoslovakia) said that the recent past had been 
marked by fundamental political changes not only in his country, but also in 
other States of Central and Eastern Europe. Those countries had seen an 
extensive economic and social democratization process which had given rise to 
hope and optimism. Real possibilities were being offered to reform structures 
based on confrontation and to turn them towards co-operation and integration 
on a European and global scale. That development must not be undermined by 
the situation brought about in the Middle East by the aggression of Iraq 
against Kuwait. His country resolutely condemned that aggression and 
supported the measures to implement the pertinent Security Council resolution 
which the Agency's Director General had announced in his opening statement. 
18. At previous sessions, his delegation had informed the General 
Conference of progress made by the nuclear power programme in his country, 
where nuclear power plants currently accounted for about 28% of electricity 
production. Nuclear power would necessarily continue to play an important 
role in energy production in Czechoslovakia, as the availability of 
economically viable fossil fuels was diminishing and it was planned to shut 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 8 


down several thermal power plants with a total installed capacity of 
1200 MW(e) over the next four years in order to resolve the most pressing 
environmental problems. It went without saying that nuclear power could only 
play such a role if the strictest safety standards were applied, both during 
the construction and the operation of the plants. In that connection, he 
wished to emphasize the high performance standards of his country's nuclear 
power plants from the point of view of stability and operational reliability, 
both recently and in earlier years. The eight WWER-440 reactors of the 
Jaslovske Bohunice and Dukovany plants had produced a total of 23 TWh 
in 1989. Their operating characteristics were excellent, as demonstrated by 
an average availability factor of 80% and average unplanned outages of less 
than 1 unit per year. 


19. The operational safety of all those reactors received continuous 
attention from the operators and the regulatory bodies, and the Czechoslovak 
Government was aware of the concerns on that subject at both national and 
international level, especially in the case of the Jaslovske Bohunice V-l 
plant, which was equipped with old WWER-type V-230 reactors similar to those 
installed at some nuclear power plants in the German Democratic Republic, 
Bulgaria and the Soviet Union. The matter of guaranteed safety of the 
Bohunice nuclear power plant had recently been the subject of many discussions 
and doubts in Austria, stemming partly from objective and partly from 
misleading information. 
20. He wished to recall that the Czechoslovak authorities had already taken 
a number of technological, organizational and inspection measures to enhance 
the operational safety of the power plant in question, and the Austrian 
authorities and the IAEA had been fully informed of those measures. It was 
unfortunate that certain countries did not regard nuclear power simply as a 
problem of technology and safety, but used it for psychological, and even 
political, purposes. 
21. The change in his country's political and economic structures had 
opened up vast new possibilities for resolving problems related to the 
installation of further nuclear power plants, since previously the country had 
been oriented exclusively towards the Soviet Union and the other countries of 
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). Czechoslovakia was 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 9 


currently building four WWER units of 440 MW(e) at the Mochovce nuclear power 
plant and two WWER units of 1000 MW(e) at the Temelin site, which would be 
commissioned in stages up to the year 2000. It was planned to equip all those 
reactors with advanced western technologies, including control and diagnostic 
systems, so as to enhance their operational safety. The plans for plants to 
be constructed after Temelin were soon to be submitted for his Government's 
approval on the basis of results of an overall energy policy review and taking 


into account information received in the course of a call for bids for the 


supply of an advanced pressurized water reactor. 


22. Naturally the construction of new nuclear power plants in 
Czechoslovakia would bring with it corresponding changes in the area of 
nuclear fuel cycle management. Intensive studies were under way on the 
possibilities for long-term storage of spent fuel on Czechoslovak territory, 
the feasibility of reprocessing of such fuel by an appropriate partner, and a 
convenient way of assuring supplies of fresh fuel. 
23. His country continued to hold the view that national bodies bore the 
primary responsibility for the safety of their nuclear facilities, but it 
nevertheless hoped for effective bilateral and multilateral co-operation to 
help it in the safe construction and operation of its nuclear power plants. 
In that area the Agency played a very important role. His Government 
appreciated the objectivity of the Agency's safety expert missions to the 
Dukovany power plant in 1989 and to the Temelin site in 1990 and wished to 
participate in the activities of the new engineering safety review service as 
well as the recently established extrabudgetary project to review ageing 
reactors. 
24. Problems related to providing the public with objective information 
were among the most prominent concerns, and his country would willingly join 
in promoting new Agency activities in that area. 
25. There was no doubt that confidence in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy was linked to the strengthening of the nuclear-weapon non-proliferation 
regime. Less than a week previously, the Fourth NPT Review Conference had 
completed its deliberations - which, in his country's opinion, had been 
fruitful even though no consensus had been reached on a final document. That 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 10 


Conference had highlighted the outstanding role of Agency safeguards, which 
were a reputable and irreplaceable instrument of international verification of 
non-proliferation. 


26. The basic document for safeguards implementation within the framework 
of the NPT had been drafted more than 20 years previously. It had hitherto 
played an important role, but experience showed that the application of the 
principle of full verification of the material balance at each nuclear 
facility no longer corresponded to current needs in view of the limited 
financial and human resources available to the Agency. For that reason, his 
country had proposed the adoption of a "selective" approach to the application 
of safeguards. Flexibly implemented, that proposal would eliminate certain 
existing shortcomings, reduce financial burdens and contribute to the 
establishment of safeguards that could ensure effective and reliable control 
of the development of nuclear energy into the next century. 
27. His delegation approved the Agency's draft programme and budget 
for 1991-92 and the planned expenditure for 1991, which showed a fair distribution 
of resources between all the more important Agency programmes that 
contributed to the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It 
also approved the proposal to set the 1991 target for the TACF at 
$49 million. His Government had decided to pay to that Fund for 1991 a 
contribution in local currency corresponding to its full share at the basic 
rate of assessment. In addition, as in the past, his country would offer 
Type II fellowships representing a total of 48 man-months for the training of 
specialists from developing countries in Czechoslovak institutions. 
28. He concluded by saying that his delegation welcomed the results of the 
Agency's activities during the past year and attributed their success to the 
Director General and the Secretariat, who deserved sincere thanks for their 
fruitful work to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
29. Mr. NGUYEN DIHH (Viet Nam) said that, in attending the 1990 session 
of the General Conference, his delegation was motivated by a sincere will to 
co-operate with other delegations to attain the noble objective set forth in the 
Agency's Statute, namely "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 11 


30. Over its more than 30 years of existence, the Agency had already done 
much to attain that objective. The number of Member States had grown 
considerably and the Agency had developed its safeguards and technical 
co-operation activities with increasing efficiency. His delegation welcomed 
those results and wholeheartedly supported the Agency's work, in which it 
would make every effort to co-operate actively. 
31. His delegation highly appreciated the development of international 
co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy in its 
different forms: bilateral, multilateral or regional. The Agency's technical 
co-operation projects and training programmes, and the Regional Co-operation 
Agreement for Asia and the Pacific (RCA) had brought considerable benefits to 
his country. The technical co-operation programmes had been of great help in 
the improvement of the skills of Vietnamese scientists and technicians, the 
transfer of methods and technology, and the establishment and operation of 
laboratories required for the application of radioisotopes and nuclear 
techniques in medicine, agriculture and industry. His country therefore took 
great interest in the RCA and was becoming more and more actively involved in 
activities under that agreement which were in line with his country's 
conditions and needs. 
32. Everyone knew that, along with its considerable benefits for humanity, 
atomic energy also brought with it serious potential dangers. Following the 
accidents which had happened in the past, opposition to nuclear power was 
growing in many countries and there was great demand for nuclear safety. 
Adopting a highly reliable global policy on radiation protection and nuclear 
safety was the only way to overcome those psychological barriers and to create 
favourable conditions for the safe and steady development of atomic energy. 
Accordingly, his delegation strongly supported the fruitful activities of the 
Agency in the field of radiation protection and nuclear safety and welcomed 
the precious assistance which the Agency and the RCA had given to many 
countries to help them strengthen their infrastructure in that area. 
33. In Viet Nam, despite many difficulties, nuclear science and technology 
were beginning to develop and were contributing more and more to the 
development of the national economy and to improving the health and welfare of 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 12 


the population. The Dalat nuclear research reactor now made it possible to 
produce radioactive isotopes and compounds to meet the demands of the 
country's hospitals. 


34. Under an Agency technical co-operation project, a pilot facility for 
gamma irradiation was under construction in the suburbs of Hanoi. The 
building which would house the facility was completed, the assembly of the 
processing equipment would soon be finished, and it was planned to put the 
irradiation facility into operation at the end of 1990. The Viet Nam Ministry 
of Health had recently authorized the irradiation of many foodstuffs and it 
was hoped that the opening of that facility would mark a turning-point in the 
promotion of irradiation techniques in his country and in the development of 
international co-operation between Viet Nam and others, especially the 
countries of Asia and the Pacific, in the field of food irradiation and 
radiation technology in general. 
35. Lastly, his Government wished to reiterate its firm intention to use 
atomic energy only for peaceful purposes and to continue to develop 
international co-operation in that field. His Government strongly supported 
all efforts to make South East Asia a peaceful, co-operative, stable and 
prosperous region free of nuclear weapons. 
36. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco), commending the Agency on its successes in 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, said that his country had paid 
close attention to the Agency's nuclear safety activities in 1989, noting in 
particular the establishment of basic safety principles for nuclear power 
plants and the work it had done in elaborating guidelines on fundamental 
radiation protection criteria, the protection of workers and the environment, 
the transport of radioactive materials, emergency planning and preparedness, 
the control of radiation sources, the radiological safety of nuclear fuel 
activities, and the evaluation and treatment of cases of exposure. At a time 
when Member States, in particular developing countries, were seriously 
concerned about the problem of nuclear safety, it might be good for the Agency 
to draft an international nuclear convention or uniform regulations in that 
area. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 13 


37. His delegation had been very interested to note the decision taken by 
the Board of Governors to publish a Safety Series document which, for the 
first time, reflected an international consensus on ways to ensure the safe 
underground disposal of high-level wastes with a view to achieving the longterm 
radiological protection of man and the environment. The developing 
countries in particular welcomed the work carried out within the framework of 
the Waste Management Advisory Programme (WAMAP) which had enabled missions to 
be sent to eight developing Member States wishing to undertake programmes in 
that area. Furthermore, aware of the need to maintain the ecological balance 
and to protect the environment against the hazards associated with the dumping 
of industrial waste, including radioactive waste, his delegation was gratified 
that the Agency had prepared a Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste and hoped it would be adopted by 
the General Conference. That Code, which laid useful foundations for the 
co-ordination of the surveillance and control of transboundary movements of 
radioactive waste, should be backed up by a binding international agreement. 
38. The New World screwworm, which was now rampant in some regions of the 
Maghreb, also threatened other countries in the Mediterranean basin and 
Africa. Morocco welcomed the action undertaken by the Agency in collaboration 
with FAO to establish plans aimed at eradicating that pest by means of the 
sterile insect technique, and noted with satisfaction the efforts made to find 
the necessary technical resources for transporting sterile flies from the 
Mexican breeding facility to the regions affected. He appealed to the Agency 
and to States advanced in the field of pest-control techniques to provide 
increased technical assistance to the programmes and projects aimed at 
eradicating the screwworm, in co-operation with other specialized institutions 
of the United Nations dealing with that matter. 
39. Many countries were suffering from lack of water, both for domestic and 
for irrigation needs. In view of the socio-economic problems caused thereby, 
particularly in African countries, and given resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/515 
requesting that the technical and economic potential for using nuclear heat 
reactors for the low-cost desalination of sea water be assessed, his 
delegation hoped the Agency and countries with appropriate technologies would 
support the programme to produce potable water for countries in North Africa. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 14 


40. His delegation welcomed the noteworthy efforts made by the Department 
of Technical Co-operation to help developing countries and to encourage them 
to implement their nuclear energy programmes. It was gratifying to note that 
Africa's share in the total assistance financed from the TACF had increased 
to 24% in 1989-90. Despite that improvement, however, Africa was still the 
least well endowed region. The Agency should therefore continue to provide 
assistance taking into account that imbalance and the current situation of 
African countries which urgently needed its help. 
41. With regard to nuclear power plants, the Annual Report for 1989 showed 
that no significant progress had been made in the developing countries during 
the previous year, especially in the African countries, which for the most 
part lacked energy resources such as coal and oil. For that reason, his 
delegation considered it essential to have regional co-operation between 
developing countries, including the African countries. Morocco had extensive 
experience as well as human and material resources in that area and was ready 
to co-operate and collaborate with other African States under regional 
programmes for the exchange of information and skills in fields such as the 
use of nuclear techniques in medicine, agriculture, physics and chemistry. In 
that spirit, he looked forward to the entry into force in 1990 of the African 
Regional Co-operative Agreement (AFRA). That Agreement was a new element in 
the technical co-operation programme for the Africa region, based on the 
principle of technical co-operation between developing countries. It was to 
be hoped that AFRA would promote co-operation between African countries and 
thereby further enhance the value of the technical assistance given to 
national and regional programmes. 
42. His country had recently signed an agreement for the acquisition of a 
1.5 MW TRIGA Mark II research reactor; it was to become operational in 1993 
and would be the kingpin of the National Centre for Nuclear Energy, Sciences 
and Technology (CNESTEN), which would be called upon to play a decisive role 
in the promotion and development of nuclear techniques in Morocco. 
43. With regard to Morocco's nuclear power programme, a site which would 
meet all the requirements was currently being sought for the first nuclear 
power plant to be built in the country. As part of those activities, a 
Nuclear Power Planning Advisory Team (NUPAT) had gone to Morocco to evaluate 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 15 


the national capabilities and skills which would be called upon during the 
different stages of project implementation. He wished to underscore the 
importance of the work performed by that mission. 


44. Morocco could not refer to the expansion of the safeguards system and 
to non-proliferation without deploring the obstinate attitude and 
irresponsible behaviour shown by Israel with regard to the recommendations of 
the General Conference and the resolutions of the Security Council and the 
General Assembly of the United Nations. Indeed, the Israeli Government was 
persistently refusing to apply the United Nations Charter and the decisions of 
all international authorities, in particular the resolutions of the Agency's 
General Conference. His delegation regretted that the Director General's 
report on the modalities of application of safeguards in the Middle East had 
not brought forward new elements which might have overcome the obstinacy of 
Israel and its attitude of refusal and induced the Tel Aviv Government to 
implement the Agency's resolutions. Accordingly, his delegation requested the 
Director General to continue his consultations with the States concerned with 
a view to placing the nuclear installations of the region under Agency 
safeguards in conformity with the recommendations listed in paragraph 75 of 
the report contained in document GC(XXXIIl)/887. 
45. Furthermore, his country condemned the nuclear co-operation between 
Israel and the racist Government of South Africa, as it constituted a grave 
danger to peace and security in Africa and the Middle East. At the thirtythird 
regular session of the Agency's General Conference, the South African 
Government had let it be understood that it intended to accede to the NPT and 
to place its nuclear installations under Agency safeguards. Despite those 
declarations of intent, the General Conference had strongly condemned the 
wavering of the Pretoria Government, which had led Member States to question 
the real intentions of that regime. A year had since passed and the South 
African Government had still not acted on its promises. Resorting to the same 
procedure as in 1989, it had issued, on 17 September 1990, a document in which 
it declared its willingness to begin negotiations with a view to adhering to 
the NPT. His delegation doubted the credibility of those statements and felt 
that the General Conference should treat the matter with all necessary caution 
and implement the relevant decisions already adopted, pending the honouring by 
the Pretoria Government of the commitments which it had itself made. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 16 


46. Lastly, his delegation wished the General Conference every success in 
its work and reaffirmed Morocco's strong support for the Agency's efforts. 
47. Mr. PAREJA CUCALON (Ecuador) said that at a time when new threats 
endangered world peace, the Agency must remain vigilant so as to stop any 
attempt to use atomic energy for non-peaceful purposes. Only by dispelling 
the nuclear threat could a state of mutual understanding be reached, and that 
was the only proper spirit for international behaviour. For example, by 
complying with Security Council resolution 661, the Agency would be helping to 
strengthen peace. 
48. In that context, the matter of nuclear safety was of great importance, 
and the Secretariat accorded it particular attention. Faithful to its 
traditional policy, his country had acceded to all international instruments 
on that subject. 
49. Ecuador continued to believe it essential that safeguards be accepted 
as widely as possible so as to ensure the peaceful use of all nuclear 
facilities. In that connection, he wished to commend the Secretariat's 
efforts to include a greater number of Latin American nationals in the 
inspectorate. 
50. With regard to the expanded programme of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, it was desirable that funds intended for technical co-operation 
should not be allocated to it. 
51. The environment issue affected many technical assistance programmes and 
was therefore of particular concern to his Government, which had decided to 
declare the 1990s a "Decade for ecodevelopment" because of the need to 
reconcile economic development with environmental protection in the interests 
of the well-being of present and future generations. It had also decided to 
set up an Undersecretariat for Reforestation and Natural Resources within the 
Ministry of Agriculture and an Undersecretariat for the Environment in the 
Ministry of Energy and Mining. In the same spirit, the problem of dumping of 
nuclear waste called for the closest attention, since such wastes could 
radically alter the ecosystem and jeopardize the health of entire future 
generations. His country had supported the joint effort to find strategies 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 17 


for avoiding transboundary radiological consequences, pointing out that 
economic growth and social development could lead to serious deterioration if 
the quality of the environment was neglected. 


52. At a regional level, his country continued to take great interest in 
the Regional Co-operative Arrangements for Latin America (ARCAL), an 
indispensable instrument for co-operation between the countries concerned. In 
that context, it was worth recalling that the presidents of the member 
countries of the Andean Group had decided at their Machu Picchu meeting to add 
the nuclear sector to their energy co-operation programme, which could open 
new perspectives for co-operation between the Agency and the Cartagena 
Agreement. 
53. As a long-standing Member of the Agency, his country attached the 
highest importance to the Agency's technical co-operation activities, and the 
firm support given by his Government, which was convinced of the vital role 
played by science and technology in development, had permitted the Ecuadorian 
Atomic Energy Commission to continue to strengthen its work programmes and 
research projects. 
54. In the field of agriculture and stockbreeding the Commission had 
undertaken work on the improvement of seeds through radiation-induced 
mutations, on the use of labelled fertilizers and on the improvement of 
livestock that was of inestimable value for the agricultural sector. The same 
went for research which had been undertaken in various areas - physics, 
chemistry, biology and electronics - to try to resolve specific national 
problems in order to encourage the country's development. The agreement 
concluded with a company for the determination of pesticides present in plants 
and agricultural products would permit stricter control to be exercised in 
that area and the health of the population to be improved. 
55. In industry, the Commission had introduced nuclear techniques for the 
quality control of piping welds, for determining the condition of oil storage 
tanks and for the quality control of aircraft components. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 18 


56. In radiation protection, the purpose of the Commission's work was to 
protect the population against the harmful effects of ionizing radiation. 
Ecuadorian technicians had calibrated cobalt-60 instruments for cancer 
treatment and had controlled the quality of X-ray instruments in both urban 
and rural areas of the country. 
57. The Commission's work programme also included prospecting for radioactive 
ores, particularly uranium. Although its energy system was based on 
oil and hydroelectricity, his country would in the long run have to resort to 
nuclear energy and must take the measures necessary to ensure a stable and 
safe energy future for later generations. The Commission had concentrated on 
proven techniques which helped to promote the economic and social development 
of the country. 
58. Thanks to assistance from the Agency and from countries participating 
as donors in certain of its projects, Ecuador had been able to implement 
successfully a number of very fruitful programmes and to meet the challenge of 
history by laying sound foundations for a national scientific and 
technological infrastructure. 
59. In conclusion, he reaffirmed his delegation's faith in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy to create a peaceful and just world free of fear and 
mistrust, a world which sought freedom and well-being above all, and he was 
convinced that the Agency would continue, as in the past, to play an important 
role in the pursuit of those objectives. 
60. Mr. OGADA (Kenya) observed that the thirty-fourth session of the 
General Conference was taking place at a turning-point in international 
relations. For four decades, the world had been divided into ideological 
compartments, whereas now, where there had been confrontation, there was 
understanding and compromise, which of course promoted peace and progress 
throughout the world. The events in the Gulf could therefore only be 
regretted, and his delegation hoped that the crisis would soon be settled 
peacefully. It also hoped that the Member States involved in that crisis and 
the Agency's Secretariat would come to an understanding with regard to 
technical assistance which might be affected by international sanctions. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 19 


61. On the subject of the Fourth NPT Review Conference which had just 
ended, it would be wrong to pretend that it had been a success, since no 
consensus had been obtained on the wording of the final document. It was 
significant that the disagreement had centred on the sensitive issue of a 
comprehensive test-ban treaty, although that was the key to the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons in the future. It seemed that nonproliferation 
remained an empty word since there apparently existed no trust 
between nations. His delegation was firmly convinced that the NPT must be the 
basis for non-proliferation. However, given the present structure of the 
system, under which nuclear-weapon States kept the weapons which they already 
had but renounced the possibility of acquiring or developing any more, that 
negative security assurance was vital to non-nuclear-weapon States. At all 
events, his delegation appealed to those States which had not acceded to the 
NPT seriously to consider doing so. 
62. Safeguards were a vital instrument for the non-proliferation regime. 
However, the current system was not sufficiently transparent, and the world 
would be a far safer place if that system were universally applied. Kenya 
strongly supported the idea of making the African continent a nuclear-weaponsfree 
zone, but that would only be truly possible if all the States of that 
continent acceded to the NPT and to the safeguards system. 
63. The matter of the revision of Article VI of the Statute had been on the 
General Conference's agenda for nearly ten years, and the imbalance in 
geographical and regional representation in the Agency's policy-making organs 
continued. The question of the composition of the Board of Governors should 
be rethought, given that there was no longer the problem of a delicate balance 
between divergent ideologies. 
64. It was clear that the safety of nuclear facilities and the management 
of nuclear wastes remained crucial for the development of the nuclear 
industry, the more so in developing countries where the handling of very 
sophisticated systems undoubtedly presented practical problems. It was to be 
hoped that reliable but relatively simple methods for disposing of nuclear 
wastes could be devised. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 20 


65. His delegation was sincerely grateful for the technical assistance 
which his country had received and continued to receive from the Agency. That 
assistance had enabled it to establish capacities which, however modest, were 
of great importance, allowing the use of nuclear techniques in areas such as 
agriculture, medicine, water resources and non-destructive testing of 
materials. Kenya was increasing its efforts to intensify and diversify that 
invaluable co-operation, inter alia by joining the recently concluded AFRA. 
His delegation thanked the Agency for having sent a WAMAP mission to Kenya 
in 1989. During its visit, the team had helped Kenyan experts to contain 
caesium and radium sources used in Kenyan hospitals. It had also demonstrated 
the safe disposal of hot sources. That exercise, conducted jointly with the 
Kenya Radiation Protection Board, had been filmed by the local media and 
recorded, together with a text prepared by WAMAP, on a video cassette which 
would be used for training in developing Member States. That was a small but 
significant example of co-operation between Kenya and the Agency. 
66. A regional training workshop for Africa on nuclear law would be held in 
Nairobi in November and would help Member States in the region to translate 
safety standards and recommendations into national legal mechanisms in their 
own countries. His delegation would welcome the distinguished nuclear law 
specialists from various parts of the world who would participate in that 
workshop sponsored by the Agency. African lawyers would thus have an 
opportunity of learning from and exchanging ideas with those specialists, 
which in a small way would promote better understanding of nuclear science and 
industry in Africa. 
67. His delegation warmly welcomed the Republic of Namibia, which had taken 
its place in the General Conference for the first time as an independent and 
sovereign State, and was very pleased to see it take its rightful seat. The 
independence of Namibia was a highly significant fact since it marked the end 
of the colonial era on the continent of Africa. It also showed that one of 
the major aims of the founding fathers of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) 
had been achieved. His delegation hoped that event would herald the dawning 
of peace and prosperity, not only in southern Africa but in Africa as a whole 
as well. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 21 


68. Mr. AL-SAIED (Kuwait) said that his country, which was desirous of 
peace and international co-operation for a better world, was now toiling under 
the yoke of the Iraqi invader. Iraq was systematically practising rape, 
destruction and pillage, and had removed all the equipment from scientific and 
technological establishments and burnt all the documents it had found there. 
Despite those tribulations, the Kuwaiti Government continued to take great 
interest in the Agency's activities, including the work of the thirty-fourth 
session of the General Conference. Kuwait and the Agency had exemplary 
co-operation on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Thus, the Agency had sent 
many trainees to Kuwaiti training centres and his Government had made 
financial contributions to projects carried out in a number of friendly 
countries. In addition, his country had taken an active part in the 
interregional courses organized by the Agency in various regions of the world. 
69. The Director General's remarks in his opening statement concerning the 
Middle East and the dangers which threatened that region showed how important 
it was to establish peace and trust in that part of the world. His country 
felt that the States in the region should work together to make the Middle 
East a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, and 
he called on the Director General to intensify efforts to achieve that 
objective, requesting him not to limit his visits to only two countries but to 
consult all the countries concerned in that region. Furthermore, it was 
essential that the international community should call upon Israel to respond 
positively to the international appeals that it place all its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards, as that would be an important first step 
towards establishing peace in the region. 
70. His delegation welcomed the action taken by the Agency aimed at 
reducing environmental pollution caused by fossil fuels. However, it wished 
to stress that the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy must be 
accompanied by measures to ensure safety, as the hazards of nuclear power were 
a threat to all States and not only to users. 
71. His delegation supported the draft co-operation agreement between the 
IAEA and the Arab Atomic Energy Agency contained in document GC(XXXIV)/924 and 
the draft executing agency agreement between the United Nations Development 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 22 


Programme and the IAEA in document GC(XXXIV)/923, as that type of agreement 
could only strengthen the technical co-operation links between the Agency and 
other international organizations and institutions. 


72. The Director General had said that he had received from the Secretary-
General of the United Nations the text of the resolutions adopted by the 
Security Council concerning the act of agression committed by Iraq against the 
State of Kuwait and that he had decided, as a consequence, to suspend all 
provision by the Agency of technical assistance to Iraq. The Kuwaiti 
delegation supported that decision. Since the IAEA was a specialized agency 
of the United Nations, it would have been inconceivable for a State which 
violated the Charter of the United Nations to continue to benefit from the 
services of such an agency. Furthermore, there was reason to fear that staff 
members sent by the Agency to Iraq might be taken hostage by the Baghdad 
regime. In that connection, his country wished to reiterate that all States 
and all international organizations must implement the Security Council's 
resolutions until Iraq submitted to the unanimous will of the international 
community. 
73. Lastly, emphasizing that co-operation between his country and the 
Agency would continue, he thanked all those countries which had defended the 
just cause of the State of Kuwait, whose sole objective was peace. 
74. Mr. RASHID (Bangladesh) said that one of the most urgent and 
complex of the Agency's tasks was to provide a healthy and well-developed 
energy system for the developing countries. In order to achieve tangible 
benefits which would not be confined to the industrially advanced countries, 
serious thought should be given to ways of promoting a sustainable energy 
system worldwide. The present session of the General Conference provided an 
opportunity to take stock of the energy situation in the world in general and 
in the developing countries in particular, especially in the least advanced 
countries. 
75. The nuclear option, which had proved mature and viable, had been 
expected to reach the developing countries, but the majority of those 
countries, although in need of nuclear technology, had not been able to take 
advantage of it for lack of resources. According to estimates, the average 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 23 


annual growth in commercial energy demand in Bangladesh over the following 
two decades would have to be at least 6% in order to sustain some level of 
economic development over that period. The average growth rate of electricity 
production would have to be increased to at least 10%. However, the 
lack of resources, particularly of indigenous fuel, would make it difficult to 
achieve even those modest objectives. 


76. The Agency had rightly identified the pressing need for small and 
medium-sized power reactors (SMPRs) to meet the requirements of small power 
grids in developing countries such as Bangladesh. So far, however, the 
efforts in that area had been limited mainly to conducting studies and 
organizing seminars and symposia. The time had come for the Agency to take 
action. No short- or medium-term solutions had yet been found to the problem 
of meeting energy needs. The Agency should give urgent consideration to 
those issues and take the necessary action, particularly with regard to 
strengthening radiological safety and protection. 
77. Many countries with limited fossil fuels needed to find other energy 
sources. That was the case of Bangladesh, where the nuclear option seemed a 
viable approach to meeting electricity demand, as indicated by various 
feasibility studies carried out by reputable international companies. 
However, the problem of financing was a major obstacle, and without sufficient 
funds, construction of the planned nuclear power plant at Rooppur could not 
even be started. The financing of nuclear power plants in developing 
countries which had signed the NPT and a safeguards agreement with the Agency 
was an area in which the developed countries and the Agency could play a 
significant role. 
78. In that connection, he recalled resolution GC(XXVTII)/RES/439, adopted 
by the General Conference in 1984, in which the Director General had been 
requested to provide, upon request, assistance in securing financing from 
outside sources for nuclear power projects in developing countries, and in 
particular the least developed countries. The results of the Director 
General's efforts to follow up that resolution had not yet become apparent. 
In that context, he also recalled the recommendations relating to Article IV 
of NPT, which had recently been approved at the Fourth NPT Review Conference, 
particularly those in paragraphs 4, 10, 11 and 28 of the document produced by 
the Drafting Committee of the Review Conference. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 24 


79. Public confidence in nuclear power had been shaken by several 
accidents. The Director General, in his introductory statement, had referred 
to the present stagnation in the construction of new plants and stated that 
public confidence could only be restored if the Agency gave urgent attention 
to three issues, namely the safety of nuclear installations, the safe 
management and storage of nuclear waste, and non-proliferation, and 
established an appropriate balance between them. The Agency should renew its 
efforts to gain public confidence in nuclear power, and in that connection his 
delegation welcomed the plan of action for public information which the Agency 
had set up with the help of a special contribution from the Japanese 
Government. 
80. Bangladesh appeared to be one of the victims of climatic change, being 
not only affected by environmental deterioration but also vulnerable to the 
greenhouse effect. If corrective measures were not taken to remedy environmental 
degradation, the consequences would be disastrous, not only for 
Bangladesh but for the entire world. His delegation therefore welcomed the 
Agency's contribution to combating the greenhouse effect. 
81. Bangladesh was essentially an agricultural country, and assessment of 
its water resources and their potential use on a large scale was vital. 
Nuclear techniques were an invaluable tool in that endeavour, and the Agency 
could provide assistance to meet his country's needs in that area. 
82. The Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission provided services for the 
application of radioisotopes in various industrial activities in his country, 
and trained local personnel in both the public and the private sector in the 
safe and effective use of those techniques. A cobalt-60 gamma source had 
become jammed at the Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture, and foreign 
experts had advised abandoning it and burying it in concrete. However, the 
country's own experts and engineers had succeeded in salvaging the facility at 
the modest cost of US $700, which bore witness to the local experts' competence. 
A study of the movement and deposition of sediments on the river 
beds leading to Chittagong harbour had been launched using isotopes produced 
by the country's research reactor, which had gone critical at the end 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 25 


of 1986. The research programmes in various areas had been expanded, in 
collaboration with international organizations such as the Agency, WHO and FAO 
and within the framework of the RCA. 


83. In the biological sciences, research was continuing in several major 
disciplines, including agro-industry. A project for a demonstration 
irradiation unit was under way as part of the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. That commercial installation was a joint venture with the private 
sector and would come into operation early in the following year. The 
application of nuclear and other advanced techniques for the diagnosis and 
treatment of various diseases was continuing in close collaboration with 
various national institutions. The research reactor was being used at present 
for a number of research and development projects, and new measures had been 
taken to ensure better utilization of the reactor. The installation, with the 
Agency's assistance, of a triple axis spectrometer was making good progress 
and the unit should enter into service at the beginning of 1991. 
84. His Government wished to thank the Agency for the technical assistance 
it had provided in various sectors of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and 
sincerely hoped that it would continue to benefit from that assistance in the 
future. However, it believed that the Agency's technical assistance programmes 
for developing countries, which were based mainly on voluntary 
contributions, should be financed on a predictable and assured basis; he 
trusted the General Conference would make every effort to find an appropriate 
solution. 
85. Bangladesh was a signatory of NPT. The inability of the Fourth NPT 
Review Conference to reach a consensus on a final document was disappointing. 
The Conference had reached agreement on several issues to which his Government 
attached importance, such as the strengthening of the Agency's work on both 
energy and non-energy applications in developing countries, the recommendation 
that nuclear suppliers should require the application of full-scope safeguards 
as a condition of supply to both NPT and non-NPT countries, and the 
strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system by special inspection 
procedures. His delegation hoped that the positive achievements of the 
Fourth NPT Review Conference would have the intended effect. He reaffirmed 
his country's commitment to the objectives of NPT and the norm it sought to 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 26 


establish by deterring any attempt to legitimize the existence or promotion of 
nuclear explosives. The NPT was a major instrument for achieving progress 
towards disarmament and consolidating peace and security throughout the world. 


86. In conclusion, he wished to emphasize again the glaring imbalance in 
the representation of the regions Middle East and South Asia and Africa on the 
Board of Governors. The legitimate interests of the countries in those 
regions must be honoured and the present imbalance corrected. To that end, 
his delegation had co-sponsored a draft resolution seeking revision of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute at an early date, and he hoped the draft would 
be adopted at the present session of the General Conference. 
87. Mr. CHOI (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that in the 
previous year, the Agency's activities in the areas of the nuclear fuel cycle, 
radioactive waste management, food and agriculture, human health, industry, 
radiation protection, safety of nuclear facilities, and safeguards had greatly 
contributed to promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and thus also to 
achieving the Agency's objectives. 
88. Although public concern about nuclear safety had led to a conspicuous 
stagnation in nuclear power worldwide, the importance of nuclear energy for 
electricity production should not be underestimated. Despite all the 
difficulties encountered, the present share of nuclear power in world 
electricity production had reached 17%, and with the advent of safer and less 
expensive types of reactor, nuclear power would undoubtedly have even greater 
development potential. 
89. The Agency's extensive work in the area of radiation protection had 
related to basic principles and criteria, occupational radiation protection, 
environmental assessment and protection, and emergency planning and 
preparedness. 
90. He commended the Agency on its nuclear safety activities, particularly 
those following the Chernobyl accident. The establishment of the World 
Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), the revision of the NUSS codes, the 
Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive 
Waste and other accomplishments in the area of nuclear safety should help 
convince the public that nuclear energy could serve as a reliable and safe 
source of energy. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 27 


91. His Government noted with satisfaction the efforts made by the Agency 
to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of safeguards. 
92. For its part, his Government was seeking to increase the contribution 
of nuclear power to economic development and the well-being of the 
population. It had taken measures to respond to the increase in electricity 
demand, and by the end of the third 7-year plan (1987-1993) electricity 
production was to reach 100 thousand million kilowatt-hours. Hydroelectric 
and thermal power plants were under construction in several places, and 
preparatory work on the siting of four pressurized water reactor units had 
been completed. 
93. Various institutions in industry, agriculture, medicine, and research 
had begun to use nuclear techniques, and development projects to promote those 
activities had been successfully implemented. 
94. The national regulatory bodies were giving due attention to nuclear 
safety and environmental protection in order to ensure the sound development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Progress in that area was closely 
linked to technical co-operation activities for which the Agency deserved 
thanks. 
95. Nuclear energy, if misused, could bring about the annihilation of 
mankind. His delegation had put forward a proposal to make the Korean 
peninsula a nuclear-weapons-free zone in order to eliminate the danger of 
touching off a nuclear war which existed there, and thus to contribute to 
peace and security in Asia and the rest of the world. 
96. With regard to the safeguards agreement between his country and the 
Agency, the negotiations which had taken place on several occasions had failed 
to reach a solution acceptable to both parties, as the Director General had 
mentioned in his statement. In that connection, he wished to express his 
profound gratitude to the Secretariat for the efforts it had made to find a 
reasonable and fair solution. His delegation had clearly stated its point of 
view on that issue at the Fourth NPT Review Conference. As soon as a 
Depositary Power for the Treaty gave assurances, through a legally binding 
commitment, not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against his country, 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea would immediately conclude and 
implement the relevant safeguards agreement. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 28 


97. Finally, he endorsed the Annual Report for 1989. His country had the 
firm intention of strengthening its co-operation with the Agency with a view 
to promoting the safe and rational development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
98. Mr. SANTOS (Portugal) said that he fully supported the statement 
made by the Italian delegate on behalf of the 12 Member States of the European 
Community, and that the Agency had shown itself to be one of the most 
important and competent organizations facing rapid changes of emphasis in 
sensitive technological areas; he hoped the Agency's vital role would continue 
to develop. 
99. His delegation was very pleased with the Annual Report for 1989 and 
wished to congratulate the Agency on its excellent financial management, which 
had again made it possible to draw up balanced budget estimates for 1991 
and 1992 while maintaining near-zero growth for 1991. In his delegation's 
view, the Agency's main activities were those in the areas of safeguards, 
nuclear safety and technical co-operation. 
100. On the subject of safeguards, he noted that, as in preceding years, the 
Agency had not found any anomaly indicating the diversion of a significant 
amount of safeguarded nuclear material for non-peaceful purposes. That was an 
important achievement which should always be highlighted, as also should the 
efforts made by the Department of Safeguards to establish a coherent set of 
criteria to serve as a basis for the planning, implementation and assessment 
of safeguards inspection and nuclear material accountancy during the period 
1991-95. That effort could contribute in the near future to increasing the 
efficiency of safeguards, which was particularly important in view of the 
growing number of facilities to be inspected. 
101. With regard to nuclear safety, the Agency had played a leading role in 
the organization of meetings on various subjects related to nuclear power: 
climate changes and the gathering of information on the potential role of 
nuclear energy in avoiding aggravation of the greenhouse effect; promotion of 
an international meeting of nuclear power plant operators with a view to 
improving operational safety; and development of reactors with improved safety 
characteristics and a simpler and more economic design to facilitate a 
significant increase in the use of nuclear power. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 29 


102. Recognizing the importance of information on radioactivity in the 
environment, and taking into account public concern, his country was 
establishing two continuous monitoring networks, one for air and the other for 
fluvial waters. 
103. In the field of technical co-operation, it was still too early to 
evaluate the new biennial programming system, but it should be emphasized that 
the growing workload of the Department of Technical Co-operation had been 
absorbed through a more effective use of manpower, office automation and data 
processing. He hoped to see that positive tendency continue in the future. 
104. As a recipient of technical assistance, his country had noted that the 
present biennial programming system made it possible to extend the period of 
project preparation and gave greater flexibility to the Agency in resource 
management. Pre-project support in the form of programming missions and RAPAT 
and WAMAP missions could contribute significantly towards improving the 
quality of projects proposed by Member States. 
105. During the previous decade, his country had on balance received 
substantial assistance from the Agency in carrying out technical co-operation 
projects in most of the main areas of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. The technical assistance officers had shown understanding whenever 
adjustments in project implementation had been required. The Agency's 
programme for 1989-90 included various projects for his country, relating to 
the modernization of a research reactor, the application of nuclear techniques 
in animal husbandry, hydrology and industry, radiation protection and 
environmental monitoring, and the disposal of wastes from uranium mining and 
processing. 
106. In that connection, his delegation wished to express its gratitude to 
the United States and to France for the assistance they had provided during 
the period 1989-90 for two projects relating to nitrogen fixation and uranium 
exploration. 
107. Portugal had not yet made a decision concerning the use of nuclear 
energy for electricity production. Studies were under way, as part of the 
national energy plan, to provide a technical and economic assessment of the 
various options. Uranium prospecting and mining work had continued, with an 
annual production of some 150 tonnes. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 30 


108. The research and development activities carried out in 1989 had 
included work in the areas of medicine, agriculture, radiological safety and 
radiation protection, radio-ecological studies and the use of the Portuguese 
research reactor for radioisotope production and the application of nuclear 
techniques. In all those areas, his country had greatly appreciated the 
co-operation of the Agency over the past several years. 
109. Finally, his delegation wished to support the action taken by the 
Director General with respect to technical co-operation with Iraq. 
110. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) said that the Agency's mission, which was to 
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the world and to ensure 
that they contributed further to the well-being of humanity and to progress in 
medicine, agriculture and industry, deserved the full support of all Member 
States. The NPT, by entrusting the Agency with important responsibilities 
regarding nuclear non-proliferation, had given it a vital role in maintaining 
international peace and security and in preventing the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction. In the past few years, the Agency had acquired 
another essential task, which was to ensure liaison between Member States for 
early notification in the case of a nuclear accident or radiological 
emergency, and to provide technical assistance aimed at preventing such events 
taking place. 
111. The countries of the Middle East continued to face the permanent threat 
posed by the increase in Israeli nuclear and military capabilities, which 
could lead to an arms race jeopardizing peace and security in that region and 
in the rest of the world. The obstinate attitude of Israel and its persistent 
refusal to implement the resolutions of the General Conference and the United 
Nations were an open challenge to the entire international community. By 
refusing to adhere to the NPT and to submit its nuclear facilities to Agency 
safeguards, the Tel-Aviv Government was directly endangering the peace and 
security of the peoples of the Middle East. 
112. Not content with remaining impervious to all international appeals to 
submit to the application of safeguards, it was continuing to co-operate 
closely with the racist Pretoria Government on the production of nuclear 
weapons, which posed a serious threat not only to the countries of the Middle 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 31 


East, but also to all African States. His delegation accordingly requested 


all States desiring peace to counter that threat with a firm and constructive 
attitude in line with their responsibilities for maintaining international 
peace and security. 


113. Having examined the report on the consultations held by the Director 
General with the Middle East States concerned with a view to the application 
of Agency safeguards to all nuclear facilities in the region, his country 
strongly denounced the behaviour of Israel, which was prevaricating, inventing 
pretexts, and hindering the full application of General Conference resolutions 
while giving priority to the achievement of its political aims and 
expansionist designs rather than to the establishment of a nuclear-weaponsfree 
zone. Noting the unsuccessful efforts made by the Director General to 
apply resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/506 entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and 
threat", he requested the Director General to renew his efforts to exert 
pressure on Israel and persuade it to submit its nuclear facilities to Agency 
safeguards. 
114. Turning to two extremely important issues which were closely linked, 
namely nuclear safety and the management and disposal of radioactive wastes, 
his delegation noted that for the past few years a number of States using 
nuclear energy had been getting rid of their radioactive wastes by exporting 
them openly or in secret to Third-World countries and dumping them in the 
oceans or burying them in deserts, thereby endangering not only the 
environment, but above all human health. The Agency had a vital role to play 
in that area. It was helping solve the problems of radioactive waste 
management, studying the possible harmful effects of certain disposal 
procedures on various Third-World countries, and trying to give greater 
publicity to that issue, as well as establishing standards for safety and 
radiation protection in nuclear power plants. It should, however, also offer 
technical assistance and advice to developing countries to enable them to keep 
pace with technical progress and to facilitate more extensive use of peaceful 
nuclear applications. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 32 


115. If the Agency were to fulfil the noble mission for which it had been 
established, all Member States would have to renew their efforts and work 
together loyally, confident in the future of a world based on law and justice 
in which the safety and well-being of all were guaranteed. His country, for 
its part, would continue to support the work of the Agency. 
116. Mr. OMARI (Albania) said that his country, which had been a Member 
of the Agency since its establishment, had always highly appreciated the 
Agency's role in promoting, accelerating and enlarging the use of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes with a view to increasing prosperity and progress 
throughout the world. 
117. The assistance provided by the Agency was also vital for the 
assimilation, development and utilization of nuclear techniques to improve the 
economy, scientific research and health in Albania, which had made investments 
within the limits of its development capabilities, to set up the necessary 
infrastructure and equipment for the use of those techniques. Through 
co-operation with the Agency on technical assistance projects, Albania had 
extended its peaceful nuclear activities to areas such as the use of 
radioactive tracers for monitoring industrial processes, the measurement and 
monitoring of radioactivity in the environment and the use of radioisotopes in 
medicine and animal production. 
118. The supply of measuring equipment, a major component of those projects 
for the development of modern nuclear techniques in Albania, had been 
complemented by staff training, which had usually been provided in the 
Agency's own laboratories. The Agency had also regularly sent experts from 
the Secretariat and from outside to give advice and assistance in solving 
various problems. In addition, the visits by the present Director General, a 
former Director General and a member of the Department of Technical 
Co-operation had done much to help strengthen the co-operation between Albania 
and the Agency. 
119. Although the technical co-operation projects carried out with the 
Agency's assistance had been successful and had made it possible to solve 
certain economic problems, it would be desirable, in view of the conditions 
prevailing in Albania and probably in many other countries too, for the Agency 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 33 


to continue to provide assistance for projects after their completion, 
particularly in the form of spare parts and services for the maintenance of 
systems and measuring equipment. Such assistance could only serve to enhance 
the efficiency of technical co-operation projects. 


120. Positive developments were taking place in the world and a spirit of 
co-operation and understanding was now prevailing, accompanied by constructive 
efforts for peace and friendship between peoples and moves towards integration 
at regional, continental and even wider levels. Albania was following those 
developments with interest and was attempting to contribute to the extension 
of that process in the Balkans, Europe and elsewhere. It had signed a 
safeguards agreement many years previously, and it had recently acceded to 
the NPT and deposited the necessary instruments with the depositaries. 
Accession to that Treaty created more favourable conditions for the 
development of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes and for the granting 
of assistance by the Agency and various friendly countries. 
121. His delegation was following with interest the Agency's activities 
related to the drawing up of international conventions, recommendations, codes 
and standards in the area of nuclear technology. It was currently examining 
the Conventions on Early Notification and Emergency Assistance and had no 
difficulties in principle with their approval. 
122. Albania was engaged in a process of democratic reforms in all areas of 
its economic, political and social activity. The introduction of a new 
economic mechanism, the strengthening of co-operation with other countries, 
foreign companies and international organizations, the democratization of the 
country's economy and other measures were aimed at promoting the country's 
economic rise, the introduction of new technologies and the improvement of the 
population's welfare. Within that overall framework, the development of 
nuclear technologies had a special role to play in agriculture, industry, 
medicine and research, as well as in the prospecting and processing of raw 
materials. 
123. With the Agency's assistance and in co-operation with UNDP, Albania was 
in the process of implementing a fairly large-scale project which involved the 
construction and commissioning of a research reactor, the production of shortand 
medium-lived radioisotopes and radiopharmaceuticals, the expansion and 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 34 


strengthening of the use of radioisotopes and the consolidation of the neutron 
activation analysis method. That project, which Albania regarded as very 


important, would be complemented by staff training, the extension and 
improvement of existing infrastructures and the reinforcement of radiation 
protection measures at the national level. 


124. It was Albania's intention to make every effort to contribute to the 
Agency's activities by participating actively in the Agency's noble task of 
promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy, strengthening understanding, 
safeguarding peace and eliminating the threat of a nuclear catastrophe. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXlV)/938) 


125. The PRESIDENT recalled that, following the recommendation made by 
the inter-sessional working group to review the General Conference's working 
practices and approved by the General Conference the previous year, no secret 
ballot would be held where there was agreement regarding the candidate or 
candidates from a particular area, the Conference simply declaring the agreed 
candidate or candidates duly elected. A secret ballot would take place only 
with respect to those areas for which there was no agreement on the 
candidates. Rule 79 of the General Conference's Rules of Procedure, which 
provided that elections to the Board should be by secret ballot, would be 
suspended in respect of the areas for which no secret ballot was to be held. 
126. He was pleased to announce that the Member States of all areas had 
reached agreement and that therefore no secret ballot was necessary. He was 
grateful to all groups for the efforts they had made to reach agreement, since 
that would greatly facilitate the Conference's work and help save valuable 
time. 
127. The elective places on the Board which had to be filled were indicated 
in document GC(XXXIV)/938. Paragraph 2 of that document indicated the number 
of Member States that must be elected for each area to ensure that the Board 
was constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute. Paragraph 4 
listed the 24 Member States which had been either designated by the Board of 
Governors in June for membership of the Board pursuant to Article VI.A.1 of 
the Statute or elected by the General Conference in 1989 in accordance with 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 35 


Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and which would therefore be serving on the 
Board during 1990-91. Delegates had received an informal note showing the 
results of consultations among the eight geographical area groups regarding 
their candidates for the vacant seats. 


128. Taking each of the areas for which there were vacancies in turn, he 
said that if there were no objections he would assume that the General 
Conference wished to elect Brazil, Cuba and Uruguay to the three seats to be 
filled in respect of Latin America. 
129. Brazil, Cuba and Uruguay were duly elected. 
130. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect Austria and Portugal to 
the two seats to be filled in respect of Western Europe. 
131. Austria and Portugal were duly elected. 
132. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect the Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic to the seat to be filled in respect of Eastern Europe. 
133. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was duly elected. 
134. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no other proposals, he 
would assume that the General Conference wished to elect Cameroon and Morocco 
to the two seats to be filled in respect of Africa. 
135. Cameroon and Morocco were duly elected. 
136. The PRESIDENT said that, in the absence of any other proposal, he 
would take it that the General Conference wished to elect the Islamic Republic 
of Iran to the seat to be filled in respect of the Middle East and South Asia. 
137. The Islamic Republic of Iran was duly elected. 
138. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
assume that the General Conference wished to elect Indonesia to the seat to be 
filled in respect of South East Asia and the Pacific. 
139. Indonesia was duly elected. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 38 


safety standards and recommendations. Within the framework of their 
co-operation, the CMEA member countries were also devoting considerable 
attention to the preparation and implementation of backfitting work on nuclear 
power plants equipped with first-generation WWER-440 reactors. 


149. A two-year co-operation programme between the CMEA and the Agency had 
been drawn up and adopted in 1989 with a view to further development of the 
agreement between those two organizations. That programme opened up new 
prospects for expanded co-operation. Under that programme, the CMEA regularly 
received from the Agency proceedings of international symposia and 
conferences, standard documents on radiation and nuclear safety, and 
information bulletins. The CMEA Secretariat, in its turn, sent relevant 
documents to the Agency. 
150. The CMEA attached great importance to the Senior Expert Symposium on 
Electricity and the Environment to be organized by the Agency in Finland in 
May 1991 and had become one of its co-sponsors. The CMEA was also interested 
in other Agency initiatives, such as the establishment of the Inter-Agency 
Committee for Radiation Safety. The co-operation between the Agency and the 
CMEA had already resulted in certain achievements, and the CMEA was ready to 
broaden that mutually beneficial co-operation. 
151. The PRESIDENT gave the floor to the delegates of Iraq and the 
United States, who wished to exercise their right of reply. 
152. Mr. FAHAD (Iraq), noting that one of his colleagues claiming to be 
the representative of Kuwait had spoken some time earlier, recalled the 
reservations and objections expressed by his delegation at the beginning of 
the General Conference's work with regard to the statements made by that 
representative and the capacity in which he was speaking. 
153. His delegation had already commented in detail on the statements by the 
Director General concerning the suspension of technical assistance to Iraq. 
Iraq considered that such a suspension was contrary to the recommendations of 
the Board of Governors, that it was illegal, that it was not provided for in 
the Security Council resolution, and that it stemmed from a biased and 
political interpretation of the text of that resolution. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.329 
page 39 


154. Lastly, he noted that Czechoslovakia was talcing advantage of the 
situation in the Middle East to make requests for donations and assistance 
from organizations and States known for their attitude towards developing 
countries and other States. 
155. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), referring first to the 
comments which had just been made by the representative of Iraq, said that his 
delegation was firmly convinced that the Director General had taken the 
appropriate measures in the circumstances and therefore associated itself with 
the statements on that point made by a number of delegations in the plenary 
meetings the previous day and earlier the same day. 
156. Replying then to the statement by the delegate of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, he recalled that the delegate of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea had stated that his country would immediately 
conclude and implement a safeguards agreement, provided it received certain 
assurances. Speaking as a representative of a Depositary Power of the NPT, he 
pointed out that the obligation under the NPT of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea to conclude a safeguards agreement within 18 months of 
accession to the Treaty could not be conditional upon the resolution of any 
other issue or upon the conclusion of another agreement or provision of any 
guarantee. The obligation undertaken under the Treaty was absolute and 
unconditional. 
157. Mr. AL-SAIED (Kuwait), exercising his right of reply, said that he 
did not intend to involve the General Conference in a consideration of 
political issues which his delegation had already explained and about which 
all delegations present were informed. However, his delegation was surprised 
that the representative of Iraq should dispute the lawfulness of the Director 
General's attitude, when the Baghdad regime was violating international law 
and Security Council resolutions, including resolution 662 which condemned the 
Iraqi invasion and rejected the annexation of Kuwait by Iraq. 
158. Mr. CHOI (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), exercising his 
right of reply, said that his delegation's position on the subject of the 
safeguards agreement had been clearly expressed that morning and that he would 
merely recall that at the Fourth NPT Review Conference, the United States had 
opposed the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Korean 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.329 
page 40 


peninsula because it was continuing its military exercises directed against 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Under those conditions, it was 
difficult for his country to conclude a safeguards agreement, and he stressed 
that the Depositaries of the Treaty were bound to give non-nuclear-weapon 
States assurances against the use or the threat of the use of such weapons. 
That obligation had not yet been fulfilled owing to a lack of political will 
on the part of some of the Depositary Powers. 


159. Mr. PARK (Republic of Korea), exercising his right of reply, said 
that he had no intention of politicizing a discussion which was essentially 
about whether or not an Agency Member State was fulfilling its obligations. 
The General Conference was not the appropriate forum to consider political or 
other issues which lay outside the Agency's sphere of competence. His 
delegation therefore urged Member States which had significant nuclear 
activities to fulfil their obligations in accordance with the Agency's Statute. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
12 October 1990 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna, 
on Thursday, 20 September 1990, at 3.10 p.m. 
President: Mr. TREMEAU (France) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
Report by the Chairman of the Special 
Scientific Meeting on Nuclear Power 
Plant Upgrading and Life Extension 1-10 
General debate and annual report 
for 1989 (resumed) 11 98 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Ghana 11 22 
Mongolia 23 34 
Austria 35 43 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 44 58 
Sudan 59 73 
Cyprus 74 75 
United Republic of Tanzania 76 85 
Spain 86 94 
Afghanistan 95 98 


[*] GC(XXXIV)/939. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIV)/INF/287/Rev.2. 


90-4468 
(7268e/721e) 



GC(XXX1V)/OR.330 
page 2 


REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING ON NUCLEAR POWER 
PLANT UPGRADING AND LIFE EXTENSION 


1. The PRESIDENT said that, with the Conference's permission, he 
proposed to invite Mr. Kenneth Carr to report on the conclusions of the 
Scientific Meeting on Nuclear Power Plant Upgrading and Life Extension, which 
he had chaired so ably. 
2. Mr. CARR said that a special scientific meeting had been held on 
18-19 September 1990 to address the topic of nuclear power plant upgrading and 
life extension. The first session had provided an overview of the topic from 
the international perspective of the IAEA and from the point of view of a 
researcher, a regulator and a designer. 
3. The second session had provided examples of national experience and 
policies in nuclear power plant upgrading and life extension. Speakers had 
emphasized various aspects of the topic in the context of experience with VVER 
reactors, standardized plants, backfitting and development of life extension 
methodology, problems and issues facing developing countries, preventive and 
predictive maintenance techniques, instrumentation and control, extension of 
operation of plants beyond their original design life, and pressure vessel 
annealing. 
4. The third session had consisted of a panel discussion on topical 
aspects as perceived by researchers, designers, regulators and operators of 
nuclear power plants. The papers presented at each session had given 
excellent technical coverage to the topic, had been highly informative and had 
been followed by lively discussion by participants. 
5. Fatigue, embrittlement, effects of temperature loads, and outdated 
electrical and electronic systems were among the main problems of plant ageing 
that could give rise to the need for plant upgrading if operation was to 
continue, either during the original design life of the plant or for a period 
beyond that. Furthermore, while the features that contributed to the ageing 
of nuclear power plants were common to all plants, different countries might 
use different approaches to cope with plant ageing and questions of life 
extension. Some countries, for example, might require some form of safety 
assessment on an annual basis as a condition for continued operation, while 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 3 


others might require a major reassessment at longer intervals or as a 
condition for consideration of operation beyond the design life. Safety 
reassessments performed for plant life extension varied from once a year to 
once every ten, twenty or more years in different countries. 


6. Participants had generally agreed that the design life of a plant could 
be extended through careful monitoring and upgrading of systems and 
components, which would provide for up to 50 to 60 years of safe operation. 
However, the plant had to continue to meet its original safety criteria, 
including any backfitting requirements imposed since the plant was originally 
licensed. In addition, for plants to be considered for life extension, 
operation and maintenance records had to be well documented. A probabalistic 
safety assessment was also considered to be very helpful in determining what 
upgrades might be appropriate. Fulfilment of those conditions had been 
considered important by all concerned. 
7. The economic viability of plant life extension appeared to be 
established. However, if an adequate level of safety could not be maintained 
as a plant aged, cost considerations became irrelevant. The challenge in 
seeking to extend the useful lifetimes of current nuclear power plants lay in 
achieving comprehensive preventive maintenance programmes which would mitigate 
the effects of ageing, while at the same time controlling the costs of 
production. 
8. There were advantages and difficulties in plant life extension. The 
obvious advantages were enhanced safety through reassessment and 
refurbishment, cheaper electricity in comparison with the construction of new 
facilities, utilization of an existing site and less opposition from the 
public. Public acceptance was of particular interest in today's environment. 
While there had been considerable worldwide debate on whether new nuclear 
power plants should be built, public attention had not focused as much on the 
question of the ageing and life extension of current plants. The difficulties 
included scarcity of spare parts for much older plants and maintenance of the 
original design basis documentation for the plant. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 4 


9. It was generally agreed that older plants should not pose significantly 
more risk than new plants. That necessitated a reasonable degree of 
compromise between safety requirements for older plants and new plants. 
Differences between older plants and new plants could be compensated for by 
backfitting, where necessary, and by strength in other areas such as the 
qualifications and experience of operators and maintainance crews with the 
plant and enhanced accident management and emergency procedures. It should 
not be forgotten, however, that plant personnel also aged. The training and 
retraining of plant personnel for older plants were thus particularly 
important. 
10. There was a continuing need for international co-operation in 
determining how safe was safe enough and for a concerted effort in managing 
nuclear power plant safety. Methods to identify and combat the effects of 
plant ageing represented another area where international co-operation was 
essential. That was particularly important for nations with small and 
developing nuclear power programmes where the research and engineering 
infrastructure might not yet be well established. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989 (GC(XXXIV)/915) (resumed) 


11. Mr. AM00-G0TTFRIED (Ghana) said he wished to extend a warm welcome 
to Namibia, which was participating in the work of the General Conference for 
the first time as an independent country. 
12. It was a matter of great satisfaction to his delegation that the 
necessary steps had been taken in the past year to make the African Regional 
Co-operative Agreement (AFRA) operative. He appealed to all Member States 
that were in a position to do so to help make AFRA a success. 
13. His delegation could approve the Agency's programme and budget for 1991 
and 1992. However, after seven years of zero real growth in the budget, it 
was time to take a hard look at the effect of that policy on the Agency's 
safeguards system and on its promotional activities. The demands on the 
Agency's resources were increasing and, if it were to be able to meet the 
challenges of a changing world, it must also be able to change with it. 
14. The Agency was to be commended for the continued effective and reliable 
operation of its safeguards system at a time of severe budgetary constraints. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 5 


The Agency should continue to make efficient use of the limited resources at 
its disposal in order to maintain international confidence in the system. His 
country also appealed to States with significant nuclear programmes to submit 
all their nuclear facilities to full-scope Agency safeguards. 


15. The question of amending Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had now been 
before the General Conference and the Board for over a decade without any 
concrete steps being taken to correct the under-representation of Africa and 
the Middle East and South Asia. Membership of the Agency in those regions had 
increased considerably, and there should have been a corresponding increase in 
their representation on the Board. The time had come for positive steps to be 
taken to rectify that glaring injustice. 
16. He was happy to be able to announce that over the past four years Ghana 
had intensified its efforts to establish a viable nuclear programme. Massive 
renovation work had been carried out on the physical infrastructure of the 
National Nuclear Research Institute, its nuclear equipment had been updated 
and the number of scientific staff had almost doubled. 
17. Current research activities concentrated on the use of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, industry and medicine. One major breakthrough was 
the construction of a multipurpose gamma irradiation facility designed for 
food preservation and radiation sterilization of medical products. The 
facility was to be commissioned in June 1991. 
18. Nor had his Government neglected the question of radiation protection: 
a national radiation protection law would be promulgated soon; frequent 
checks were made on users of ionizing radiation and advice was given when 
appropriate; and a national training course on safe operating practices was 
to be held for some 30 X-ray machine operators in October 1990. 
19. The Agency's technical assistance programme had played no small role in 
the development of Ghana's nuclear programme, and he hoped that the 
zero-growth philosophy would soon be abandoned in favour of real growth that 
would enable the technical assistance programme to grow in a manner 
commensurate with the needs of developing countries. Ghana would continue to 
play its part in technical co-operation by making its facilities available, at 
subsidized rates, for regional and interregional training courses. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 6 


20. The world's attention continued to focus on the increasing dangers 
posed to the earth's atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels. As more facts 
emerged about those dangers and about adverse climatic changes brought about 
by the greenhouse effect, many countries would begin to consider 
pollution-free alternatives to fossil fuel. Moreover, recent events in the 
Gulf had once again demonstrated the uncertainties inherent in absolute 
reliance on fossil fuel. The fragile economies of many developing countries 
had been thrown into complete disarray by the sudden and catastrophic increase 
in oil prices. Under such circumstances, the development of nuclear energy 
seemed the most viable alternative to conventional energy sources, although 
the enormous cost of installing safe nuclear reactors might act as a great 
disincentive to many developing countries. He appealed to the Agency to 
initiate efforts aimed at pooling resources to assist developing countries to 
establish nuclear power programmes. 
21. His country was deeply concerned about South Africa's continued refusal 
to place its nuclear installations under IAEA safeguards. It would have 
welcomed a positive announcement from South Africa, as it believed that a move 
towards transparency by that country would boost confidence-building in the 
region and enhance peace and security. However, his delegation's hope that 
the current session of the General Conference would be spared the usual 
pre-Conference letters and statements concerning South Africa's readiness to 
accept IAEA safeguards had again proved to be unfounded. Such manoeuvres were 
designed simply to prevent drastic action being taken against South Africa 
during the General Conference. 
22. South Africa's nuclear capability combined with its continued refusal 
to place its facilities under safeguards posed a serious danger to the rest of 
Africa. He therefore once again urged the Conference to take the necessary 
measures to drive it home to South Africa that its intransigence and blatant 
disregard of international opinion would no longer be acceptable. 
23. Mr. SODNOM (Mongolia) observed that the thirty-fourth regular 
session of the Conference was significant in that it was meeting at a time 
when events leading to the democratization of society in Europe and Asia and 
warming of the international climate were taking place. Those circumstances 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 7 


were propitious for extensive and fruitful scientific, technological and 


economic co-operation at the international level. In that context, the Agency 
would have a much greater role in organizing global co-operation. While 
atomic energy offered an important alternative source to meet the growing 
energy demands and to satisfy the ecological requirements, it was meeting with 
serious constraints associated with the assurance of full safety of nuclear 
power plants. In that connection, he wished to emphasize the especial 


importance of the Agency's safeguards functions, which were directly related 


to ensuring international peace. 


24. His delegation approved the Agency's activities in the area of nuclear 
safety in connection with the Incident Report System (IRS), International 
Nuclear Event Scale (INES), Radioactive Waste Safety Standards (RADWASS), Code 
of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, 
etc. 
25. Considering the great importance of wide international co-operation in 
the case of a nuclear accident and radiological emergency arising from it, 
Mongolia had acceded to the two conventions approved at the special session of 
the Conference in 1986. 
26. His delegation had pleasure in supporting the Agency's main programmes 
related to safeguards, nuclear and radiological safety, nuclear power, 
technical co-operation, the environment and the nuclear information system. 
27. He also approved the Agency's annual report for 1989 and endorsed the 
Board's recommendations on the programme and budget and the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1991 and 1992. 
28. He shared the Director Director General's concern at the insignificant 
increase in the budget, while welcoming the Secretariat's efforts to improve 
efficiency, especially in the area of technical assistance to developing 
countries. 
29. He commended the Agency's efficient management of technical 
co-operation, and expressed his gratitude for the technical assistance 
provided to his country. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 8 


30. During the current session his delegation had visited the Department of 
Technical Co-operation, where it had discussed and approved the draft plans 
for 1991-92. He wished to thank the Department's staff for their assiduous 
evaluation of his country's proposals and their understanding of its 
requirements. 
31. Mongolia welcomed the increase in the number of staff members drawn 
from developing countries and would be interested in making its specialists 
available for employment in the Secretariat. 
32. Since December 1989 important social and political changes had been 
taking place in Mongolia, where a multiparty democratic system had been 
introduced and on the basis of which the country's President, Parliament and 
Government had been elected. The new Government had adopted a programme of 
building a democratic State based on the rule of law, of changing over to a 
market economy and of co-operation with all countries. It was counting on the 
support and help of international organizations, including the IAEA, in those 
complex transformations. 
33. Thanks to the Agency's support, Mongolia had continued to implement its 
programmes on agriculture, medicine, geology, science and education and 
environmental protection, which would promote the economic and social 
well-being of its people. He expressed his appreciation, in particular of the 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team (RAPAT) and many IAEA experts who had 
visited his country in the current year. 
34. In conclusion, he wished to assure the Agency that Mongolia would 
continue actively to support and participate in its activities and to fulfil 
its obligations. 
35. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that the past year had seen a further 
intensification of the public debate on energy and the environment. The 
question at the centre of that debate had continued to be how to reconcile the 
two aims of responding to the increasing demand for energy to satisfy the 
economic needs of a growing world population and of securing an environment 
fit for future generations to live in. There was a broad consensus on some 
basic facts and assumptions. One was the expectation of a substantial 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 9 


increase in world primary energy consumption in the coming decades. Another 
was the perception of fossil fuels as the most important contributor to 
man-made carbon dioxide emissions, which were one of the main causes of 
damaging changes in the atmosphere and the climate and had given rise to 
demands for fossil fuels to be replaced by forms of energy that were less 
harmful to the environment. 


36. There was no single answer to that problem. At present, more than 
30 Member States had chosen to make use of nuclear power as part of their 
neergy policy. In some of those countries a growing tide of public opposition 
to the expansion of nuclear energy programmes was interfering with the 
endeavours of governments to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Other 
Member States had forgone the nuclear option. The policy of the Austrian 
government was well known. It was based on a decision of the Austrian people 
taken in a referendum and set out in a law prohibiting nuclear fission to be 
used as a source for power production. That negative attitude to nuclear 
power did not, however, diminish his country's appreciation of the important 
role the Agency was playing in a world in which nuclear power was a matter of 
fact. Austria set great store by the Agency's indispensable activities in 
safeguards and by its growing role in enhancing the safety of existing 
reactors. While his country wished others would follow its example, it shared 
the desire of States operating nuclear plants to make them as safe as possible 
and it therefore welcomed the Agency's recent initiative to review the 
operational safety of older reactor types in the light of current thinking on 
safety. The proposal to hold a high-level conference on nuclear safety in 
1991 was also welcome. 
37. His country was pleased with the progress made in the Standing 
Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage towards establishing a new, 
comprehensive and, it was to be hoped, universal contractual regime in that 
area. He envisaged establishing such a regime through an extensive revision 
of the Vienna Convention. There was some agreement that under the new regime 
the definition of nuclear damage must be significantly expanded to cover inter 
alia - environmental damage and the cost of preventive and 
re-instatement measures. That would require a corresponding expansion of 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 10 


financial liability for nuclear damage. Austria shared the view expressed by 
many delegations in the Standing Committee that that could only be brought 
about by strengthening the legal and economic involvement of States in which a 
nuclear facility was located with regard to liability. Such involvement, 
together with that of the State claiming compensation for environmental damage 
or for the cost of preventive or re-instatement measures, called for a new 
claims procedure which would be an integral part of the new regime and which 
could deal satisfactorily both with claims raised on the governmental level 
and with a multitude of individual claims, for which the present system was 
totally unsatisfactory. At all events, the efforts being made to establish a 
new regime of international liability for nuclear damage was one of the 
Agency's most important activities and deserved strong support. 


38. Less than a week previously, the Fourth NPT Review Conference had 
completed its work in Geneva. The principle of non-proliferation clearly 
continued to have the support of the international community. The NPT regime 
was one of the cornerstones of international arms control and disarmament 
policy. That policy was an essential part of the great improvement in 
international relations which had led to the fundamental changes that had 
taken place in Europe and, as a consequence, to the revitalization of the 
United Nations as a global force for peace. 
39. His delegation noted with interest the Agency's involvement in the 
international programme to assess the radiological consequences of the 
Chernobyl accident and expressed its pleasure at the contribution being made 
by Austrian experts to the project. 
40. The General Conference had on its agenda the adoption of a draft Code 
of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, 
establishing a set of principles designed to ensure that no transboundary 
movements of radioactive waste took place unless they were consistent with 
existing international safety standards. The adoption of those rules would 
further enhance safety in international nuclear waste transactions. 
41. He was pleased to announce that Austria had ratified the Convention on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency in 
November 1989. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 11 


42. At the bilateral level, his Government had continued to promote a 
dialogue and an exchange of information on nuclear safety and radiation 
protection matters with countries in its immediate and wider neighbourhood. 
Agreements with the Soviet Union and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic 
(CSFR) had come into force in March and July 1990 respectively, and another 
agreement had been signed with Poland in December 1989. Arrangements for 
co-operation in the field of nuclear safety had also been made in the context 
of the so-called "pentagonal initiative" involving Austria, Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary, Italy and Yugoslavia. 
43. Construction work on the training wing to be added to the Agency's 
Laboratories in Seibersdorf was being completed. Together with the United 
States, the Federal Republic of Germany and FAO, Austria had contributed to 
the extrabudgetary funding of that project. He was confident the new 
facilities would become a useful tool in the implementation of the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme. 
44. Mr. SAETI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) expressed his appreciation of 
the efforts made by the Director General and his staff to raise the Agency's 
efficiency in carrying out its functions relating to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 
45. As to the contributions of nuclear energy to improving living standards 
and economic and social development, Libya had since the Great September 
Revolution endeavoured to achieve scientific competence and capability in that 
area with the assistance of the Agency and its Member States desirous of 
co-operation in the interests of human welfare without discrimination. It 
highly valued the Agency's help and would make every effort to extend its 
co-operation with the organization to meet the growing demands of its 
scientific and economic development. 
46. He expressed his gratitude to the United Nations and its specialized 
agencies and in particular to the IAEA and FAO for their action on combating 
the screwworm. In that connection, he pointed out Libya's contribution in 
terms of manpower and facilities sharing more than 30% of the cost of the 
programme on combating the. pest, its spread to neighbouring African countries 
and to Europe. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 12 


47. Referring to resolution GC(XXXIll)/RES/515, in which the Conference had 
approved Libya's request concerning a plan for the production of low-cost 
potable water, and to operative paragraph 1 thereof, he commended the Director 
General and the Agency's technical staff and the Member States who had 
participated in the study as a first step towards a long-term plan. He drew 
attention to the conclusions and recommendations contained in document 
GOV/2465 and in particular the following: 
(1) 
The freshwater shortage was becoming a question of life in many 
areas of the world, such as the Middle East and the southern part 
of the Mediterranean. In other areas such as Italy, Spain, 
France, Greece and certain parts of the United States, a water 
shortage might have an increasing impact on the quality of life; 
(2) 
The energy required for water desalination accounted for 
about 50%, on average, of the production cost. Therefore, nuclear 
energy had a potential for reducing that cost; 
(3) 
Nuclear desalination was considered to be technically feasible on 
the basis of the experience gained on the subject, especially in 
the USSR; 
(4) 
A detailed technical study of desalination mainly using nuclear 
energy sources was considered essential and should be carried out 
at one or more Middle Eastern and Mediterranean sites. 
48. Libya's initiative and its contribution within the United Nations 
family to seeking solutions to pressing problems ought to be pointed out and 
taken into account. Moreover, he wished to emphasize that, from the same 
considerations and with the same determination as in the case of the screwworm 
programme, it would participate in finding and implementing economic solutions 
to the problem of a shortage of potable water and in implementing a plan for 
producing such water economically. 
49. He wished to stress the impact of the rise in oil prices and the 
contribution of the burning of oil to environmental pollution and related 
problems, such as the rise in temperature, the reduction in rainfall, the 
occurrence of acid rain, the depletion of the earth's ozone layer and so on. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.330 
page 13 


Those problems could be alleviated by completely stopping the burning of oil, 
by afforestation and by combating desertification, which measures could be 
implemented only by creating a clean energy source and by supplying 
appropriate water. 


50. The cost of having no water was much greater than that of producing 
fresh water at any price using clean energy sources. That was why he was 
requesting the Conference to implement the recommendations contained in 
document GOV/2465. The Jamahiriya, for its part, would contribute actively to 
the conduct of a feasibility study and to a plan for producing potable water 
economically. 
51. He assured all Member States which were interested in bilateral and 
multilateral co-operation to implement such a plan, which had offered their 
facilities in that connection (such as Argentina, India and the Soviet Union) 
and any other States which wished to participate in establishing and executing 
an international co-operative programme on combating drought and 
desertification with the participation of the United Nations and its agencies, 
including the IAEA, that his country was fully prepared to apply all its 
physical and human resources to implementing and making available commercially 
the best water desalination and treatment systems, to solving the problem of 
drought and desertification and to creating a clean, healthy environment. He 
considered that nuclear desalination should be included as one of the Agency's 
future programmes. 
52. He had pleasure in supporting the request submitted by the Arab Atomic 
Energy Agency concerning the conclusion of a co-operation agreement with the 
IAEA (GC(XXXIV)/924) since such agreements promoted technology transfer and 
collaboration with the IAEA in implementing its programmes in the States 
concerned. 
53. Libya set a high value on the Regional Co-operative Agreement for 
Africa and urged the Agency and its advanced Member States to lend active 
support to that agreement with a view to raising standards and promoting 
technology transfer in the African region so that it could, with the other 
regions, accelerate its progress of its peoples towards prosperity and 
well-being. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 14 


54. In that connection, he wished to express, as he had done in the past, 
his country's willingness to make available to the Agency the Tajoura Nuclear 
Research Centre for use as a regional centre for the purposes and programmes 
of the agreements referred to. It was therefore necessary to expedite the 
preparation of a work programme to make use of the facilities of that centre, 
together with a training programme. 
55. Radioactive waste without proper treatment was a serious disadvantage 
of nuclear energy and caused concern. In that context, he considered a Code 
of Practice for transboundary movements of radioactive wastes, mentioned in 
resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/509, to be of great legal value. Libya, as a 
developing country, demanded a total ban on the export of such waste by 
industrialized States and their companies and was strongly opposed to the 
exploitation of the difficult economic and social conditions of some 
countries, including those in Africa, for dumping nuclear waste on their 
territory. He had no objection to the technical working group continuing its 
work in order to achieve its purpose which served the cause of peace and 
security everywhere, and thanked it for its valuable work. 
56. As everyone knew, the Zionist entity, with the collaboration of the 
racist regime in southern Africa, had acquired nuclear military capability and 
was encouraged and supported by some States. The reply received by the 
Director General from that entity concerning the application of Agency 
safeguards in the Middle East showed that it and its racist ally in southern 
Africa still took no account of the demand to comply with international 
customs and the Agency's Statute and to place all their nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. That defiance must be countered and those two 
entities be isolated until they abided by the will of the world and were 
mindful of world security. 
57. Lastly, in spite of successive resolutions on the staffing of the 
Agency's Secretariat and numerous requests made on the subject, the 
representation of developing countries, including Libya, in the Secretariat 
continued to be inadequate. He hoped that the existing inequity would be 
corrected before long, especially in the case of Africa and Asia. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR-330 
page 15 


58. The deliberations and conclusions of the present session of the 
Conference might be useful not only for the present but also for the future 
generations. He was confident that the delegates would show a spirit of 
co-operation with a view to bringing benefits to all and to enabling the 
Agency to continue fulfilling its objectives in ensuring the peaceful and safe 
use of nuclear energy. 
59. Mr. ELAGIB (Sudan) considered that the Agency should promote basic 
research in order to achieve a breakthrough in the conversion of atomic 
energy. The current technology had disadvantages so that the high cost and 
industrial complexity made it inaccessible to developing countries. Moreover, 
people viewed it with suspicion even in advanced countries, where the two 
worst disasters had taken place. The new efforts announced at the Conference 
and at the scientific meeting organized by the outgoing President were in the 
same old direction, namely development of reactors in which radiation was used 
to produce steam. Large amounts of energy could only be generated by means of 
large installations involving risks of radioactive contamination. However, 
there did exist the possibility of directly converting radiation energy into 
electricity. In that connection, he endorsed the outgoing President's appeal 
for international scientific and technical co-operation in finding a new 
approach. He also welcomed the United States* assurance that scientific 
co-operation in basic resarch would be open and unhampered by commercial or 
security considerations, and noted the Director General's emphasis that the 
Agency was in favour of openness and co-operation in that area. 
60. Paying a tribute to Italy's contribution to scientific co-operation, he 
recalled that it had collaborated with the Agency in establishing the Trieste 
Centre. It had a number of scientific cities like Trieste and was the host of 
numerous scientific institutions. While the contributions of other countries 
were considerable, they should follow Italy's example in establishing 
scientific cities, adopting an open-door policy and enabling Third World 
scientists to participate actively without discrimination based on political, 
ideological, racial or security considerations. Multiplicity of sources and 
environments in scientific research could lead to breakthroughs not only in 
the industrial world but also in the Third World. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.330 
page 16 


61. He agreed with the Director General that the Agency's mission was to 
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in various developmental areas and 
to contribute to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons by creating a 
climate suitable for encouraging those uses and by strengthening confidence in 
the safety of nuclear technology. 
62. Sudan appreciated the Director General's participation in the first 
meeting held recently in Cairo of the African Regional Agreement and hoped 
that the Agency and States which could do so would help the African countries 
to develop their peaceful nuclear capabilities. 
63. His country continued to feel concerned at the growth of Israel's 
nuclear capability and the threat it posed to peace and security in the 
region, which issue had been discussed by the Conference every year. He 
regretted Israel's refusal to place all its nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards in persistent disregard of the Charter of the United Nations, the 
Statutes of its different agencies and the IAEA and of the resolutions adopted 
by them. His delegation hoped that the Director General would redouble his 
efforts and continue his discussions with the States concerned in the Middle 
East region with a view to applying Agency safeguards to all nuclear 
facilities there. The similar refusal and the possession of nuclear weapons 
by the regime in southern Africa posed a serious threat to peace and security 
in the world, especially in Africa, and increased the danger of nuclear 
proliferation. He condemned the refusal to comply with the Agency's request 
and urged the Director General to do everything possible to pursuade South 
Africa to place its facilities under Agency safeguards. There had been some 
relaxation in that area, which he hoped would continue, and the following 
session of the Conference could assess the situation. 
64. Disposal of radioactive waste on the territory of developing countries 
was a threat to the environment and to human life, and he commended the action 
taken by the Agency in that matter. Approving the Code of Practice contained 
in document GC(XXXIV)/920, he considered that it would form the basis for 
further measures aimed at creating a machinery to regulate the movement of 
waste under Agency supervision. He requested the Director General to 
circulate the Code of Practice as widely as possible, especially to the United 
Nations and its agencies. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.330 
page 17 


65. A large number of African countries, including Sudan, depended on 
animals as an important source of food and wealth, which were threatened in 
Libya and the neighbouring countries by the scourge of the screwworm. He 
expressed his appreciation of the Agency's efforts to eliminate the pest in 
Libya and hoped that the Agency would enable its neighbours to benefit from 
its experience in that matter. 
66. Referring to the problem of potable water, he recalled that according 
to studies carried out by international organizations there was an acute 
shortage of such water in about 80 countries, which number was expected to 
increase in the near future owing to the population explosion. In that 
connection, he noted with satisfaction the conclusions of the consultants' 
group contained in document GC(XXXlV)/928, which confirmed the world-wide need 
for potable water and the potential of nulear energy for providing such water 
economically, and its approved recommendations. Those recommendations should 
now be implemented and the topic be included in the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme. 
67. His country attached particular importance to the financing of the 
Agency's technical co-operation and safeguards activities. During discussion 
of the 1991-92 budget at the June meetings of the Board, the Group of 7 7 had 
suggested establishing a relative balance between those two activities in 
utilizing the surplus from the 1988 budget but the proposal had not received 
sufficient response. The expenditure on safeguards had grown with no increase 
in the financing of technical co-operation activities. Sudan considered that 
there should be a balance between the two and supported the request made to 
the Director General that he provide comparative data on the expenditure on 
safeguards and on technical co-operation activities. 
68. While nuclear power had become a major source of energy, nuclear safety 
and radiation protection continued to be problems of utmost importance. In 
that connection, he was pleased to say that his country was implementing the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and to note that the 
Agency's Emergency Response System had been put into operation. Sudan had now 
only to apply the nuclear safety measures in connection with that Convention. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 18 


69. The issue of amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had long been 
under discussion and it was time to find a solution taking into account the 
importance of increasing the number of seats for Africa and the Middle East on 
the Board of Governors in accordance with the principle of equitable 
geographical representation of those areas. 
70. In conclusion, he wished to stress his country's growing interest in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and its efforts in that area, which it 
considered crucial for future progress and well-being. Sudan was now 
establishing the infrastructure and developing programmes on the application 
of radioisotopes and radiation in agriculture, medicine and industry. In that 
context, he referred in particular to the existing fruitful collaboration 
between his country and the Department of Technical Co-operation and expressed 
his gratitude to the Agency for its assistance in various areas such as 
radioimmunoassay techniques for hormones, establishment of the infrastructure 
and facilities for occupational exposure monitoring, monitoring of the 
environment and foodstuffs, groundwater surveys and maintenance and 
fabrication of electronic devices. 
71. Sudan was also interested in environmental studies with a view to 
studying the movement of desert sands, the movement of water evaporating from 
the vegetative cover in the tropics and forming the source of rain in 
continental areas, and the influence of the depletion of tropical forests on 
that movement. He hoped that the Agency would participate in those studies, 
which were to be carried out by nuclear techniques. 
72. Another area which the Agency should be concerned with was solar 
energy, which was basically nuclear energy and required the same kind of 
scientific expertise. 
73. Thanks to Sudan's geographical situation and suitable environment for 
co-operation in such areas, Sudan was willing to establish specialized 
scientific cities. 
74. Mr. ELIAPES (Cyprus) welcomed the comments made by the Director 
General on the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat and stressed his 
delegation's view that there should be a wide balanced representation of all 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 19 


Member States. Although his country had no nuclear power plants, it attached 


great importance to the Agency's work particularly in the areas of 
non-proliferation, nuclear power plant safety and safe nuclear waste 
management. His delegation welcomed the proposed Code of Practice on the 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste and hoped that it would be adopted 
by the General Conference and implemented by as many countries as possible. 


75. Cyprus highly appreciated the Agency's technical assistance in the 
fields of hydrology, agriculture and other related sectors and he had pleasure 
in informing the Conference that his Government had approved its assessed 
contribution to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1991 
amounting to US $9800. 
76. Mr. MAHIGA (United Republic of Tanzania) commended the Agency's 
efforts in preventing the diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to 
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, but noted that a 
substantial amount of nuclear material in the world was not safeguarded by the 
Agency and that only peaceful and not military facilities were safeguarded. 
The Agency's safeguards system could perhaps be strengthened to become one of 
the international instruments for promoting and perhaps monitoring the 
implementation of general complete disarmament agreements. 
77. With technical assistance provided by the Agency, Tanzania had been 
able to establish a viable radiation protection infrastructure which was a 
necessary prerequisite for the development of the peaceful applications of 
nuclear technology. The infrastructure was supervised by the National 
Radiation Commission, a statutory body responsible for all atomic energy 
matters and charged with the role of planning, co-ordinating and to some 
extent implementing the peaceful applications of atomic energy. 
78. The Agency was also very active in supporting national research 
activities in the areas of agriculture, animal husbandry, health, hydrology 
and in strengthening nuclear physics education at the University of 
Dar es Salaam. In recent years, the Agency had increased the number of 
training courses and fellowships, the supply of technical equipment and the 
provision of short-term experts in the above fields. Tanzania would continue 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.330 
page 20 


to require technical assistance in those fields in order to consolidate the 
achievements obtained so far and in order to cover new areas. 


79. His delegation was grateful for the contributions made by Member States 
to the Technical Assistance and Go-operation Fund. Tanzania also welcomed 
initiatives to promote regional co-operation in the development and use of 
nuclear energy, especially in Africa. Such an approach was not only a way of 
realizing economies of scale, but also a sure way to ensure transparency and 
mutual confidence in the peaceful use of nuclear energy at regional levels. 
80. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had not ended with a Final 
Declaration, but it had reviewed the provisions of the Treaty relating to 
nuclear disarmament responsibilities and obligations and had commended the 
Agency's safeguards system. Although Tanzania had not yet acceded to the NPT, 
it was a consistent advocate of disarmament and non-proliferation. His 
country continued to have reservations about the Treaty which it regarded as 
discriminatory and which it believed should be altered to ensure a balance of 
responsibilities and obligations between those States which had nuclear power 
programmes and those which did not. There were already positive indications 
that a new era with better prospects for vertical disarmament and peace was 
emerging with the easing of East-West tensions. It was to be hoped that 
regional conflicts could also be solved and that enduring regional security 
arrangements could be established to curb the horizontal proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
81. His Government was particularly concerned about the activities of 
certain States with a nuclear weapon capability which were only partially 
covered by the safeguards system and whose domestic and military policies were 
threatening and destabilizing other States in their regions, as was the case 
in southern Africa and the Middle East. Stalling tactics were being used to 
avoid negotiations with the Agency for full-scope safeguards while fresh 
evidence and reports pointed to a continuing build-up and improvement of their 
nuclear weapon capability and ballistic missile technology. The General 
Conference should take appropriate measures to demand that those States 
complied with the Statute or their privileges should be suspended. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.330 
page 21 


82. South Africa's insistence that its decision to accede to the NPT should 
be dependent upon the accession of other States in Southern Africa was simply 
a diversionary and procrastinating tactic, since South Africa's neighbours had 
no nuclear weapon capability. The world needed to be convinced that 
negotiations for political change to dismantle apartheid were irreversible. 
If South Africa was committed to peace and security in the region and the 
world, it should negotiate in good faith with the Agency to conclude a 
comprehensive safeguards agreement applying to all its nuclear facilities. 
83. The Agency was operating with a zero-real-growth budget at a time when 
the challenges were becoming more complex. His delegation hoped that the 
Agency would ensure that there was a judicious balance between the safeguards 
requirements and the needs for technical assistance to developing countries. 
In view of the Agency's current financial difficulties, it was particularly 
important that Member States should heed the Director General's appeal to 
fulfil their financial pledges to the Agency. 
84. The Agency had shown remarkable initiative and resourcefulness in 
responding to nuclear accidents, especially after the Chernobyl accident, and 
in taking steps to prevent the occurrence of such accidents. It had also 
taken a leading role in providing guidelines for the storage of radioactive 
materials and the regulation of transboundary radioactive wastes. 
85. Finally, as scientists and Governments around the world strived to make 
nuclear reactors safer and more efficient and as the Agency prepared to embark 
on a public information campaign to make nuclear energy acceptable in 
industrialized countries, the needs of the developing countries should be 
given equal attention and nuclear energy should be made available and 
affordable to them, since the current world energy crisis required a global 
response and strategy. 
86. Mr. SIMARRO (Spain) thanked the Director General for his 
introductory statement; the information contained in it and in the Annual 
Report, document GC(XXX1V)/915, showed clearly the importance and quality of 
the work performed under his expert guidance. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 22 


87. The existing nuclear park in Spain had a capacity of 7.8 GW and had 
produced 39% of all the electricity generated in the country in 1989. That 
figure was a historic maximum. In previous years output had been fairly 
equally divided between nuclear power, hydroelectric power and power produced 
using fossil fuels. Thus, nuclear power constituted one of the three pillars 
of Spain's energy base. In the area of nuclear power the Agency was called 
upon to play a double role: on the one hand, it had to lay down standards and 
recommendations for nuclear facilities and objectively improve safety 
conditions by in-depth analysis of plant behaviour; and on the other, it had 
to provide reliable information to the public at both national and 
international level on any feature of nuclear energy and on the safety of 
nuclear installations. The Agency's work in those areas was fundamental. In 
particular, the systematic safety assessments, carried out by international 
experts, were very valuable - at the beginning of the current year Spain had 
received an Operational Safety Review Team (OSART) mission at the Cofrentes 
nuclear power plant, and Spanish experts had taken part in OSART missions and 
in Assessment of Safety Significant Events Team (ASSET) missions in other 
countries. The Incident Reporting System (IRS) helped disseminate operating 
experience amongst member countries, and Spain had both supplied information 
to and used information from that system. 
88. The Agency's efforts to collaborate with the countries of Central and 
Eastern Europe were laudable and received the full support of the Spanish 
Government. Of special interest was the programme for reviewing the safety of 
older reactors, in particular the WWER-440/230 model; Spain had already 
stated its willingness to contribute both financial and technical help to that 
programme. The planned activities on ageing of nuclear power plants were also 
most interesting. Spain had already done a great deal of research work in 
that area and would play an active part. 
89. The Agency's involvement in the clean-up activities pursuant to the 
Chernobyl accident and in the creation of the Chernobyl centre for 
international research represented an extraordinary opportunity to study the 
effects of radiation. Spain was very interested in participating in work at 
the Centre and was playing an active part in the drawing up of the agreement, 
together with the Commission of the European Communities. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 23 


90. Spain was also collaborating with the Agency on the revision of various 
safety documents such as the codes of practice and safety guides produced by 
the Nuclear Safety Standards Programme (NUSS). Those standards were used as a 
reference by the Spanish regulatory authorities, together with national 
standards and the standards of the country which had supplied the technology 
for each plant. The activities of the International Nuclear Safety Advisory 
Group (INSAG) were also very useful when defining safety requirements for 
nuclear facilities. Spain set great store by the Agency's efforts to 
standardize the safety criteria applied in various countries and to revise 
national regulations. 
91. He noted with interest the International Nuclear Event Scale which the 
IAEA had produced jointly with the Nuclear Energy Agency of the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. Spain had committed itself to 
using that Scale during the testing period which the Agency was implementing 
which was to last until the end of 1991. 
92. Since the previous year's General Conference, Spain had ratified the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, and 
they had entered into force. The planned safety conference in 1991 was a 
welcome move and Spain planned to play an active part. 
93. The safeguards system had functioned well during 1989 and no diversions 
of nuclear materials under safeguards had been detected. 
94. The continuous growth in real terms in technical co-operation and 
assistance activities was commendable, particularly in view of the budgetary 
restrictions to which the Agency was subjected. Spain had continued to 
provide resources for technical co-operation and assistance in the form of the 
participation of Spanish experts in missions, provision of Agency training 
courses, and hosting of Agency fellows in Spanish institutions and firms. In 
other words, Spain had, as far as possible, placed its existing technological 
capacity in the nuclear sector at the disposal of those countries whose 
nuclear industry required technological support from outside. During the 
thirty-third regular session of the General Conference the Spanish delegation 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 24 


had announced that the Spanish Government intended to finance footnote-a/ 
projects for the first time; Spain intended to consolidate and expand its 
efforts in that area. 


95. Mr. SHIRZAD (Afghanistan) said that over the past year the 
Afghanistan National Atomic Energy Commission (NAEC) had taken a number of 
strides forward: a statute had been drawn up for the NAEC, its staff had been 
expanded to include specialists in all areas of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, and plans had been prepared for the establishment of a library of all 
scientific publications relating to atomic energy. 
96. The Agency had provided much assistance over the years to Afghanistan 
in many different areas, but he wished to draw attention to one project in 
particular. A cobalt therapy unit had been set up in the Ali Abad Hospital 
with the Agency's assistance in 1977. Since then 5400 cancer patients had 
been treated by the unit. However, owing to difficulties caused by the war in 
Afghanistan, the cobalt-60 source had not been renewed and its strength had 
declined from the original level of 5000 Ci to less than 700 Ci. As a result, 
the exposure time for each treatment had increased from 10-15 seconds to 10-15 
minutes, with consequent delays in the treatment of most patients. The 
limited number of radiologists, physicists and technicians had also given rise 
to serious problems. He therefore appealed to the Agency to provide urgently 
needed assistance by renewing the existing cobalt-60 source, supplying a 
further cobalt-60 radiotherapy unit, supplying equipment needed by the nuclear 
medicine department, including a radioisotope generator to produce iodine-131 
and technetium, and awarding at least two long-term training scholarships and 
two short-term training fellowships each year for radiologists, radiation 
physicists and technicians. 
97. Four projects concerning dosimetry in radiotherapy, nuclear medicine, 
radiation protection and nitrogen-15 analysis had been proposed by the NAEC to 
the Agency in 1986 and had been approved. Unfortunately, the war in 
Afghanistan had led to the suspension of the implementation of those projects, 
and his delegation requested the Agency to extend the period of implementation 
of those projects for a further four years. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.330 
page 25 


98. In conclusion, his country attached great importance to the role of the 
Agency in creating a high level of safety for the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy and in hindering the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Afghanistan 
would continue to give its full support to the Agency's activities. 
The meeting rose at 5.5 p.m. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
20 February 1991 


GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 21 September 1990, at 10.35 a.m. 
President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
7 Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat 1-59 
24 Examination of delegates' credentials 60 - 71 
25 Elections to the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee 72 - 74 

[*] GC(XXXIV)/939. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIV)/INF/287/Rev.2. 


90-4474 
7903e/754e 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 2 


ISRAELI NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES AND THREAT (GC(XXXIII)/RES/506; GC(XXXIV)/926 
and 935/Rev.2) 


1. The PRESIDENT noted that the item had been included in the agenda 
pursuant to resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/506 adopted by the General Conference at 
its thirty-third session. Pursuant to operative paragraph 2 of that 
resolution, the Director General had submitted the report contained in 
document GC(XXXIV)/926. The General Conference also had before it in document 
GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2 a draft resolution submitted by Algeria, Egypt, the 
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Malaysia, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, the Syrian Arab 
Republic, Tunisia and the United Arab Emirates. 
2. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic), introducing, on behalf of the 
sponsors, the draft resolution entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and 
threat" contained in document GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2, said that the draft 
contained six preambular paragraphs which noted that the Israeli nuclear 
capability had grown to the point where it constituted a threat to the region, 
which stressed the collusion between Israel and the racist regime of 
South Africa, and which recalled the importance which the Security Council and 
the General Conference attached to the issue. Both bodies had expressed their 
deep concern at the race to build up nuclear and other weapons of mass 
destruction, which threatened peace and security in the area. The preambular 
paragraphs also deprecated the continuous refusal by Israel to place all its 
nuclear installations under Agency safeguards as requested by the Security 
Council and the General Conference, although it ought to do so as soon as 
possible if it wanted to help establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East. 
3. There were four operative paragraphs in the draft resolution. 
Paragraph 1, which once again called upon Israel to comply without delay with 
Security Council resolution 487(1981) urging it to submit all its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards, concerned a matter of great importance, 
particularly in view of the present international climate of detente and 
desire and determination to enforce international law and to implement all 
Security Council resolutions with a seriousness and readiness which had 
previously been lacking since the establishment of the United Nations. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 3 


4. Operative paragraph 3 requested the Director General to inform the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations about the resolution, and pursuant to 
operative paragraph 4, the item would again be included in the agenda for the 
thirty-fifth regular session of the General Conference. 
5. Operative paragraph 2 requested the Director General to deploy further 
efforts in continuing consultations with the States concerned in the Middle 
East area. The steps taken by the Director General the previous year should 
be regarded as a first step towards achieving the main objective sought by all 
States. Although there remained a long way to go and many obstacles to 
overcome, it was to be hoped that a result could be achieved swiftly if the 
Director General deployed intensive efforts to that end. 
6. In that context it was worth stressing one positive point. Other 
bodies were also discussing the matter and had devoted much attention to it. 
Thus, the Secretary-General of the United Nations had recently set up a 
committee consisting of three persons of international standing, 
Mr. James Leonard (United States of America), Mr. Jan Prawitz (Sweden) and 
Mr. Benjamin Sanders (Netherlands), to carry out a feasibility study on the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. That study 
had been submitted to the Secretary-General in August 1990[*]. Paragraph 175 
stated: 
"The present study of the path to a nuclear-weapon-free zone for the 


Middle East has been made in a spirit of 'realistic optimism'. There 
clearly is no instant solution to the problem. There is also no doubt 
that the goal can be reached; it is not an idle dream. Intensive and 
sustained efforts can overcome the most serious difficulties, provided 
that these efforts attract the participation and support of the States 


of the region and of the major outside Powers. In the end, the 


co-operation of the international community as a whole will be 


essential. This consideration alone points to a central role for the 


United Nations". 


7. In paragraph 176, it was observed that: 
"The effort required will be great, but so will the benefits of 
success". 


[*] The study was published on 10 October 1990 in document A/45/435. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 4 


8. Lastly, paragraph 181 noted that: 
"Adherence to the NPT by all States of the region - and notably by 
Israel - would be a most significant milestone. Pending such a 
measure, the acceptance by Israel of safeguards on the Dimona 
facilities would be an important move towards the establishment of a 
zone and could be realized well in advance of its adherence to the NPT". 


9. The recent events in the Middle East, which were of concern to the 
whole world, had shown the validity of what the sponsors of the draft 
resolution had stated in 1989 and in previous years on the issue under 
consideration. They had noted that the Middle East had its own characteristics 
and its own sensitivity and vision of world peace and security. That 
highly volatile region was the birthplace of three religions. It was the 
cradle of great civilizations and formed a link between East and West, North 
and South. Oil was only one of its riches. 
10. The sponsors of the draft resolution did not intend to emphasize the 
nature of Israel and its policy. They were simply requesting the General 
Conference and the Agency to study the problem, since Israel had a tremendous 
nuclear-weapons capability and was in a position to use that capability. It 
therefore constituted a unique threat to the Middle East which could lead to 
an escalation of the build-up of nuclear and other weapons of mass 
destruction. Their aim was to avoid triggering a conflict which would end in 
the use of such weapons with terrible consequences directly or indirectly 
affecting not only the region but the whole world. 
11. The three persons mentioned, who came from North America and Western 
Europe, had carried out their study carefully without any diplomatic or 
political pressure. Since their conclusions corresponded to those contained 
in the draft resolution, it was to be hoped that those delegations which had 
traditionally objected to any examination of the subject would reconsider 
their position, particularly as the General Conference was, both from a 
scientific and cultural and from a diplomatic point of view, a leading body 
with the historic responsibility of eliminating the threat of nuclear war in 
the Middle East and elsewhere in the world. The increasing number of 
delegations supporting the draft resolution would lend an additional impetus 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 5 


enabling the Director General to pursue his efforts in that area. Moral 
pressure had to be exerted on Israel to make it place all its facilities under 
Agency safeguards. In conclusion, he requested that the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2 be put to a roll-call vote. 


12. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his delegation 
regretted having to speak again on an issue which had already been discussed 
so many times, with so many political ulterior motives that the main point was 
being forgotten. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2 
was almost identical to that submitted the previous year. His country had 
voted against that draft resolution in 1989 and would have to do so again in 
1990. In its explanation of vote, his delegation had commended the efforts 
which had been made to render the resolution less aggressive and more 
constructive than in previous years. It had also expressed the hope that the 
positive development which the resolution represented would continue in the 
future. Unfortunately, that had not been the case. 
13. Like the delegate of the Syrian Arab Republic, he thought that the 
study on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East 
undertaken on behalf of the United Nations had been useful and that the path 
towards creating such a zone would be a long and difficult one, but not 
impassable. Unfortunately, the draft resolution, by continuing to address 
matters of a political nature which went beyond the mandate and competence of 
the Agency, did not at all help to make that path easier or shorter. The 
preamble contained the same tired and one-sided assertions as the previous 
year's resolution. It referred to an Israeli threat to peace and security in 
the area, but completely ignored the statements made by the Israeli Government 
to the Director General that it had no intention of threatening countries in 
or outside the Middle East region. It also ignored the fact that the General 
Conference itself had accepted those statements. Furthermore, it did not 
mention the very real fact that another State in the Middle East was, by its 
actions, presenting such a threat to peace and security in the region that the 
Security Council had taken unprecedented steps to deal with that threat. In 
addition, concern was expressed in the preamble at the co-operation between 
Israel and South Africa in the nuclear field, even though both Israel and 
South Africa had denied those allegations. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 6 


14. Operative paragraph 1 reiterated the call made the previous year to 
Israel to submit all its nuclear installations to Agency safeguards. While 
urging all non-nuclear-weapon States to place all their nuclear activities 
under Agency safeguards, his delegation could not support a proposal directed 
against one State alone, for the issue was of global importance and did not 
just involve one State. Moreover, his delegation rejected the notion implied 
in the draft resolution that the implementation of safeguards was a sanction 
rather than a voluntary step taken by Member States to confirm the peaceful 
nature of their nuclear activities. 
15. His delegation strongly objected to the title of the draft resolution, 
which introduced political and security considerations lying beyond the 
mandate and competence of the Agency. Moreover, the title had nothing to do 
with the one substantive and constructive paragraph of the resolution, 
operative paragraph 2, which requested the Director General, among other 
things, to continue consultations with the States concerned in the Middle East 
with a view to applying Agency safeguards to all nuclear facilities in that 
area. 
16. Finally, operative paragraph 4, which called for the inclusion in the 
agenda for the thirty-fifth session of the General Conference of an item 
entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat", was counterproductive. 
That proposal continued to involve the Agency in complex questions of 
international and regional security which ought to be resolved through 
negotiations in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. 
Maintaining that item on the General Conference agenda could only divert it 
from the Agency's proper scientific and technical tasks. 
17. The need to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the Middle 
East had become all the more apparent in the light of the current situation in 
that region. His delegation therefore hoped that the sponsors would 
understand the need to move away from the negative and discriminatory type of 
resolution which they had traditionally imposed on the Agency for the last few 
years, and to adopt a more positive and constructive approach. Such an 
approach was suggested in operative paragraph 2 of the draft. Although his 
delegation would have to vote against the draft resolution as a whole, it 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 7 


strongly supported the request to the Director General to examine the issue of 
the application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East. 


18. Mr. SAETI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that, far from being of a 
political nature, the draft resolution under consideration was a technical one 
and therefore within the Agency's sphere of competence. Although the question 
was a very important one, the text did not call for condemnation of Israel for 
its violation of Arab territories, its expulsion of the autochthonous 
population from those territories, its infringement of human rights and the 
barbarous way in which it had quelled the uprising in the occupied 
territories. It concerned only the growing Israeli regional nuclear 
capability, which threatened peace and security in the Middle East and 
throughout the world. In that light, he hoped that all delegations would 
support the draft resolution. 
19. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) said that her country continued to believe 
that, in view of the dangerous and sensitive situation and the specific and 
complex conditions in the Middle East, it was necessary to discuss all the 
issues affecting peace and security in that part of the world with a new 
vision and approach if a solution was to be found. Accordingly, Egypt 
continued to consider that, in order to build up confidence gradually, it was 
essential that all States in the Middle East accede to NPT, that all nuclear 
facilities in the region be placed under safeguards, and that weapons of mass 
destruction be totally eliminated. 
20. In the case of the Middle East, it was no longer acceptable to postpone 
or prevent the adoption of such measures by suggesting that the establishment 
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region should precede the application of 
safeguards, or that the drawing up of an agreement on the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone should proceed by way of direct negotiations, or that 
acceptance of safeguards should be a voluntary act within the framework of a 
State's sovereignty and not a compulsory step comparable to a sanction, or, 
lastly, that no link could be made between the elimination of nuclear and 
chemical weapons. Given the present situation, all of those arguments were 
out of place. Disarmament initiatives could offer a way of emerging from the 
present crisis and ensuring the future peace and security of the region. For 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 8 


all those reasons, Egypt welcomed the steps taken by the Agency during the 
past two years, namely the preparation of a report on the modalities of 
application of safeguards in the Middle East and the Director General's 
consultations with States in the region, and hoped that those efforts would be 
stepped up. 


21. Events in the Gulf should not serve as a pretext for minimizing the 
question of the Israeli nuclear capability. On the contrary, they showed that 
the problem had to be dealt with in a practical and rational way in order to 
strengthen peace and stability in the Middle East. 
22. Her delegation wished to stress three points. Firstly, Egypt had been 
working since 1974 for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East because it was convinced that such a step was inextrocably linked 
to efforts aimed at establishing a peace based on justice and developing the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy to ensure the progress and well-being of the 
peoples in that part of the world. 
23. Secondly, it believed that the development of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy should go hand in hand with wider application of Agency 
safeguards in the region. The strengthening of efforts to prevent the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons in the Middle East was not only a means of 
developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, but a necessary condition for 
such development. It was essential to prevent the explosion of regional 
conflicts which could affect world peace, security and stability. 
24. Thirdly, her Government was firmly convinced that the Middle East 
region should be completely free of weapons of mass destruction. It was 
working actively to ensure that the initiative taken in that connection by 
President Mubarak was put into effect. Such a development would be beneficial 
not only for the Middle East but for the whole international community. 
Nuclear weapons were the major weapons of mass destruction. Accordingly, 
Egypt considered that if a nuclear-weapon-free zone was to be established in 
the Middle East, the Agency's Director General would have to continue his 
consultations aimed at reaching an agreement on the modalities of application 
of full-scope safeguards to all nuclear installations in the region, and the 
Israeli Government would have to react favourably to those efforts by placing 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 9 


all its nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards. In that 
context, her delegation requested the Director General to bear in mind the 
four proposals contained in the letter sent in reply to a letter from him by 
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt 
(reproduced on pages 1 and 2 of Annex 2 to document GC(XXXIV)/926). The 
Agency could also consider other approaches within its sphere of competence, 
such as the preparation of a model safeguards agreement specific to the region. 


25. Noting that it was on the basis of those last points that it had 
co-sponsored the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2, 
her delegation urged others to adopt the resolution. 
26. Mr. LEE (Canada) said that his country's consistent policy was to 
oppose all politicization of the United Nations system. Canada set great 
store by that system of international co-operation and was concerned that the 
introduction of political issues in non-political bodies tended to disrupt the 
work of organizations which contributed much to global well-being. 
27. His country had repeatedly urged and would continue to urge all 
Member States which had not yet done so to accede to NPT and to agree to place 
their nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards. However, it 
could not support a draft resolution which singled out one country for failing 
to submit its nuclear facilities to safeguards while there were other major 
offenders. 
28. Mr. CHIKELU (Nigeria) supported the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2 on the Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat. 
29. He noted with regret that the only nuclear installations in the Middle 
East which were not subject to safeguards were those of Israel. In fact, 
whereas the other States in the region were party to NPT, had signed a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency or did not have any nuclear facilities, 
Israel had three such facilities which were not under safeguards. He 
accordingly joined other delegations in requesting Israel to accede to NPT and 
to sign without further delay an agreement for the application of full-scope 
safeguards to its installations. Such a step would facilitate the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region, which would have a 
very positive impact on peace and security in the Middle East. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 10 


30. Mr. ALLAGUI (Tunisia) said that the draft resolution under 
consideration, of which his country was a co-sponsor, expressed the concern 
felt by Tunisia and all States anxious to preserve peace and security in the 
Middle East and elsewhere. Since Security Council resolution 487(1981), 
Israel had repeatedly been requested to place all its nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards and to refrain from attacking or threatening to attack 
nuclear installations. Despite all the steps taken, including those taken by 
the Director General, Israel continued to refuse to submit all its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. 
31. That refusal with virtually permanent impunity only exasperated the 
other States in the region, discouraged more moderate voices and drove others 
to greater excesses and despair - and then people were suddenly surprised when 
international law was flouted and upheavals threatened in that part of the 
world. 
32. It was essential that all Security Council resolutions should be 
equally strict and binding and should be applied with the same effectiveness. 
It was also very important that the Director General should continue to 
intensify his efforts and consultations with the States concerned in the 
Middle East with a view to the application of Agency safeguards to all nuclear 
facilities in that region, thereby contributing to the initiation of a peace 
process at the end of which reason would triumph over passion and the moral 
strength of the international community would sweep away arrogance and 
injustice. 
33. For all those reasons, his delegation called upon all Member States to 
vote for the draft resolution under consideration. 
34. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his delegation 
had always maintained that the nuclear capability of the Israeli entity had 
long been a threat to peace and stability in the Middle East. Furthermore, 
that capability was currently the major obstacle in the path of making the 
region nuclear-weapon-free. Therefore the Iranian delegation strongly 
supported the draft resolution and urged that it be adopted and implemented. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 11 


35. He regretted that, until the Israeli entity was forced to accede to NPT 
and to place all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards, the region 
would remain unstable and would continue to represent a threat to world peace 
and security. 
36. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) said that his delegation was a co-sponsor of 
the draft resolution and had been amazed at the pretexts put forward for 
dismissing the draft. None of those pretexts did justice to the current 
situation in the Middle East. In particular, owing to the difficult and 
dangerous circumstances now arising in the region, it was more urgent than 
ever in 1990 that Israel be requested to place its nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards without further delay, and that it be forced to abide by the 
relevant Security Council and General Conference resolutions. Accordingly, he 
appealed to all delegations which had declared their intention to vote against 
the draft resolution to reconsider and change their position, and thus to 
demonstrate their love of peace and contribute to the strengthening of 
stability and security in the Middle East. 
37. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) raised objections against two of 
the arguments put forward by the delegations of the United States and Canada 
on the present item, namely that the Agency should not concern itself with 
such matters and that Israel should not be singled out in the draft 
resolution. Referring to Security Council resolution 487(1981), he pointed 
out that it was in fact the Security Council which had been the first to 
single out Israel, by asking it to place all its nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards. Consequently, there was indeed a link between the Security 
Council's request and the Agency's safeguards system. It was therefore quite 
in order for the Agency to concern itself with the modalities of applying 
safeguards in view of the close and direct link created by the Security 
Council resolution. 
38. Mr. ARAIN (Pakistan) shared the concern expressed by many 
delegations regarding the Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat. All 
Israel's neighbours had placed their nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards, and so he earnestly requested the Director General to continue his 
efforts to put into effect resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/506, which his delegation 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 12 


had fully supported. Pakistan also was in favour of setting up a nuclear


weapon-free zone in the Middle East, because it was a measure that would 


strengthen the non-proliferation regime. 


39. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no more speakers, invited 
the General Conference to vote on the draft resolution in document 


GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2. As had been requested by the delegate of the Syrian Arab 


Republic, the vote would be taken by roll-call. 


40. Norway, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon 
to vote first. 


41. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bolivia, 
China, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea, Egypt, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, Iraq, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, 
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab 
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, 
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


Against: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, 
Denmark, Finland, France, German Democratic Republic, 
Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, 
Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, 
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America. 


Abstaining: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, 
Czechoslovakia, Ecuador, Holy See, Hungary, Namibia, 
Poland, Romania, Venezuela. 


42. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2 was 
adopted by 42 votes to 27, with 14 abstentions. 


43. Mr. FAHAD (Iraq) said that although his delegation had voted in 
favour of the resolution, it wished to emphasize that certain paragraphs, in 


particular paragraph 2, did not come up to its expectations. His delegation 


had already commented very clearly on all the documents and proposals put 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 13 


forward on the matter so far, in particular at the Board of Governors meetings 


in June. It did not believe that any significant practical progress had been 
made towards implementing the resolutions adopted by the General Conference in 
connection with the application of safeguards to Israeli nuclear facilities, 
as was apparent from the various reports on the subject by the Director 
General. 


44. Mr. TALIANI (Italy), speaking on behalf of the 12 member countries 
of the European Community, said it was a matter for regret that the draft 
resolution had not confirmed the progress noted the previous year towards 
accommodating the concerns of a larger number of Member States. The Twelve 
could not support it for the same reasons that had led them to decide against 
the resolution the previous year. By its very existence, the resolution just 
adopted would perpetuate the debate within the Agency on a question which 
distracted it from its proper tasks and had a divisive effect on its 
membership. By its content, the resolution was at variance with the specific 
objectives of Agency safeguards, which were the cornerstone of international 
relations in nuclear matters and which the Twelve wished to see applied as 
widely as possible so as to exclude the risk of proliferation. Any attempt to 
use safeguards as a means of exerting pressure or as a sanction perverted the 
purpose for which they had been designed. 
45. Nevertheless, the Twelve wished to emphasize that they fully shared the 
sponsors' concern regarding the need to prevent the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons in any region of the world. 
46. Mr. WILSON (Australia) said that his delegation had opposed the 
resolution just adopted because it sought to keep on the General Conference's 
agenda political issues extraneous to the functions and responsibilities of 
the Agency. The resolution was also discriminatory in that it singled out the 
safeguards situation in one State for criticism and condemnation. Australia 
had always urged all States to accept NPT or at least the application of 
full-scope safeguards. Failure to do so on the part of Israel or any other 
State was a source of concern to his country, which again called upon all 
States that had not yet done so to accede to NPT or at least to accept 
full-scope safeguards. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 14 


47. Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) said that his country had always 
fully supported non-discriminatory measures in favour of the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and of nuclear disarmament. For example, it had signed and 
ratified the Tlatelolco Treaty, and its constitution prescribed a policy of 
peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
48. Although very concerned by the escalation of tension in the Middle 
East, and well disposed to all efforts aimed at promoting peace in that region 
under the United Nations Charter, his delegation had nevertheless abstained in 
the vote that had just taken place. The Agency's Statute clearly stipulated 
that where safeguards were concerned, each Member State had full sovereign 
power to choose the solution it deemed most appropriate. Any attempt to 
impose the application of safeguards against the sovereign will of a country 
was contrary to the spirit of the Agency's Statute and would have a negative 
impact on the credibility of the safeguards system. 
49. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that as a party to NPT, his country 
was firmly convinced of the merits of the safeguards system and was thus in 
favour of widening its scope. However, it considered that such widening 
should not be required on an individual basis, because that approach was 
likely to make the attainment of the desired objective more remote. For that 
reason, Austria had voted against the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2. 
50. Mr. ANGUIANO ROCH (Mexico) said that, although his delegation had 
voted in favour of the resolution, it had reservations regarding preambular 
paragraph (b). The General Conference was not competent to deal with 
situations threatening international peace and security. Those matters were 
the exclusive preserve of the Security Council. His Government also found 
certain wordings in the resolution inappropriate. 
51. Mr. M0NDIN0 (Argentina) said that his country unreservedly 
endorsed the principle of non-proliferation, both vertical and horizontal, and 
that it was guided by that principle in the conduct of its international 
affairs. Thus, it fully shared the deep concern of the international 
community of the escalation of tension in the Middle East and reaffirmed the 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 15 


need to encourage and support all efforts aimed at preserving peace, stability 
and compliance with the aims and principles of the United Nations Charter in 
the region. 


52. The position of Argentina regarding the application of safeguards was 
well known: it was firmly convinced that confidence in the Agency's 
safeguards system could only be maintained if the system was applied in strict 
conformity with the Statute. Consequently, any attempt to impose safeguards 
against the sovereign will of a Member State would strike at the essence of 
the system and detract from its credibility. Even a decision taken by 
consensus by the General Conference could not alter the voluntary nature of a 
Member State's acceptance of Agency safeguards, let alone make obligatory the 
acceptance of full-scope safeguards, which were not mentioned in the Agency's 
Statute. Acceptance of such safeguards could be legally binding only for 
States which had freely acceded to an international instrument imposing on 
them an obligation to that effect. Accordingly, Argentina had abstained from 
voting. 
53. Mr. SINAI (India) recalled that according to Article III.A.5 of 
the Agency's Statute, safeguards could be applied "at the request of the 
parties, to any bilateral or multilateral arrangement, or at the request of a 
State, to any of that State's activities in the field of atomic energy". 
Therefore any application of safeguards on a regional basis required prior 
approval from all the States in the region. 
54. Despite that principle, India had supported the draft resolution 
submitted in document GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2, as well as all earlier resolutions 
passed by the General Conference on that issue, because of the exceptional 
situation created in the Middle East by the undisclosed Israeli nuclear 
programme, by Israel's refusal to withdraw from the occupied territories, and 
by its continued denial of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. 
It was on account of that threat that, following the Israeli military attack 
on an Iraqi nuclear reactor subject to Agency safeguards, the Security Council 
had adopted its resolution 487(1981) calling upon Israel urgently to submit 
all its nuclear installations to the Agency's safeguards. That requirement 
still remained unfulfilled, and so the task entrusted to the Agency by the 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 16 


Security Council had yet to be accomplished. To date, with the exception of 
Israel, all countries in the Middle East having a nuclear programme had 
voluntarily placed all their nuclear facilities under safeguards or expressed 
their willingness to do so. The resolution just adopted would enable the 
Agency to carry out the task entrusted to it by the Security Council, and that 
was why India had supported it. 


55. Operative paragraph 2 of the resolution mentioned document GC(XXXIV)/926. 
His delegation considered that certain proposals and opinions contained in 
that document did not, strictly speaking, fall within the purview of the 
Agency. His delegation's vote in favour of the resolution should therefore 
not be interpreted as an endorsement of those proposals, but rather as a 
result of the exceptional situation in the Middle East, which required that 
all possible efforts be deployed to achieve the objectives of Security Council 
resolution 487(1981). 
56. Mr. BROOKS (New Zealand) said that his delegation had been 
disappointed to find that the draft resolution before the Conference was 
almost identical in substance to that which had been submitted on the same 
subject to the thirty-third session of the General Conference and which his 
country had voted against. Naturally, his delegation's position remained 
unchanged, and he regretted that discriminatory draft resolutions continued to 
be submitted to the General Conference. 
57. New Zealand supported the principle of universal application of Agency 
safeguards to all peaceful nuclear activities in all countries and urged all 
States which had not yet done so to accede to NPT. The general situation in 
the Middle East was of great concern to New Zealand and it therefore regarded 
operative paragraph 2 of the resolution as constructive. 
58. Mr. VETTOVAGLIA (Switzerland) said that his country had always 
sought to prevent the United Nations specialized agencies from debating 
subjects which by rights were the province of other bodies. Paragraphs (b), 
(d) and (e) of the preamble and operative paragraph 1 of the resolution 
contained wordings which did not fit in with established facts or the Agency's 
concerns. Switzerland attached the highest importance to non-proliferation 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 17 


and thus to the safeguards system. However, acceptance of safeguards was 
exclusively a matter for sovereign decision by States. Therefore there could 
be no question of singling out one State and subjecting it to special 
treatment. 


59. Mr. GALLOWAY (Namibia) said that his delegation wished to foster 
peace and nuclear safety worldwide. It therefore called upon all States to 
accept Agency safeguards. However, not being in possession of full background 
information concerning the draft resolution submitted in document 
GC(XXXIV)/935/Rev.2 and earlier resolutions on the matter, his delegation had 
abstained from voting. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXXIV)/936 and Add.1, 944) 


60. The PRESIDENT drew attention to document GC(XXXIV)/944, which 
contained the General Committee's report on its meeting to examine delegates* 
credentials, as provided for in Rule 28 of the General Conference's Rules of 
Procedure. Paragraphs 2 to 12 of the report described the manner in which the 
Committee had approached its task and conveyed the opinions expressed during 
the discussion. The Committee had agreed to recommend the adoption of the 
draft resolution contained in paragraph 13 of its report. 
61. Mr. ARAIN (Pakistan) endorsed the last sentence of paragraph 9, 
regarding the credentials of the delegate of Afghanistan, about which the 
Pakistan delegation had reservations. 
62. Mr. FAHAD (Iraq) said that his delegation had reservations 
concerning the credentials of the delegate from the so-called "State of 
Kuwait". 
63. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco), speaking on behalf of the delegations from 
member countries of the League of Arab States participating in the General 
Conference, drew attention to the reservations expressed by those delegations 
in documents GC(XXXIV)/936 and Add.1, with regard to the credentials of the 
Israeli delegate. 
64. Mr. AL-SAEID (Kuwait) said that he had no intention of reiterating 
the statements his delegation had made in response to the allegations by the 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 18 


representative of the Iraqi regime. Remarking that it would be more 
appropriate for Kuwait to express its reservations about the credentials of 
the delegate of the Baghdad regime, which was not representative of the Iraqi 
people it had reduced to helplessness, he rejected the assertions made by the 
delegate of a regime that flouted Security Council resolutions, such as 
resolution 662(1990). 


65. Mr. MOOSAVI BIOKI (Islamic Republic of Iran), referring to the 
Israeli delegate's credentials, said that his country was not prepared to 
approve the credentials of a delegate from an illegal State which was 
occupying Palestine by force. 
66. Mr. SULAIMAN (Saudi Arabia) rejected the statements made by the 
representative of Iraq regarding the credentials of the delegate of Kuwait, at 
the thirty-fourth session of the General Conference. In that context, he 
stressed that successive Security Council resolutions had reaffirmed the 
legitimacy of the Kuwaiti Government and had called on Iraq to withdraw 
immediately and unconditionally from Kuwaiti territory. 
67. Mr. ABDEL MOHEIM (Egypt) said that, in view of his country's 
well-known position on the matter, and given the rule of international law and 
the relevant Security Council resolutions, his delegation wished to oppose the 
reservations expressed by the Iraqi representative concerning the credentials 
of the delegate of Kuwait. 
68. As to the credentials of the Israeli delegate, he wished to reiterate 
the stance his delegation had taken on previous occasions. 
69. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) said it was truly a matter for regret that the 
Iraqi representative should express reservations concerning the legitimacy of 
the Kuwaiti delegate's credentials. The delegation of Qatar wished to 
reaffirm that Kuwait, as an independent sovereign State, was a stabilizing 
factor in the Arab region. He therefore took exception to the Iraqi 
delegation's remarks. 
70. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no more speakers, assumed 
that the General Conference was prepared to accept the draft resolution 
contained in paragraph 13 of document GC(XXXIV)/944, on the understanding that 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.331 
page 19 


the remarks and reservations of delegates would be reflected in the summary 
record of the meeting. 


71. The draft resolution contained in paragraph 13 of document GC(XXXIV)/944 
was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


72. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was currentlyrepresented 
on the Agency's Staff Pension Committee by two members, 
Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands) and Mr. Loedel (Uruguay), and two alternates, 
Mr. Kumar (India) and Mr. Tilemann (Australia). 
73. As Messrs. Loedel, Tilemann and Kumar would no longer be available to 
serve on the Committee, he proposed that Ms. Schick (Australia) be elected as 
a member and Mr. Hamada (Tunisia) and Mr. Hernandez (Argentina) as 
alternates. On behalf of the General Conference, he thanked Mr. de Klerk for 
continuing to serve on the Committee and the newly elected members for 
undertaking to serve the Agency in such a way. 
74. Ms. Schick (Australia) was elected as a member of the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee, and Mr. Hamada (Tunisia) and Mr. Hernandez (Argentina) were 
elected as alternates, with Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands) continuing to serve as 
a member of the Committee. 
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
5 October 1990 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-FOURTH (1990) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 21 September 1990, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


Oral report by the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole on the 
following items: 1-89 
- The Agency's accounts for 1989 19 
- Measures to strengthen international 
co-operation in matters relating to 
nuclear safety and radiological 
protection 20 - 71 
- The Agency's programme and 
budget for 1991 and 1992 72 

{*] GC(XXXIV)/939. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXIV)/INF/287/Rev.2. 


90-4480 
(7365e/726e) 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 2 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


Contribution of Namibia towards 
the 1990 Regular Budget 73 - 74 


- 
Scale of assessment of Members' 
contributions for 1991 75 - 76 
- 
The financing of safeguards 7 7 
- 
The financing of technical 
assistance 78 
Plan for producing potable 
water economically 79 


Staffing of the Agency's 
Secretariat 80 


Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of 
the Statute 81 


- 
Revision of Article VI of the 
Statute as a whole 82 
- 
Executing agency agreement 
between the United Nations 
Development Programme and the 
International Atomic Energy 
Agency 83 - 84 
- 
Co-operation agreements with 
intergovernmental organizations 85 - 86 
- 
Rule and policy on the appointment 
of the Director General 87 - 89 
23 
South Africa's nuclear capabilities 90 - 120 


26 
Report on voluntary contributions pledged 
to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1991 121 


Closing of the session 
122 - 127 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 3 


ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


1. Mr. NEWLIN (United States of America), Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole, presented the Committee's report on items 9 to 22 of the 
agenda. 
2. Under item 9, "The Agency's accounts for 1989", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution on page III 
of document GC(XXXIV)/916. 
3. Under item 10, "Measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXIV)/948/Rev.1, relating to the implementation of resolution 
GC(XXXIII)/RES/508, to liability for nuclear damage and to the Convention on 
Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in 
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. The Committee also 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXIV)/950 entitled "Code of Practice on the International Transboundary 
Movement of Radioactive Waste", the draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/937 
entitled "Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material", and the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXXlV)/949 entitled "Nuclear safety guidelines 
for nuclear-powered vessels". 
4. Under sub-item 10(f), "Prohibition of all armed attacks against nuclear 
installations devoted to peaceful purposes whether under construction or in 
operation", the Islamic Republic of Iran had introduced in the Committee of 
the Whole a draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90, but had 
suggested that there be no discussion on it in view of the lateness of the 
hour. However, India had submitted some amendments to the draft resolution, 
and there had been a brief discussion, following which the Committee had noted 
that the Islamic Republic of Iran would be submitting the draft resolution 
directly to the General Conference in plenary session. 
5. Under item 11, "The Agency's programme and budget for 1991 and 1992", 
the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt draft resolutions 
A, B and C in Annex IV to Part I of document GC(XXXIV)/917. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 4 


6. Under item 12, "Contribution of Namibia towards the 1990 Regular 
Budget", the Committee recommended that Namibia be assessed for a zero 
contribution towards the Agency's Regular Budget for 1990. 
7. Under item 13, "Scale of assessment of Members* contributions 
for 1991", the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/925 and that, in adopting it, the Conference 
approve the footnote on the first page of the Annex to the draft resolution as 
shown in document GC(XXXIV)/925/Add.1. 
8. Under item 14, "The financing of safeguards", the Committee recommended 
that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/941. 
9. Under item 15, "The financing of technical assistance", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXIV)/947. 
10. Under item 16, "Plan for producing potable water economically", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXIV)/945. 
11. Under item 17, "Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXIV)/951/Rev.2. 
12. Under item 18, "Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute", the 
Committee recommended the adoption of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXIV)/940. 
13. Under item 19, "Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXIV)/943. 
14. Under item 20, "Executing agency agreement between the United Nations 
Development Programme and the International Atomic Energy Agency", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference approve the draft Executing Agency 
Agreement contained in the Attachment to document GC(XXXIV)/923. 
15. Under item 21, "Co-operation agreements with intergovernmental 
organizations", the Committee recommended that the Conference approve the 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 5 


conclusion of the proposed co-operation agreement between the IAEA and the 
Arab Atomic Energy Agency set forth in Annex 1 to document GC(XXXIV)/924. 


16. Under item 22, "Rule and policy on the appointment of the Director 
General", the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/946 and that it request the Director General 
to transmit to the Board of Governors the summary records of the discussion on 
that item in the Committee and of any discussion on it which might take place 
in the plenary. 
17. In conclusion, he thanked the two Vice-Chairmen, Mr. Mannan of 
Bangladesh and Mr. Jurza of Czechoslovakia, for their valuable support. 
18. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conference should now consider 
one by one the agenda items which had been referred to the Committee of the 
Whole and its recommendations thereon. 
The Agency's accounts for 1989 


19. The draft resolution on pafie III of document GC(XXXIV)/916 was adopted. 
Measures to strengthen international co-operation in matters relating to 
nuclear safety and radiological protection 


20. The draft resolutions in documents GC(XXXIV)/937, GC(XXXIV)/948/Rev.1, 
GC(XXXIV)/949 and GC(XXXIV)/950 were adopted. 
21. The PRESIDENT recalled that, as reported by the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole, the Islamic Republic of Iran wished to submit a draft 
resolution directly to the General Conference in plenary session. 
22. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran), introducing the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90 entitled "Prohibition of all armed 
attacks against nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes whether 
under construction or in operation", said that the protection of nuclear 
installations devoted to peaceful purposes against armed attacks was an 
important task directly related to the development of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes. The Agency was therefore the most appropriate forum for 
taking up the matter. The draft resolution reflected a moderate approach born 
of wide-ranging and intensive negotiation. If it were adopted, his delegation 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 6 


would withdraw its request for inclusion of the topic in the agenda for the 
General Conference's thirty-fifth regular session. He appealed to delegations 
to support the draft resolution. 


23. Mr. SINAI (India), introducing three proposed amendments to the 
draft resolution submitted by his delegation in document GC(XXXlV)/COM.5/90/Mod.2, 
said that the first amendment was to replace operative paragraph 2 of the 
draft resolution by a new preambular paragraph (d), simply in order to bring 
out clearly the notion that the matter was of particular concern to the Agency 
in connection with its safeguards system. In addition, he wished to propose 
that the words "an authoritative" which appeared in that paragraph in the 
document be replaced by "a comprehensive". 
24. The second amendment, namely the replacement of the word "safeguarded" 
in operative paragraphs 3 and 5 by the word "peaceful", was prompted by the 
desire to make the draft resolution applicable to all peaceful nuclear 
installations, whether or not safeguards procedures applied to them. It would 
be unfortunate for nuclear installations used for peaceful purposes in 
non-nuclear-weapon States, as well as in nuclear-weapon States, not to be 
covered by the draft resolution, the main concern of which was the danger of 
radioactive releases - a danger that was exactly the same for installations 
subject to safeguards as for those that were not. 
25. The third proposed amendment, deletion of operative paragraph 4, was 
motivated by the fact that that paragraph of the draft resolution had nothing 
whatever to do with the Agency. 
26. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said he was prepared to 
accept the deletion of operative paragraph 4 but hoped for a thorough 
discussion of the remaining two proposed amendments and of the draft 
resolution itself. 
27. Mr. LOOSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) said that his delegation 
had great sympathy for most of the material contained in the draft 
resolution. Much of the wording had been taken from statements made at the 
Fourth NPT Review Conference, and there was wide agreement on it. His 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 7 


delegation had doubts, however, whether a single organization in the United 
Nations system should take upon itself tasks that actually fell within the 
province of the Security Council. 


28. Furthermore, it would appear that the wording of the draft resolution 
was not entirely satisfactory, as evidenced by the fact that amendments to it 
had been proposed. He would therefore suggest that the Conference should not 
proceed to a detailed discussion of the draft resolution, but that the 
official records should indicate that there had been a broad measure of 
agreement among delegations on the substance of the matter. 
29. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that, while it 
endorsed the views expressed by the delegate of the Federal Republic of 
Germany, his delegation regarded the subject of armed attacks on peaceful 
nuclear facilities as entirely inappropriate for consideration by the General 
Conference. The Agency had neither the competence nor the mandate to discuss 
the complex legal, military and political dimensions of the question. Armed 
attacks on peaceful nuclear installations were issues of international peace 
and security and were therefore properly examined by the Security Council or 
the Conference on Disarmament. 
30. His delegation would strongly oppose any attempt to specify in advance 
what actions the Agency should take in response to events that were by their 
very nature unpredictable, and it regarded any prejudgement as to what 
constituted a violation of the Agency's Statute, the United Nations Charter or 
international law in general as unacceptable. 
31. The United States had a number of specific problems with the text of 
the draft resolution. First, the text would have the Agency make 
pronouncements on the role and activities of the Security Council pronouncements 
that were wholly inappropriate. Second, virtually the entire 
draft resolution had no relevance whatsoever to the Agency, its statutory 
responsibilities or its technical competence. Third, the draft resolution 
asked the Director General to inform Member States about developments that 
were not within the Agency's purview. That request, along with the repeated 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.332 
page 8 


efforts to address the issue in the Agency, was objectionable in principle and 
in practice, given the Agency's limited resources and the genuine nuclear 
safety issues it had to deal with, it was a divisive distraction. The Agency 
needed to focus all of its attention on areas within its statutory 
responsibilities and technical competence. For those reasons, it would be 
impossible for his delegation to support the draft resolution. 


32. Mr. ORNSTEIN (Argentina) said that his delegation had been one of 
the main proponents of General Conference resolutions GC(XXIX)/RES/444 and 
GC(XXXI)/RES/475 on protection of nuclear installations devoted to peaceful 
purposes against armed attacks, which were referred to in the preamble of the 
draft resolution under consideration. Those earlier resolutions had enjoyed 
wide support and an overwhelming majority of delegations had voted in favour 
of them. The present draft resolution, however, introduced concepts which 
were not to be found in the earlier resolutions, and which his delegation 
could not espouse. Although the Iranian delegation had made intensive efforts 
to arrive at a formulation that would be acceptable to a broad majority, 
Argentina could not go along with the language used in operative paragraphs 2, 
3, 4 and 5 as submitted. The amendments proposed by India would greatly 
improve the draft resolution, however, and his delegation would join in a 
consensus on them. 
33. Mr. GOMES DE MATTOS (Brazil) said that although his delegation had 
in the past sponsored resolutions similar to the one under consideration, it 
had difficulties with several operative paragraphs as at present formulated. 
The amendments submitted by India would go a long way towards meeting his 
delegation's concerns, and it would join in a consensus on those amendments. 
34. Mr. ERRERA (France) said that his delegation had always held the 
view that the Agency was not the appropriate forum for consideration of the 
subject now under discussion. France could not, therefore, endorse the draft 
resolution. 
35. The PRESIDENT said that the question appeared not to be ripe for 
resolution, and that it might be preferable to postpone further consideration 
until the next session of the General Conference. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 9 


36. Mr. LOOSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) said that, instead of 
placing the item on the agenda for the next session of the General Conference, 
it might be sufficient to record that there had been broad agreement on a 
number of aspects of the issue, including the fact that resolution of such 
matters was the province of forums other than the Agency. 
37. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) strongly endorsed the 
suggestion made by the delegate of the Federal Republic of Germany. 
38. Mr. van GORKOM (Netherlands) said that attacks on nuclear 
installations, like all other attacks or use of force, had to be judged on the 
basis of the principles of the United Nations Charter, particularly those 
expressed in Article 2, paragraph 4. An attack on a nuclear installation 
acquired a special dimension if the possibility existed that large quantities 
of radioactive material would be released thereby. His country's efforts were 
aimed at strengthening the present regime in order to prohibit such attacks. 
That could be done in the Conference on Disarmament, in a diplomatic 
conference on the Additional Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, or 
through regional or national restrictive measures. His delegation would 
therefore strongly advocate including, in the reference to the Conference on 
Disarmament in operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution, the phrase 
"recognizing that attacks on nuclear facilities could result in large releases 
of radioactivity with potentially grave consequences". 
39. It was open to question whether the references to Security Council 
matters in operative paragraphs 3 and 4 of the draft resolution were 
appropriate in an Agency context. Nevertheless, the Netherlands believed that 
the draft properly took into account the view that the matter did not 
primarily concern the Agency and was accordingly prepared to join in a 
consensus on it. 
40. The amendments proposed by India, on the other hand, raised serious 
problems for his delegation. The Netherlands could not accept the proposals 
regarding operative paragraphs 2, 3 and 5 and, if they were accepted, would be 
forced to withdraw its support for the draft resolution. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.332 
page 10 


41. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that in drafting the 
resolution an attempt had been made to find the most widely acceptable wording 
so as to ensure its approval in the present session and to obviate the need to 
reopen discussion of the matter at the next session of the General Conference. 
42. He requested that the resolution be put to a roll-call vote. 
43. Mr. DAVIES (Secretary of the Committee of the Whole) pointed out 
that, in accordance with Rule 76 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference, amendments to a proposal must be voted on before the proposal 
itself. In other words, voting would take place first on paragraph 1 of 
document GC(XXXIV)/C0M.5/90/Mod.2, then on paragraph 2 of the same document 
and finally on the draft resolution submitted by the Islamic Republic of Iran 
in document GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90, but with the deletion of operative paragraph 4 
as proposed by India and agreed to by the Iranian delegation. 
44. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) felt that the draft resolution, which she 
fully supported, would be weakened by the deletion of operative paragraph 4. 
Furthermore, the proposal to replace the word "safeguarded" in operative 
paragraphs 3 and 5 by the word "peaceful" was not acceptable, since all 
non-military installations were supposed to be under the safeguards system. 
45. Mr. LAVIHA (Philippines) thought it might still be possible to 
avoid a vote by reaching a consensus on the Iranian draft resolution, which he 
supported while reserving his position on the amendments proposed by India. 
46. Mr. CSERVENY (Hungary) said that for a small country such as his 
own with a high population density the massive radioactive releases caused by 
an attack on nuclear installations on its own or on neighbouring territory 
were of the greatest concern. It was in the interests of all countries, 
whether or not they possessed nuclear facilities, to strengthen the protection 
of such facilities by international law. 
47. In view of the poor progress made on the matter in the Conference on 
Disarmament in Geneva and other multilateral forums, an even greater effort 
should be made in all forums to enable a solution to be proposed to the 
relevant United Nations bodies and future diplomatic conferences. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 11 


48. Considered as a whole, the issue went beyond the Agency's competence, 
but certain aspects were nonetheless relevant to its activities. The Iranian 
draft resolution in its original form provided an acceptable solution and 
would forestall further protracted and repetitive discussion of the matter. 
Moreover, as it did not require specific action by the Agency, his delegation 
would vote for the draft resolution either as proposed by Iran or as amended 
by the Netherlands, i.e. with the addition of a phrase concerning radioactive 
releases. 
49. Mr. SINAI (India), replying to comments on his delegation's 
proposed amendments, said that he was opposed to retaining the word 
"safeguarded" in operative paragraphs 3 and 5 because it seemed contrary to 
the intention of preambular paragraph (c). Although he would prefer to 
replace it by the word "peaceful", he would not insist on that point. 
50. Since the deletion of the word "safeguarded" from operative paragraphs 
3 and 5 would make paragraph 2 redundant, it could conveniently be 
replaced by the new preambular paragraph (d) proposed by his delegation, in 
order to show the Agency's particular concern in the matter. 
51. With regard to Egypt's wish to restore operative paragraph 4 of the 
draft resolution, he considered that it was the prerogative of the 
depositaries and signatories of NPT to request action by the Agency, but not 
vice versa, as not all Member States of the Agency were parties to the 
Treaty. Neither was it proper for the Agency to instruct the United Nations 
Security Council on its course of action in any circumstances. However, if it 
were felt desirable to provide some sort of guidance to the Security Council, 
a preambular paragraph could be included along the following lines: 
"Considering that an armed attack against a nuclear installation devoted to 
peaceful purposes would call for action by the Security Council of the United 
Nations". 
52. Mr. TALIANI (Italy) said that he could not agree to the suggested 
deletion of the word "safeguarded", since not all nuclear facilities were 
under the Agency's safeguards system. Furthermore, he wondered at what point 
an installation under construction became a nuclear facility. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 12 


53. Mr. DAVIES {Secretary of the Committee of the Whole), for the 
purposes of final clarification before voting, explained that India's first 


amendment was as stated in paragraph 1 of document GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90/Mod.2, 


but with the replacement of the words "an authoritative" by "a comprehensive". 


The second amendment was as stated in paragraph 2 of that document, namely the 


replacement of "safeguarded" by "peaceful". He wished to make it quite clear 


that voting would not be necessary on paragraph 3 of that document, since the 


sponsors of the original draft resolution had already withdrawn operative 


paragraph 4 thereof. 


54. The PRESIDENT proposed that the General Conference proceed to vote 
on India's first amendment to the draft resolution, as contained in 


paragraph 1 of document GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90/Mod.2, with the replacement of the 


words "an authoritative" by "a comprehensive". As requested by the delegate 


of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the votes would be taken by roll-call. 


55. Bangladesh, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon 
to vote first. 


56. The result of the vote was as follows; 
In favour: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Cuba, Ecuador, 
India, Pakistan, Philippines, Turkey. 


Against; Albania, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Costa 
Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, German Democratic 
Republic, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Hungary, 
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, 
Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Spain, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, 
Tunisia, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
States of America, Venezuela. 


Abstaining; Afghanistan, Bolivia, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Canada, Colombia, Czechoslovakia, Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, Ghana, Holy See, Republic of 
Korea, Romania, Senegal, Sudan, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zimbabwe. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 13 


57. There were 11 votes in favour and 50 against, with 17 abstentions. The 
amendment submitted by India in paragraph 1 of document GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90/Mod.2 


with the replacement of the words "an authoritative" by "a comprehensive" was 


re.j ected. 


58. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to vote on the second 
amendment to the draft resolution, as contained in paragraph 2 of document 


GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90/Mod.2. 


59. Spain, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


60. The result of the vote was as follows; 
In favour: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Cuba, India, Mexico, 
Pakistan, Philippines, Turkey. 


Against: Albania, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, 
Canada, Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, 
Egypt, Finland, France, German Democratic Republic, 
Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, 
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy, 
Japan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Monaco, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, 
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, 
Thailand, Tunisia, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab 
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela. 


Abstaining: Afghanistan, Bolivia, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ghana, Holy See, 
Iraq, Senegal, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, 
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zimbabwe. 


61. There were 10 votes in favour and 55 against, with 15 abstentions. The 
amendment submitted by India in paragraph 2 of document GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90/Mod.2 


was re.jected. 


62. The PRESIDENT proposed that the General Conference now vote on the 
original draft resolution submitted by the Islamic Republic of Iran, in 


document GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90, with the deletion of operative paragraph 4. 



GC(XXX1V)/OR.332 
page 14 


63. Myanmar, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


64. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Bulgaria, 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa 
Rica, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, 
Egypt, Ghana, Hungary, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, 
Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, 
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam. 


Against: Argentina, Brazil, France, Japan, Monaco, Switzerland, 
United States of America. 


Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, 
Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, German 
Democratic Republic, Federal Republic of Germany, 
Greece, Holy See, Iceland, India, Italy, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zimbabwe. 


65. There were 46 votes in favour and 7 against, with 28 abstentions. The 
draft resolution submitted by the Islamic Republic of Iran in document 


GC(XXXIV)/COM.5/90 was adopted with the deletion of operative paragraph 4. 


66. Mr. ALER (Sweden) said that he had voted in favour of the draft 
resolution mainly because it did not insist on reverting to the issue at the 


next session of the General Conference and because it upheld Sweden's view 


that the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva was the most suitable forum for 


discussing the matter. The resolution contained much of the language of the 


documents of the Fourth NPT Review Conference. However, since those documents 


had been the result of a compromise, Sweden's views on several issues were not 


covered by the text of the resolution. 


67. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) pointed out that, although his delegation had 
voted in support of the Iranian resolution, it none the less had serious 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 15 


reservations about its operative paragraph 3. It was inconsistent to refer to 
nuclear facilities under construction, since "nuclear facility" was a 
well-defined term in safeguards terminology. His delegation's positive vote 
was based on that understanding of the term. 


68. Mr. LOOSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) said that, although he 
agreed with the resolution in general terms, he had been obliged to abstain 
because, in his view, other United Nations bodies provided the proper forum 
for discussing the matter at hand and because it was not appropriate for the 
General Conference of the Agency to advise the United Nations Security Council. 
69. Mr. ROSALES ARIAS (Cuba) said he had abstained primarily because 
the resolution only covered safeguarded installations. Using the concept of 
nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes would have been more in the 
spirit of the present resolution and that adopted at the previous General 
Conference, which his country had also sponsored. 
70. Mr. LORENZINI CORREA (Chile) said that his reason for abstaining 
had been the same, namely that the resolution was confined to safeguarded 
installations. He stressed, however, that it did have positive elements 
similar to those in the earlier resolutions on the subject co-sponsored by the 
Latin American Group. 
71. Mr. SOLTANIEH (Islamic Republic of Iran) expressed his sincere 
gratitude to all who had supported his delegation's resolution, which 
reflected its concern for the maintenance of peace and prosperity throughout 
the world, the health of mankind and the protection of the environment. 
The Agency's programme and budget for 1991 and 1992 


72. Draft resolutions A, B and C in Annex IV to Part I of document 
GC(XXXIV)/917 were adopted. 
Contribution of Namibia towards the 1990 Regular Budget 


73. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished Namibia to be assessed for a zero 
contribution towards the Agency's Regular Budget for 1990. 
74. It was so decided. 

GC(XXX1V)/OR.332 
page 16 


Scale of assessment of Members* contributions for 1991 


75. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXIV)/925 and that, in adopting it, the Conference approve the 
footnote on the first page of the Annex to the draft resolution as shown in 
document GC(XXXIV)/925/Add.1. 
76  It was so decided. 
The financing of safeguards 


77. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/941 was adopted. 
The financing of technical assistance 
78. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/947 was adopted. 
Plan for producing potable water economically 
79. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/945 was adopted. 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
80. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/951/Rev.2 was adopted. 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 
81. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/940 was adopted. 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole 
82. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/943 was adopted. 
Executing agency agreement between the United Nations Development Programme 
and the International Atomic Energy Agency 


83. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the Conference wished to approve the draft Executing Agency Agreement 
contained in the Attachment to document GC(XXXIV)/923. 
84. It was so decided. 
Co-operation agreements with intergovernmental organizations 
85. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the Conference wished to approve the conclusion of the proposed 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 17 


co-operation agreement with the Arab Atomic Energy Agency set forth in Annex 1 
to document GC(XXXIV)/924. 


86. It was so decided. 
Rule and policy on the appointment of the Director General 


87. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXIV)/946 was adopted. 
88. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the Conference also wished to request the Director General to transmit 
to the Board of Governors the summary records of the discussion on the item in 
the Committee of the Whole. 
89. It was so decided 
SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXXIII)/RES/524; GC(XXXIV)/942; 
GC(XXXIV)/INF/290) 


90. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that the item in question 
had been included in the agenda pursuant to resolution GC(XXXIIl)/RES/524 
adopted by the General Conference during its thirty-third regular session. 
Pursuant to the request made in that resolution the Director General had 
reported to the current session of the Conference in his opening statement. 
In addition, the Conference had before it document GC(XXXIV)/INF/290, 
containing a statement by the South African Foreign Minister circulated at the 
request of the Ambassador of South Africa, and document GC(XXXIV)/942, 
containing a draft resolution submitted by the African Group which he would 
invite the delegate of Sudan to introduce. 
91. Mr. GAILI (Sudan), speaking on behalf of the African Group, said 
that South Africa's nuclear capabilities were a direct threat to Africa and 
had long been a subject of discussion in the United Nations and the Agency. 
The African countries wished to achieve stability in order to promote economic 
and social development, but such stability was rendered impossible by the 
nuclear threat of South Africa. In that situation, all African countries 
were of the view that Africa should become a denuclearized zone. 
92. South Africa, by its refusal to comply with resolutions of the United 
Nations General Assembly and the IAEA, had shown its unwillingness to adhere 
to the principles and objectives of the United Nations Charter and the Statute 
of the Agency. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 18 


93. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIV)/942 was 
substantially similar to the resolution adopted by the Conference's 
thirty-third regular session in 1989 (GC(XXXIII)/RES/524), though there were 
some amendments - the wording of the draft resolution was milder, but the 
substance was the same. The more conciliatory note of the new draft 
resolution had been introduced in the face of the political changes taking 
place in South Africa and in an attempt to encourage mutual understanding and 
co-operation. Thus, the phrase "vehemently condemns" in operative 
paragraph 1 of the 1989 resolution had been replaced by the word "deplores", 
the phrase "persistent refusal to comply" in the same paragraph had been 
replaced by the word "non-compliance", and the phrase "refusal to adhere to 
the principles and purposes of the United Nations" had been substituted by the 
phrase "non-adherence to the principles and purposes of the United Nations". 
94. In conclusion, he urged that a decision be taken on the recommendation 
concerning the suspension of South Africa from the exercise of the privileges 
and rights of membership in accordance with Article XIX B of the Statute which 
was contained in operative paragraph 4 of the Board of Governors resolution 
reproduced in Attachment 1 to document GC(XXXI)/807, and expressed the hope 
that the new draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIV)/942 could be 
adopted by consensus. If not, he would request that a roll-call vote be 
taken on it. 
95. Mr. CHIKELU (Nigeria) voiced his support for the draft resolution 
and associated himself with the statement made by the delegate of Sudan on 
behalf of the African Group. 
96. There had been high hopes before the current meeting that South Africa 
would join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 
However, it had not, nor had it abolished apartheid. He took note of the 
statement by the South African Foreign Minister contained in document 
GC(XXXIV)/INF/290; that document was interesting but did not go far enough. 
Pressure must continue to be applied on South Africa until it abolished 
apartheid and subjected its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. 
97. For those reasons, he urged all delegations present to send a clear 
message to the South African Government by adopting the draft resolution. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 19 


98. Mr. SINAI (India), speaking as the Chairman of the Group of 77, 
said that the draft resolution also had the support of the Latin American and 
Asian groups. 
99. There were positive signs in South Africa of improvements, and hints of 
a possible end of apartheid, but the recent acts of violence by the security 
forces were cause for concern. There were also signs of a shift in policy in 
the nuclear area, but the issue must remain on the General Conference's agenda 
until such time as South Africa had actually placed its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. The milder wording of the draft resolution was 
intended as a conciliatory move in the face of the political changes taking 
place in South Africa. 
100. Speaking on behalf of the Indian Government, he said that his country 
continued to stress the fact that safeguards were voluntary and could not be 
imposed on a State. 
101. Mr. MBODJ (Senegal) said that South Africa's nuclear capabilities 
were a threat to the whole African continent and to international security and 
peace generally. He therefore urged all States to vote in favour of the 
draft resolution. Any other course of action could only encourage South 
Africa to continue with its attempt to develop a nuclear capability. 
102. Mr. MAHIGA (United Republic of Tanzania) associated himself with 
the statements made by previous speakers. The new draft resolution was an 
improvement on that from the preceding year. It was moderate and 
realistic. Though there were positive signs of political changes inside 
South Africa, pressure had to be maintained until the South African Government 
demonstrated that its avowed intentions to improve the situation were serious. 
103. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXlV)/942 was the same in almost all 
respects as the resolution on South Africa which had been submitted to 
the 1989 session of the General Conference. Though he had already explained 
in detail in previous years the United States reasons for voting against that 
kind of resolution, he wished to reiterate those reasons briefly. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 20 


104. First of all, the preamble referred to violations of international law 
and the United Nations Charter. Such matters were properly the concern of the 
United Nations Security Council and were beyond the mandate and competence of 
the IAEA. Although operative paragraph 2 did not propose an immediate 
suspension of South Africa from the exercise of its privileges and rights as a 
Member of the Agency, it did call for a decision on the issue at the next 
session of the General Conference. The United States could not support such a 
provision for a number of reasons - firstly, any attempt to exclude a 
Member State or limit its participation in the Agency except as specifically 
authorized by the Agency's Statute would undermine the principle of 
universality of membership in international organizations. It would also 
compromise the Agency's ability to promote the peaceful and safe uses of 
nuclear energy, as that objective could only be met if all nations with 
nuclear energy programmes could participate in Agency activities. Secondly, 
Article XIX.B of the Agency's Statute provided for suspension of a 
Member State only if it had persistently violated the Statute or an agreement 
concluded pursuant to it which South Africa had not done. Thirdly, the 
Agency's safeguards system was a vital component of the non-proliferation 
regime. Any steps which might reduce the scope of safeguards, make their 
extension more difficult, or call into question their continued application in 
any country should therefore be avoided. Fourthly, safeguards were voluntary 
measures and to treat them as sanctions or penalties could only undermine the 
common objective of preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. 


105. His country's opposition to the draft resolution should in no way be 
interpreted as a weakening of its support for NPT. The United States, 
together with the other NPT depositary States, had been engaged in intensive 
discussions with the South African Government since December 1989. Those 
discussions had brought the South African Government closer to acceding to the 
Treaty and had produced related positive decisions. For example, South Africa 
had decommissioned its pilot enrichment plant in February 1990. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 21 


106. He welcomed the statement by South Africa's Minister for Foreign 
Affairs, circulated in document GC(XXXIV)/INF/290, in which the Government of 
South Africa expressed its interest in joining NPT and concluding a 
comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency. Nevertheless, he remained 
disappointed that South Africa had not yet taken a final decision to adhere to 
the Treaty. He hoped the South African Government would start discussions 
with the Agency without delay. He also encouraged other countries in southern 
Africa to accede to NPT, since accession by all States in the region would 
demonstrate that they wished to join the growing international trend away from 
confrontation and towards co-operation, disarmament and non-proliferation. It 
would furthermore facilitate the establishment of a nuclear-weapons-free zone 
in the region. 
107. Mr. ABDEL MONEIM (Egypt) said that his country had already stated 
its interest in establishing a nuclear-weapons-free zone in Africa, which was 
only possible if all States in the region placed their nuclear facilities 
under safeguards. He welcomed South Africa's avowed intention to join NPT, 
but noted that it could not set conditions for its accession to that Treaty in 
the form of demanding that other States in the region also accede to NPT. 
Many countries bordering on South Africa did not even have nuclear 
facilities. In conclusion, he voiced the opposition of his Government to the 
system of apartheid and urged all those present to vote for the draft 
resolution. 
108. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no more speakers, invited 
the Conference to vote on the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXIV)/942. As had been requested by the delegate of Sudan, the vote would 
be taken by roll-call. 
109. Bangladesh, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon 
to vote first. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 22 


110. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, 
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, 
Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, 
Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, 
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian Arab 
Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, 
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


Against: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, 
France, German Democratic Republic, Federal Republic of 
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America. 


Abstaining: Czechoslovakia, Holy See, Hungary. 


111. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXIV)/942 was adopted by 
54 votes to 26, with 3 abstentions. 


112. Mr. TALIANI (Italy), speaking on behalf of the European Community, 
said that, although the position of the countries of the European Community 


with regard to apartheid was well known, they also opposed the suspension of 


Member States and had therefore been unable to support the draft resolution. 


He also noted the recent positive political developments in South Africa, 


including their avowed intention to sign NPT. 


113. Mr. WILSON (Australia) said that he had voted against the draft 
resolution because his delegation felt there were insufficient grounds to 


suspend South Africa from the exercise of its rights and privileges of 


membership under Article XIX of the Statute. Furthermore, Australia was 


committed to the principle of universal membership of international 


organizations and was not prepared to join in an action inconsistent with that 


principle. It was regrettable that, despite several pronouncements of 


intention to adhere to NPT, South Africa had still not signed the Treaty. 



GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 23 


However, he hoped that the Foreign Minister's recent statement would lead to 
swift acceptance of NPT by all States in the region. He reminded those 
present that South Africa was not alone amongst the IAEA's Member States in 
not joining NPT and not accepting full-scope safeguards. Suspension of 
South Africa on that basis would therefore constitute selective application of 
non-proliferation principles; it would also isolate South Africa from 
international nuclear dialogue, which could be counter-productive. 
Australia's opposition to the resolution in no way represented a diminution of 
Australia's abhorrence of the policy of apartheid. 


114. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that he had been unable to support 
the draft resolution because it ran counter to the principle of universal 
membership of international organizations. 
115. Mr. LEE (Canada) said that his country persisted in its deep 
abhorrence of the racial policies of the South African Government and was 
firmly committed to increasing pressure on South Africa through economic 
sanctions. Canada had repeatedly urged South Africa to accede to NPT, and had 
made it clear to the South African Government that NPT was an end in itself 
and that adherence to that Treaty had to be unconditional. Accession by South 
Africa would not end Canadian sanctions, nor would it lead to the provision of 
nuclear co-operation. Nevertheless, Canada remained firmly committed to the 
principle of universal membership of international organizations and had 
therefore been unable to support the draft resolution, since the suspension of 
a Member State might do great damage to the aims and effectiveness of the 
Agency, particularly with regard to non-proliferation and safeguards. 
116. Mr. CSERVENY (Hungary) said that his country was a committed 
supporter of non-proliferation and urged all States which had not yet done so 
to adhere to NPT. Hungary therefore shared the general concern expressed in 
the draft resolution with regard to South Africa's nuclear capabilities. He 
hoped that the intentions voiced by South Africa's Foreign Minister in his 
statement would lead in the near future to discussions with the Agency 
concerning adherence to the Treaty. Clearly, important changes were taking 
place within South Africa, though much remained to be done. Regrettably, 

GG(XXXIV)/OR.332 


page 24 


however, the draft resolution had not mentioned those improvements. The 
Hungarian delegation had therefore felt unable to support the draft resolution 
and had accordingly abstained. 


117. Mr. BROOKS (New Zealand) said that his country, too, was totally 
opposed to the system of apartheid in South Africa and continued to voice its 
opposition in all appropriate forums. The fact that South Africa and other 
countries had not yet undertaken a legally binding commitment not to acquire 
nuclear weapons and had not placed their peaceful nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards was also cause for grave concern. However, the suspension 
of South Africa from the Agency was not a remedy, since only countries which 
were members of the IAEA could be encouraged to comply with the Agency's 
principles. New Zealand firmly supported the principle of universality of 
membership of international organizations and had therefore been unable to 
support the draft resolution. In conclusion, he urged all States to adhere to 
NPT and to conclude safeguards agreements with the Agency under that Treaty. 
118. Mr. ORNSTEIN (Argentina) said that his country had voted for the 
draft resolution because of South Africa's persistent violation of the United 
Nations Charter. However, it was against making safeguards compulsory. 
119. Mr. GAlLI (Sudan) thanked all those who had voted in favour of the 
draft resolution. 
120. The DIRECTOR GENERAL assured the Conference that he would do his 
utmost to implement the actions requested of him in the draft resolution. He 
also reminded those present that the statement issued by the South African 
Foreign Minister had suggested that the South African Government was ready to 
start talks with the Agency on the conclusion of a comprehensive safeguards 
agreement to cover all nuclear facilities in the country. He emphasized that 
the Secretariat was ready to commence such talks at any time. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1991 (GC(XXXIV)/934/Rev.3) 


121. The PRESIDENT said that by 5.30 p.m. on 20 September 1990 the 
voluntary contributions pledged by Member States to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund had reached a total of US $16 353 267. Since then, 
Belgium had pledged $125 392 and Ghana $5000, which took the total amount 
pledged for 1991 to $16 483 659. 

GC(XXXIV)/OR.332 
page 25 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


122. Mr. ERRERA (France), speaking on behalf of all delegations 
present, thanked the President for the authority and elegance with which he 
had directed the discussions and assisted the harmonious progress of the 
Conference's work. Everyone was aware of the symbolism underlying the 
designation as President of the representative of a country whose attachment 
to liberty and whose respect of law had recently achieved fulfilment; and 
that at a time when all were convinced that the solidarity of all 
Member States was more than ever necessary if the Agency was to achieve its 
goals. 
123. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegate of France for his kind words. 
It had been an honour and a privilege for him to serve as President of the 
General Conference at its thirty-fourth regular session. He was grateful to 
all delegations for the co-operation extended to him during the conduct of the 
Conference's business, which had involved a number of problems that could only 
be dealt with thanks to that co-operation. 
124. He thanked the members of the General Committee and the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole for their assistance. He likewise thanked the 
Secretary of the General Conference, who had been of great assistance to him 
in his work. 
125. Finally, on behalf of the Conference, he thanked the Austrian 
authorities and the City of Vienna for their traditional hospitality and for 
the excellent facilities provided for the fourth time at the Austria Center 
Vienna. He also thanked the Director General and all his staff for their 
support, which had enabled the Conference to complete its work successfully. 
126. Before closing the session, he invited delgations to observe one minute 
of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation, in accordance with Rule 48 of 
the Rules of Procedure. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


127. The PRESIDENT declared the thirty-fourth regular session of the 
General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m. 



