GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
8 January 1992 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 16 September 1991 at 10.25 a.m. 
Temporary President: Mr. VAJDA (Hungary) 
President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 
Opening of the session 1-5 
1 Election of officers and appointment 6 - 22 
of the General Committee 
2 Applications for membership of the 23 - 25 
Agency 
3 Message from the Secretary-General 26 - 31 
of the United Nations 
4 Statement by the Director General 32 87 
6 Voluntary contributions to the 88 - 91 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1992 

[*] GC(XXXV)/952, GC(XXXV)/952/Add.1 and CG(XXXV)/952/Add.2/Rev.1 


8932e/831e 
91-4582 



GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 2 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


provisional 
agenda* 


General debate and annual report for 1990 92 - 186 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Saudi Arabia 96 - 113 
United States of America 114 - 140 
Japan 141 - 161 
Spain 162 - 185 
Yemen 186 


Abbreviations used in this record 


ASSET Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
EEC European Economic Community 
INSAG International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group 
IRS Incident Reporting System 
ITER International Themonuclear Experimental Reactor 
NBA Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
NUSS Nuclear Safety Standards 
OAU Organization of African Unity 
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OSART Operational Safety Review Team 
R&D Research and Development 
RADWASS Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
RBMK High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
START Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor (Soviet Union) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 3 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirty-fifth regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, after welcoming all the participants, 
said that the Agency too had been affected by the upheavals of the previous 
year, and Member States had more numerous and more serious causes for concern 
than ever before. However, in conjunction with those difficulties there were 
also opportunities to be seized, and the Agency should be capable of focusing 
attention on both. Given the importance of those new problems for the future, 
the Agency would have to show patience, tolerance and determination to resolve 
them. 
4. He also welcomed Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia and the Republic of Yemen, 
which were making applications for membership of the Agency. There was no 
doubt that their applications would be accepted, and that they would bring new 
vitality to the Agency, particularly during the present session of the General 
Conference. Indeed, the Agency would be assuming significant responsibilities 
in the years to come. Among other things it would have to absorb the impact 
of the sometimes dramatic events which had recently taken place, and face up 
to their consequences. To that end, it could establish the principle of 
maintaining a balance between affirmative action which would enable it to make 
good use of the opportunities offered by political events, and the constant 
need to consider the consequences of the action taken and to establish it on a 
firm foundation. 
5. Among the tasks which the Secretariat and the Director General had 
accomplished since the last session of the General Conference, special mention 
should be made of the promotion of nuclear safety - including the 
International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power which had just taken 
place - and the activities assigned to the Agency by the Security Council in 
the resolutions adopted following the Gulf war. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 4 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


6. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
7. Mr. PONCE CABALLERO (Bolivia), speaking on behalf of the Latin 
American and Caribbean Group, proposed Mr. Santana Carvalho (Brazil) as 
President of the thirty-fifth regular session of the General Conference. 
Mr. Santana Carvalho was President of the National Nuclear Energy Commission 
of Brazil and Governor for Brazil on the Agency's Board of Governors. 
8. Mr. Santana Carvalho (Brazil) was elected President by acclamation. 
9. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, on his own behalf and on behalf of all 
the delegates, congratulated Mr. Santana Carvalho on his election and wished 
him every success. 
Mr. Santana Carvalho (Brazil) took the Chair. 


10. The PRESIDENT said he was deeply moved by his election as 
President of the thirty-fifth session of the General Conference. He would 
endeavour to ensure its success and, with the collaboration of all present, to 
work successfully through the extensive agenda. 
11. The attention given by the media to the nuclear option for electricity 
generation had always been irregular. That was partly due to random events 
such as scientific and technological breakthroughs or nuclear accidents, but 
also to more perennial elements such as the availability and price of oil as 
well as environmental protection. That last factor, which had been one of the 
more serious public concerns in the past few years, played a decisive role in 
all aspects of planning and design of energy programmes. 
12. The growing concern about environmental contamination caused by the use 
of fossil fuels for electricity generation had stimulated new interest in the 
nuclear alternative. However, there were still significant problems to be 
resolved, including those associated with the effects of radioactivity, 
particularly from radioactive waste. The Agency was the first to recognize 
the importance of those problems and to try to solve them, in view of their 
consequences for future generations. At the same time, if nuclear power was 
to be more widely accepted, work on the development of safer reactors would 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 5 


also be required. Any breakthough in those two areas would have a decisive 
influence on public acceptance of nuclear power as a safe, reliable and 
environmentally appropriate alternative for electricity generation. 


13. In some countries, the main benefits of nuclear energy came from the 
use of radioisotopes in areas such as medicine and health, hydrology, 
agriculture and stock-breeding. Those benefits were of interest to all 
countries, whether industrialized or not, as they favoured both development 
and the improvement of living conditions. It was in that context that he 
viewed the Agency's role in promoting nuclear energy. 
14. The Agency's activities during 1990 displayed characteristic quality 
and seriousness, and the annual report presented them in a very attractive 
manner. Its listing of activities could be considered as an invitation to 
Member States to participate in as many areas as possible in the year to come, 
since the activities in question would undoubtedly maintain the same level of 
quality. If the Agency was to fulfil its mandate successfully, it should as 
far as possible provide access for specialists from developing countries to 
the courses, seminars, symposia and training activities which it promoted. 
15. The international community also expected the Agency to disseminate as 
widely as possible the work it carried out in collaboration with countries 
advanced in nuclear safety and radiological protection. He noted with 
satisfaction that under item 11 of the agenda, the General Conference would be 
examining a series of initiatives which were of great interest to the 
international community as a whole. Their publication and a detailed 
explanation of their importance to the public could stimulate interest in 
using nuclear energy. 
16. Concern about liability for nuclear damage was gradually leading to 
recognition of the need for a more effective international nuclear safety 
system. That was due, to a great extent, to the work of the group which was 
meeting to consider that question under the aegis of the Agency. It was 
important that the system established should be flexible in order to take 
account of differing national positions on the subject. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 6 


17. The contribution which the Agency was making to full implementation of 
the conventions on early notification and on mutual assistance through the 
technical services it provided to Member States was one example of how 
effective it could be in promoting nuclear power. The Agency had contributed 
to technical and scientific improvements in nuclear installation performance 
and to an improved exchange of information among Member States and between 
Member States and the Agency, all of which facilitated a rapid response that 
would lessen the effects of any incidents. 
18. Such a positive scenario for international co-operation in the years to 
come was feasible, but it did not preclude the need for the Agency to continue 
its careful work on another part of the mandate entrusted to it by Member 
States, namely to verify that nuclear materials were not diverted from 
peaceful uses. Providing safeguards for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
throughout the world was a noble task which deserved the support of all 
Member States, the aims being to ensure that international co-operation was 
not unduly restricted but at the same time to promote mutual confidence and 
enhanced scientific and technological interchange. 
19. In conclusion, he recalled that the Agency's role was essentially 
technical and should not be clouded by political controversy. Developments in 
international affairs had placed the Agency at a historic turning point, and 
it no longer seemed out of the question that still more ambitious goals might 
be attainable. The time was perhaps approaching when the moral and ethical 
implications of nuclear energy would have to be considered, something which 
could lead to the establishment of a universally applicable code of behaviour. 
20. Mr. RI0B0 (Chile) said that members of the Group of 77 were 
displeased by the lack of courtesy to which they had been subjected: indeed, 
they had not yet completed their own deliberations when those of the 
Conference had already begun. As they had been unable to attend the beginning 
of the session, they were naturally wondering what had occurred. He 
nevertheless congratulated Mr. Santana Carvalho on his election. 
21. The PRESIDENT explained that even as matters were the session had 
begun approximately half an hour late to enable all groups to complete their 
work. Consideration of the provisional agenda was now about to begin. He 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 7 


recalled that in accordance with Rules 34 and 40 of the Rules of Procedure, 
the General Conference had to elect eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole, and five additional members of the General Committee. 
From consultations which had taken place, it appeared that all regional groups 
had already agreed on their candidates to serve on the General Committee. He 
therefore proposed, under Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, that the 
delegates of Cuba, Germany, Japan, Norway, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America be 
elected as Vice-Presidents, Mr. Wilson (Australia) as Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole and, under Rule 40, the delegates of Byelorussia, 
Canada, Egypt, Lebanon and the Netherlands as additional members of the 
General Committee. 


22. The President's proposals were accepted. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(XXXV)/959, 973, 974 and 975) 


23. The PRESIDENT announced that there would be a vote on the draft 
resolutions contained in documents GC(XXXV)/959, GC(XXXV)/973, GC(XXXV)/974 
and GC(XXXV)/975 relating to applications for membership of the Agency from 
the Republics of Yemen, Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia, respectively. 
24. The draft resolutions contained in documents GC(XXXV)/959, 
GC(XXXV)/973. GC(XXXV)/974 and GC(XXXV)/975 were adopted by acclamation. 
25. The PRESIDENT welcomed the fact that an increasing number of 
countries were applying for membership of the Agency. On behalf of the 
General Conference, he extended a warm welcome to the four new Members, who 
would undoubtedly play a constructive role in the Agency. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


26. Mr. GIACOMELLI (Representative of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations) said that he would take the opportunity, as Executive Director 
of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme, to draw a parallel 
between drugs and nuclear energy: used with discretion, both represented 
significant benefits for humanity; used in the opposite way, they could also 
be tools of mass destruction. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 8 


27. Conveying to the General Conference a message from the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, he recalled that, since the last session of the 
Conference, the world had witnessed a rapid succession of dramatic events 
which could not fail to introduce a qualitatively different framework for 
international relations. The Cold War that had overshadowed the whole area of 
arms limitation and disarmament was a thing of the past. The experience 
gained from bilateral treaties on intermediate and shorter-range nuclear 
weapons and on strategic nuclear weapons, and from the milestone treaty on 
conventional forces in Europe, had moved the world into an era of growing 
recognition of the need for transparency and an effective system of 
verification as cornerstones in arms limitation and disarmament agreements. 
28. The recent conflict in the Persian Gulf and its aftermath, while 
underscoring the interconnection between confidence-building measures on the 
one hand and security on the other, presented the international community with 
the challenge of finding effective means to halt the proliferation of nuclear 
and other weapons of mass destruction. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which had led a number of States to take initiatives 
and make declarations, and also the recent adoption by other States of 
regional measures of verification and transparency in support of pledges to 
renounce nuclear weapons, reflected a deepened understanding and concern for 
the implications of nuclear weapons proliferation, and the need to prevent it. 
29. The violations by Iraq of its safeguards agreement with the Agency, and 
of its obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty, had also given 
prominence to the fundamental importance of ensuring a safeguards system in 
which States could have full confidence. 
30. The role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in that regard was 
crucial. Not only did States have a need to be reassured that no clandestine 
nuclear weapons programmes were under way in other States in their own region 
or elsewhere, but such reassurance was also likely to be essential for 
continued co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear technology - for energy 
production, pest control, crop improvement, medicine and hydrology, and for 
the related technology transfers. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 9 


31. The role of the Agency in promoting safety and sound management in the 
peaceful applications of nuclear technology had been fully recognized. The 
task was now to devise improved measures of verification which would build 
confidence and allay fears, safeguard peaceful applications and above all 
reliably detect non-compliance, wherever and whenever it occurred. That 
challenge should be met with vigour and with the necessary resources. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


32. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that in the present fast-changing world 
international organizations had to be flexible and resilient to meet the 
changes facing their members. The Agency had demonstrated its capacity to 
deal effectively with nuclear questions needing international action. 
33. For example, when it had been necessary to conduct an international 
professional examination of the causes of the Chernobyl accident in 1986, the 
Agency had met that need within months by holding a large accident review 
conference. Two major conventions, on early notification of nuclear accidents 
and on emergency assistance, had been drafted in record time and promptly 
adopted. 
34. Over the past two years the Agency had been engaged in an international 
assessment of the radiological consequences of the accident and the Soviet 
responses to them. Together with several other organizations, the Agency had 
sent nearly 40 technical missions to the areas affected in order to obtain the 
data for scientifically based conclusions in those controversial matters. The 
conclusions had been submitted to open discussion at an international 
conference held in Vienna during the past summer. 
35. Following the Chernobyl accident, it had become evident that the 
international nuclear safety activities existing at the time would have to be 
transformed into an international nuclear safety regime that could ensure a 
high level of nuclear safety everywhere. That had led the Agency to expand 
its safety-related programme, and nuclear safety policymakers had recently 
charted a new phase of that expansion at a conference held under the auspices 
of the Agency in Vienna. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 10 


36. Developments in Eastern and Central Europe, including the Soviet Union, 
had led to a strong interest in examining and upgrading nuclear power safety 
in that region. Through the WWER-440/230 project, the Agency was responding 
to that interest by focusing attention on the oldest type of reactor used 
there. He saw the Soviet Union's very recent suggestion that the safety of 
RBMK reactors should also be made the subject of an Agency project as evidence 
of the success of the WWER-440/230 project. 
37. Worldwide concern about the environment and development, which would be 
manifested the following year at the United Nations Conference on the 
Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro, had prompted the Agency to 
consider how its own activities met that concern. It had in fact become clear 
that a large number of the Agency's development co-operation programmes, 
especially in agriculture and industry, were of direct benefit not only to 
development but also to the environment. For instance, nuclear techniques 
often afforded the best means of monitoring the presence and concentration of 
various pollutants. The Monaco laboratory had built up an important database 
from its very considerable experience in monitoring pollution in the Persian 
Gulf and was currently playing an important role in the international efforts 
regarding the Gulf. 
38. In order to provide relevant data for the growing international 
discussion about energy and the environment, the Agency, in co-operation with 
other organizations, had organized an objective comparative analysis of the 
health and environmental impacts of different ways of generating electricity. 
A scientific symposium had been held on that subject in Helsinki in May, and 
it was hoped that its conclusions would be noted during the negotiations on a 
framework convention on climate change and at the Rio de Janeiro conference by 
those dealing with the greenhouse effect and other environmental problems for 
which energy uses played an important role. 
39. The Helsinki conclusions showed that nuclear power could help to 
reconcile the world's demand for more energy, especially electricity, with the 
need to protect the environment. It was, above all, the public perception of 
the risk of nuclear power which placed restraints on its wider use. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 11 


40. The Agency's work in Iraq was another example of its readiness to 
respond to new challenges. In April 1991, the Security Council had asked the 
Agency to carry out activities aimed at denying Iraq the capability to develop 
nuclear weapons. That request had confronted the Agency with completely new 
tasks. Although the burden of those tasks was substantial, the Agency had 
been able to perform them professionally and economically with a very small 
Agency Action Team directing and organizing inspections and with financial 
resources made available by the United Nations. 
41. Following the uncovering and mapping of Iraq's uranium enrichment 
activities through Agency inspections and Iraqi declarations, the Agency was 
now faced with the challenge of strengthening its safeguards system. That a 
clandestine programme for uranium enrichment had not been spotted earlier by 
Agency safeguards was hardly surprising. It had not even been spotted by 
those with access to information obtained through satellites and intelligence 
activities. Nor was it surprising that the Agency's safeguards inspections, 
designed to detect a diversion of significant quantities of plutonium - of the 
order of a kilogram - at declared facilities, had not detected the undeclared 
separation of a few grams. The world, however, was less interested in 
explanations than in action to strengthen the detection capacity of the Agency 
through the application of full-scope safeguards. Such action was under way. 
42. Those brief descriptions of action undertaken by the Agency would 
perhaps suffice to show that Member States possessed in the Agency a flexible 
and resourceful mechanism capable of responding to the changing challenges in 
the nuclear world. He felt bound to add that the only thing which did not 
appear to be flexible was the budget, which had, in real terms, remained 
static since 1985. 
43. He went on to examine in greater detail the subject of 
non-proliferation and safeguards, and the Agency's work under Security Council 
resolutions 687 and 707. 
44. At its regular session in 1990 the General Conference had taken a keen 
interest in the many innovative proposals which had emerged at the Fourth NPT 
Review Conference. Those proposals, and also other ideas which had been put 
forward after the revelations in Iraq, had been analysed in the Secretariat 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 12 


and discussed by the Board during the past year. It was clear that the time 
was ripe for adjustment and change. The general picture of non-proliferation 
was by no means gloomy. The disappearance of the ideological struggle and 
arms race between East and West, the beginning of substantial reductions in 
the nuclear arsenals of the superpowers and the very substantial disarmament 
measures within Europe all combined to make the nuclear weapons option less 
relevant between the great powers. Armed conflicts between those powers 


seemed extremely implausible in the world that was emerging, and the response 
to Iraq's aggression against Kuwait showed that collective action could be 
forged within the United Nations. The new climate and the need to direct 
resources to development had already borne some fruit in the area of 
non-proliferation. In a momentous development, Argentina and Brazil were 
opening up their nuclear installations to each other and to comprehensive 
Agency safeguards, the details of which were being negotiated. The prospects 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty coming into force for all of Latin America and the 
Caribbean were thereby greatly improving. 


45. For a number of years, concern had been expressed about South Africa's 
nuclear programme. The winds of change had now swept away much of apartheid's 
legal infrastructure, and on 10 July 1991 the South African Government had 
taken the step of adhering to NPT. Discussions which had taken place with the 
Agency before that decision was taken had led to a very rapid accord on the 
text of a standard NPT-type safeguards agreement, which had been approved by 
the Board of Governors the previous week. The agreement had been signed that 
very morning and had come into immediate effect. The first Agency inspectors 
would start going to South Africa in October. Some questions had been raised 
as to how the Agency could feel confident that South Africa's report on the 
initial inventory of nuclear material would be complete. Such questions arose 
each time a State with a substantial nuclear programme accepted full-scope 
safeguards. In response, the Agency would have to do what it could to ensure 
completeness. In the case in point, the Secretariat and South Africa were 
discussing a number of measures which could help provide evidence of the 
completeness of the initial inventory, notably an examination of the original 
production records of South Africa's enrichment plants. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 13 


46. Now that South Africa had become a party to NPT and opened up its 
nuclear installations to Agency inspection, there was room for some optimism 
that aspirations in Africa for a nuclear-weapon-free continent might be 
realized. Those aspirations had been discussed in Addis Ababa earlier in the 
year under UN and OAU auspices. 
47. He could also report to the Conference that, after long negotiations 
between the Secretariat and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, a 
standard NPT-type safeguards agreement had been finalized in July. It had 
been approved by the Board of Governors the previous week, and he had been 
authorized by the Board to sign it on behalf of the Agency. It would enter 
into force as soon as it had been signed and ratified by the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, which, it was hoped, would be soon. Even before 
the agreement entered into force the Agency was ready to receive any relevant 
information, such as the initial inventory of facilities and material. 
Receipt of such information would facilitate early full implementation of the 
agreement, in which there was widespread interest. 
48. The declarations by the nuclear-weapon States France and China that 
they had decided, in principle, to adhere to NPT gave further impetus to 
non-proliferation efforts. If the current detente and co-operation between 
the nuclear-weapon States continued and further nuclear disarmament was 
achieved, it did not seem altogether unrealistic to hope for a universal 
non-proliferation regime by 1995. In that context it seemed appropriate to 
turn to the question of safeguards in the Middle East. 
49. In resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/526, adopted by the General Conference 
in 1990, the Director General had been requested "... to deploy further 
efforts in continuing the consultations with the States concerned in the 
Middle East area with a view to applying Agency safeguards to all nuclear 
installations in the area ... and to report ... to the Board of Governors and 
to the General Conference ...". 
50. A great deal had happened in the Middle East since September 1990. 
Security Council resolution 687 had established a comprehensive regime for the 
inspection of nuclear activities in Iraq and entrusted the inspection task to 
the Agency. That resolution expressly referred to the goal of establishing a 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 14 


zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and identified 
the restrictions on nuclear activities in Iraq and the monitoring of 
compliance with those restrictions as steps towards that goal. 


51. Furthermore, in the Middle East arms control initiative announced by 
President Bush in June 1991 a number of ideas had been advanced - as also in 
the initiatives by President Mitterrand and President Mubarak - for halting 
the spread of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, in the 
Middle East. President Bush had declared among other things his continuing 
support for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region and had 
expressed the belief that the Agency could play an important role as a result 
of its past safeguards experience in the Middle East and its more recent 
experience in implementing Security Council resolution 687. 
52. In any discussion of that question it should be kept in mind that 
safeguards presupposed arms limitation commitments which would have to be 
verified. Such commitments were a political matter, and most probably also a 
matter for negotiation between the interested parties. The Agency was not 
called upon to give advice in that regard. Nevertheless, it might not be 
premature for the Agency to examine verification concepts of various kinds. 
That was, in fact, what the Agency had tried to do, and it was worth drawing 
the Conference's attention to some of the essential points in that regard. 
53. In the Middle East verification measures might need to be more 
intensive and wider in scope than existing Agency safeguards. Some mutual 
Inspection measures might also need to be included in order to give the 
parties maximum confidence. Verification in the Middle East could not be 
limited to declared installations and material. 
54. He had already expressed the view that mutual confidence, which was the 
aim of verification, might also emerge from co-operation. Nuclear research 
and development programmes, including fuel cycle centres, if any were planned 
in the region, might be established and operated by a joint organization, as 
had been done in Europe. He had also called attention to the fact that all 
cases in which nuclear installations had been the target of armed attacks had 
taken place in the Middle East, and that any arms control arrangements in that 
region would have to contain commitments against such attacks. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 15 


55. Although the Agency inspections in Iraq had been carried out pursuant 
to a Security Council resolution under Chapter VII of the UN Charter and were 
not special inspections under an NPT safeguards agreement, the lesson which 
had been learned in Iraq, where Agency inspections and subsequent Iraqi 
declarations had revealed an unknown major enrichment programme, was that, in 
order to make special inspections under full-scope safeguards effective, three 
conditions needed to be fulfilled. 
56. Firstly, the inspectorate must have access to Information from other 
sources besides the State in which the inspections were to be performed, 
notably from satellites and intelligence organizations. Without such 
information, inspectors would not know where to look. He saw no insuperable 
difficulty in establishing a special unit to receive and evaluate such 
information on a continuous basis in the Agency. The accuracy of the 
information would have to be checked before the Director General decided 
whether he was justified in setting in motion the procedures for a special 
inspection. 
57. Secondly, the inspectorate must have the right of timely and 
unrestricted access to any location which, according to credible information, 
might be an undeclared nuclear installation or contain undeclared nuclear 
material. Although the right to perform special inspections was laid down in 
safeguards agreements, it had never beeen invoked for the purpose of 
inspecting undeclared locations. 
58. Thirdly, the Agency might need to exercise its right of access to the 
Security Council if the State in question rejected a request for a special 
inspection. The case of Iraq demonstrated that intervention by the Security 
Council to enforce inspection was a distinct possibility. Awareness of that 
was likely to deter any State from failing in its duty under a full-scope 
safeguards agreement to declare all its nuclear facilities and material. 
59. All that might sound relatively straightforward, but it required 
considerable discussion and elaboration in detail. He hoped, in view of the 
present strong interest Governments had in the matter, that the Agency would 
be able to put those ideas into effect before long. The type of case he had 
been describing was likely to occur very rarely, but by being prepared for it 
the Agency might help to prevent it from occurring at all. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 16 


60. To move to a world in which the non-proliferation regime attained, or 
was approaching universality, and yet to see confidence in full respect for 
that regime at the same time being eroded, would be completely unacceptable. 
It should also be kept in mind that any lack of confidence in the reliability 
of non-proliferation pledges and their verification would probably constitute 
an impediment to far-reaching nuclear disarmament. The inevitable conclusion 
was that the safeguards system must be made stronger as universal nonproliferation 
and nuclear disarmament drew nearer. Strengthening of the 
system was technically possible without incurring enormous costs, and the 
Agency had the potential for operating a strengthened system. 
61. Turning to the Agency's activities under Security Council resolutions 
687 and 707 and the lessons learnt from inspections in Iraq, he pointed 
out that, while the inspections ordered by the Security Council were not 
regular safeguards inspections, they did draw extensively on the Agency's 
safeguards techniques and expertise, requiring as they did the use of Agency 
instruments and seals and the services of many Agency inspectors. They also 
received extensive support from the Agency's Laboratory at Seibersdorf for the 
analysis of hundreds of samples. 
62. The Board of Governors had come to the conclusion that a number of 
failures on the part of Iraq to report to the Agency under its NPT safeguards 
agreement constituted non-compliance with that agreement. 
63. In fulfilling the mandate given to it by the Security Council in 
connection with nuclear activities in Iraq, the Agency was in part treading 
new ground. It was not only verifying peaceful uses of nuclear energy but 
also looking for any attempts to develop military applications. He did not 
think that task posed any greater difficulties than Agency inspections of 
sensitive installations such as enrichment or reprocessing plants. In Iraq, 
the Agency was not currently engaged in any promotion of the use of nuclear 
energy but rather in limiting its use to strictly defined purposes, and it was 
carrying out the task of removing, destroying or rendering harmless nuclear 
equipment and material that might be of use for weapons development. It was 
fortunate that, as far as Agency inspections had revealed to date, full 
industrial production had not been reached in a uranium enrichment programme 
for which no plausible peaceful purpose could be discerned. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 17 


64. The Agency's activities in nuclear safety and radiation protection had 
expanded very considerably over the last five years. It was unnecessary to 
make detailed comments on the major international enquiry into the radiological 
consequences of the Chernobyl accident, which he had mentioned in his 
introduction. Its conclusions were not accepted by everybody, but it was a 
source of professional satisfaction to the Agency that they were treated with 
respect and interest by the scientific community. The main criticism of that 
project concerned not what it had examined but what it had not examined, 
namely the health of people who had been evacuated from the affected regions 
and of those who had taken part in the clean-up operations. In both those 
respects the Agency must be ready to participate in any follow-up inquiry. 
65. The Chernobyl inquiry had been an isolated action, but the Agency ought 
to be generally prepared to embark upon such actions without delay and, of 
course, with the consent of the Board of Governors. Another recent isolated 
action had been the convening in the summer of all parties interested in the 
acute safety problems of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant in Bulgaria. 
66. The WWER-440/230 project, under which the examination of that reactor 
type in Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and the Soviet Union was soon to be 
concluded, had been prompted by the determination of the Governments concerned 
to adapt to international standards and practices in nuclear safety. It was 
for those Governments to decide whether to backfit and upgrade, or to close, 
the nuclear plants found to be of an unacceptable standard. As there was a 
strong interest in other countries in the safety of those plants, however, it 
was natural that there should be international co-operation involving expert 
assessments, advice and assistance and that those activities should be 
co-ordinated under the Agency's auspices. 
67. The International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power had 
concluded ten days previously in Vienna. Policy-makers in the field of 
nuclear safety from all over the world had participated. The Conference had 
been oriented towards action, which meant that its aim had been to agree on an 
agenda for nuclear safety work in the decade to come. The results of the 
Safety Conference, if endorsed by the General Conference, would provide a 
useful indication as to the types of work which Member Governments' policymakers 
wanted the Agency to undertake. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 18 


68. Like INSAG, the Safety Conference had urged that the Agency aim 
primarily at strengthening the role of the national authorities responsible 
for nuclear safety. There were good reasons for that view: the Agency should 
not seek to become a supranational regulatory authority but rather should 
endeavour, through international action, to strengthen national regulatory 
organs. The many services offered by the Agency conformed with that concept 
and the Safety Conference, which had expressed strong support for those 
services, had invited the Agency's governing bodies to develop an even more 
vigorous overview process through an expansion of such services as the ASSET 
and OSART missions, and through other means. 
69. The idea of working out a framework convention on nuclear safety had 
attracted the most attention. He felt sure that such a convention would be 
useful and viable, and hoped that the Agency's policy-making organs would 
consider the idea and decide on how best to foster it. The framework needed 
to contain only a commitment by the parties to a step-by-step strengthening of 
nuclear safety everywhere, including the safe disposal of nuclear waste. 
Specific obligations would be undertaken in protocols attached to that 
framework. A binding protocol embodying the basic nuclear safety principles 
worked out by INSAG might perhaps be included without much difficulty, as 
might, for example, a binding protocol on participation in the IRS. 
Consideration should also be given to the question whether the Code of 
Practice on the Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, adopted by the 
General Conference the previous year, could be transformed into a binding 
instrument, as had been urged in several quarters. 
70. A framework convention on nuclear safety to which a growing number of 
protocols with easy revision mechanisms were attached might give additional 
strength, stability and authority to the various principles and activities 
covered. It would also give greater visibility to the commitments entered 
into than did scattered guidelines and recommendations, however useful they 
might be. 
71. Such an international nuclear safety regime should also regulate the 
question of responsibility in the event of accidents and ensure adequate 
compensation for injuries and damage that might result from them. It was 
generally agreed that the existing conventions should be further developed, 
and the Agency was actively engaged in that effort. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 19 


72. Since the 1990 session of the General Conference the Standing Committee 
on Nuclear Liability had made further progress. As to revision of the Vienna 
Convention, foreseen in the Convention itself and due to take place at a 
conference in Vienna, preliminary agreement had been reached on a number of 
draft amendments covering most points where a need for improvement had been 
recognized. They included expansion of the concept of nuclear damage to cover 
contamination of the environment, application of the Vienna Convention to 
military installations, extension of its geographic scope, and an increase in 
the financial limit imposed on the operator's liability. He expressed his 
deep appreciation to Ambassador van Gorkom of the Netherlands who, as 
Chairman, had contributed greatly to the constructive work accomplished in the 
Standing Committee. 
73. There was sometimes a tendency in the environmental debate to write off 
nuclear power as a future source of energy without a thorough analysis of the 
health and environmental consequences of the different options available. As 
there was no intergovernmental organization that dealt with all sources of 
energy, the Agency, together with a number of other organizations, had carried 
out a major comparative study of the environmental and health effects of 
different energy systems for electricity generation. That study had been 
discussed at the Senior Expert Symposium held in Helsinki in May. Several 
important conclusions had been reached, including the following: the global 
demand for electricity services would continue to increase, subject only to 
constraints on economic growth; and improvements in efficiency could do much 
to reduce the environmental impact and should therefore be pursued 
vigorously. Such improvements would not, however, eliminate the need for new 
plants to meet growing demand; the most stringent global targets for reducing 
CO emissions could not be met by the electricity sector in many countries 
without electricity service curtailments that were socially and economically 
unacceptable; nuclear power was the non-fossil energy source which stood the 
best chance of being deployed on a large scale and with costs competitive with 
fossil fuels for base-load generation; and under routine operating conditions, 
nuclear power and renewable energy systems tended to be in the lower range of 
health risk whereas energy systems based on coal and oil were in the higher 
range. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 20 


74. Those conclusions were significant and he thought it desirable to have 
a summary of the Helsinki Symposium documentation available at the United 
Nations Conference on the Environment and Development, due to take place in 
Rio de Janeiro in 1992. 
75. The previous year, he had urged all Member States to support the 
programme involving the use of the sterile insect technique to eradicate the 
New World screwworm in Libya. The Agency, together with the Swedish 
International Development Authority and the Austrian Government, had been very 
active in that programme. The results were as follows: in 1990, 12 068 livestock 
had been found to be infested with the parasite in Libya; in 1991, only 
six cases had been recorded. Since 7 April 1991, not a single case had been 
found. There were thus good grounds for the optimistic forecast that before 
the end of 1991 the parasite would have been completely eradicated from North 
Africa. 
76. Acid rain, resulting from sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides in flue 
gases from the burning of fossil fuels, such as coal, was damaging forests, 
lakes and farmland all over the world. Different techniques were being used 
to reduce emissions of such gases. 
77. The Agency, in co-operation with the Polish Government, was implementing 
a promising project to develop radiation technology for removing sulphur 
dioxide and nitrogen oxides simultaneously and efficiently from flue gases by 
means of electron beams and transforming those gases into fertilizer. In 
April 1991, a pilot plant, the largest demonstration plant of its kind in the 
world, had been installed and started up at a thermal power plant in Warsaw, 
and successful operation was continuing. Approximately 90% of the sulphur 
dioxide and nitrogen oxides in flue gases could be removed by two 50 kW 
electron beam machines. 
78. An extrabudgetary contribution from Japan for public information work 
had enabled the Division of Public Information to develop an enhanced 
programme to improve public understanding of a broad range of nuclear energy 
issues. It had been welcomed in a number of Member States, which had helped 
to stage a series of regional seminars designed mainly for journalists. Such 
seminars had already been held in India, Australia, Japan and Hungary, and 
further seminars were planned in Thailand and Egypt by the end of the year. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 21 


79. There was no doubt that the media had become more interested in the 
Agency's activities over the past six months, especially in its inspections in 
Iraq. The fact that the resources available for public information work were 
so limited naturally placed severe constraints on the Agency's ability to 
satisfy that interest. 
80. An unusually active year had placed additional demands on already 
hard-working staff. After eight years of deteriorating salary conditions, the 
prospect of another freeze on Professional salaries was really unacceptable. 
The problems associated with Professional salaries were likely to grow if no 
solution could be found. They had already reduced the Agency's competitiveness 
in attracting candidates for jobs and might have a negative impact on the 
Agency's programme in the long term. 
81. The Agency was again facing a serious cash crisis. He appealed to 
Member States who had not paid their 1991 assessed contributions to make their 
payments without further delay. He also appealed for pledges and payments to 
the TACF for 1991. By 31 August, the Agency had collected only US $19 million 
of the 1991 target of US $49 million - only $33.4 million of which had been 
pledged so far. Calculations indicated that, unless major payments to the 
Regular Budget were received, Agency operations might be able to continue only 
until the end of October, and then only if use were made of the Working 
Capital Fund and if unencumbered balances of extrabudgetary funds, including 
the TACF, were transferred to the administrative budget. He trusted that the 
policy-making organs would agree to such unavoidable emergency actions. 
82. In 1990, the Board of Governors had requested the Secretariat to draw 
up a medium-term plan for the Agency covering the period 1993-1998. The plan 
in question was not meant to be a blueprint of what the Agency had to do in 
the period covered. The many unexpected developments of recent years 
demonstrated the need for flexibility, for readiness to meet new, unforeseen 
challenges. That meant, apart from anything else, that the Agency must have 
the financial means to act. The Medium-Term Plan should tell the Secretariat 
what to focus on in the light of identifiable longer-term trends in nuclear 
energy. It should lay down the strategy and priorities for the Agency to meet 
those challenges. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 22 


83. In view of the expected energy needs of a growing world population, 
there was a need to analyse data which would allow a systematic comparison of 
various options from the standpoint of their economics and their impact on 
health, the environment and the climate of the world. Provided nuclear power 
plants operated economically and without severe accidents, some countries 
might consider a significant expansion of nuclear power. Efforts would be 
needed in the medium term to reach consensus on nuclear safety principles and 
criteria for those future nuclear power plants, and to present some 
international standards. Wide international consensus in that sphere would 
help to obtain support for an increased reliance on nuclear power. The Agency 
should play a similar role in developing an international technical consensus 
on the acceptability of disposal methods for nuclear waste of all kinds. 
84. In the non-power area, nuclear applications in food and agriculture, 
industry, human health and environmental protection should receive the most 
attention. In accordance with the wishes of co-operating countries, more 
emphasis needed to be placed on strengthening national nuclear safety, 
radiation protection and waste management capacities. Further success in the 
transfer of nuclear applications required not only well-thought-out strategies 
but also an increase in resources for technical co-operation over the medium 
term. 
85. As legal commitments to non-proliferation approached universality and 
as nuclear disarmament progressed, there would be an increased need for 
assurance that those commitments were being respected. That assurance must 
come from an Agency with adequate capacity to examine facilities and material, 
whether declared or not. 
86. A task not only for the medium term was to seek efficiency gains, to 
maintain an Agency which was swift and unbureaucratic, yet reliable and 
orderly. In that respect Members could help the Secretariat, not only by 
being demanding but also by refraining from demanding analyses and reports not 
strictly needed for decision-making or transparency. They could also help by 
encouraging professionals of the highest calibre in their countries to put 
themselves forward as candidates for posts in the Agency. But increased 
resources were also needed. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 23 


87. In conclusion, he thanked the Austrian Government and the City of 
Vienna, who were the excellent hosts of the Agency. At its June and September 
sessions, the Board of Governors had considered and approved applications for 
membership of the Agency from Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the Republic of 
Yemen. The Board had recommended approval by the General Conference of all 
four applications and the General Conference had just given its approval. 
Having grown up on the shores of the Baltic Sea, he was particularly happy 
that the Agency was the first organization in the United Nations family to 
welcome the three Baltic States as Members. The Agency was also fully aware 
that two of the world's largest nuclear power reactors were located in one of 
those States. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1992 


88. The PRESIDENT said that the Agency's policy-making bodies had, 
since 1982, followed the practice of recommending Indicative Planning Figures 
to be used in fixing annual targets for voluntary contributions to the TACF. 
The Indicative Planning Figure for 1992 had been set at $52.5 million, in 
accordance with an agreement reached in the Board of Governors in 1988 and 
subsequently reported to the General Conference. In the draft resolution 
relating to the TACF, which appeared in Annex IV to document GC(XXXV)/955, 
the Board of Governors recommended that figure as the target for voluntary 
contributions to the TACF for 1992. 
89. Unfortunately, the past two or three years had witnessed a disturbing 
decline in pledges and contributions to the TACF. He hoped that that decline 
would be arrested and perhaps even reversed in 1992. 
90. Early pledging of voluntary contributions was of considerable help to 
the Secretariat in planning technical assistance programmes. He therefore 
urged all delegations that were in a position to do so, but had not done so as 
yet, to notify the Secretariat during the current session of the voluntary 
contributions that their Governments would be making to the TACF in 1992. 
91. He would report at the end of the session, under a later agenda item, 
on the voluntary contributions which had been pledged up to that time, and was 
confident that he would be able to report that a considerable percentage of 
the 1992 target figure had already been pledged. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 24 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) 


92. The PRESIDENT recalled that in 1989 the General Conference had 
adopted procedures for streamlining its working practices, some of which 
related to the conduct of the general debate. He also recalled that those 
procedures had been successfully applied during the past two years. With a 
view to making the most efficient use of the time available, he suggested that 
the General Conference authorize him, under Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure, 
to limit the duration of statements made in the general debate to 15 minutes. 
He appealed to all delegations not to go beyond the time allotted. 
93. It was so decided. 
94. The PRESIDENT, requesting delegates' understanding and 
co-operation in the arrangement of the speakers' list and the order of 
speakers, said that the list had been opened in June but that the participation 
of ministers and other senior officials who were unable to spend the 
whole week in Vienna had made adjustments necessary. Additional adjustments 
might be required in order to meet all kinds of contingencies, but he was 
confident that the Secretariat would do its best to cope with conflicting 
demands and would consult delegations when finalizing the list of speakers. 
He assumed that the General Conference agreed with the suggestions made 
regarding the speakers' list for the general debate. 
95. It was so decided. 
96. Mr. AL-TAIFI (Saudi Arabia) congratulated the President on his 
election and wished every success to the Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole and the other members of the General Committee. He 
also greeted the Director General of the Agency and all participants. 
97. Ever since the Agency had been established, it had been working to 
spread the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the world in order to 
promote the well-being and progress of all peoples and to strengthen 
international co-operation on nuclear safety and radiological protection, and 
it had zealously fulfilled the tasks assigned to it by its governing bodies. 
It had closely followed recent world events and upheavals, and had reacted to 
them within the terms of its mandate. In view of the successes it had 
achieved, it fully deserved the support and praise of all Member States. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 25 


98. In the past, the General Conference had on several occasions adopted 
resolutions requiring action to be taken pursuant to resolution 487(1981) of 
the Security Council, in which, in particular, Israel had been requested to 
submit all its nuclear installations without delay to the Agency's 
safeguards. The most recent had been resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/526, in which 
the Director General was invited to continue consultations with the States 
concerned in the Middle East area with a view to applying Agency safeguards to 
all nuclear installations in the region without discrimination of any kind. 
However, Israel had responded by refusing to submit its nuclear installations 
to Agency control. 
99. The Middle East, which in recent years had had to face the horrors of 
war and the dangers arising from the manufacture and accumulation of weapons 
of mass destruction of various kinds, nuclear, chemical and biological, was 
the region of the globe where a zone free of such weapons was most urgently 
required. The States of the region should seek to resolve their problems by 
peaceful means and not by war and destruction, and should devote their 
resources to the well-being of their populations. 
100. His delegation wished once more to declare its preference for a ban on 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and the 
establishment of a zone free from such weapons in that part of the world. It 
invited all States in the region to support that noble aim, and asked the 
international community and the Agency for assistance in attaining it. 
101. All the Agency's Member States agreed on the importance of safeguards, 
but many believed that the financial burden was distributed unequally among 
States. Saudi Arabia was one of the States whose contribution to the 
safeguards budget was equal to the total amount paid by all States who were 
shielded, although several of the latter had a mean revenue equal to that of 
Saudi Arabia or had nuclear activities subject to safeguards. For that reason 
his delegation believed it essential that countries which had nuclear 
activities should make a greater contribution to expenses arising through the 
application of safeguards. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 26 


102. In addition, in view of recent developments on the international scene 
the safeguards system plainly needed to be re-evaluated in order to remedy its 
deficiencies and to strengthen its effectiveness, so that mankind could be 
confident that nuclear science was being used for peaceful purposes only. 
103. His delegation welcomed the efforts undertaken by the Secretariat to 
establish a medium-term plan for the period 1993-1998. It had already 
expressed its support for that plan, which should provide a framework for 
considering the Agency's future activities with enough flexibility to allow 
for developments in the situation. His delegation hoped that the Agency would 
try to take into account the aspirations and needs of developing countries 
regarding the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, as population growth, 
which was particularly high in the developing regions, would lead to an 
increase in demand for food products, medical care and manufactured goods and, 
consequently, to an increased need for nuclear techniques, which it was hoped 
would contribute to improving the productivity of those countries. 
104. Recent world events would inevitably have repercussions on the Agency. 
The Agency should perhaps make preparations for providing more services, which 
it was perfectly capable of doing without neglecting its activities with 
developing countries. 
105. At its thirty-fourth regular session, the General Conference had 
considered an item entitled "Plan for producing potable water economically", 
and had adopted resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/540, in which the Agency was 
requested to assess the costs of potable water production with nuclear 
desalination plants, and to compare them with the costs of desalination by 
other methods. 
106. Saudi Arabia could scarcely be accused of exaggerating the importance 
of the issue. Indeed, the Middle East, which suffered from a chronic water 
shortage and had an annual population growth rate of 3%, was heading for 
catastrophe if it could not find additional water resources. The problem was 
exacerbated by the increasing pollution and salinatlon of fresh water. His 
delegation accordingly felt duty bound to stress the need to preserve existing 
natural water resources for the benefit of future generations. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 27 


107. Many developing countries were placing great hopes in the numerous 
environmental and other advantages offered by nuclear applications for the 
economic desalination of sea water which, compared to other water resources, 
was abundant and relatively unpolluted. 
108. From the environmental point of view, those applications would make it 
possible to preserve other water resources and to fight against desertification, 
global warming and the increasing releases of carbon dioxide into the 
atmosphere. From the economic point of view, they could reduce the cost of 
desalting water, just as they had brought down the cost of electric power 
generation in some countries. 
109. The Saudi delegation, which had been contributing to the work on that 
problem for years, considered that the production of potable water should be a 
priority objective for the international organizations concerned. It 
therefore invited the Agency to include the nuclear desalination of sea water 
among its main programmes. 
110. At its thirty-fourth regular session, the General Conference had 
considered the question of dumping of radioactive waste, and in particular 
international transactions involving nuclear wastes. It had then adopted 
various resolutions, the most recent being resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/530 in 
which it had adopted a code of practice on the international transboundary 
movement of radioactive waste. 
111. Although, owing to a lack of accurate data, there was no agreement on 
the exact number of used radioactive sources in the world, it appeared that 
the majority of such sources were in the developing countries and came from 
the developed countries. His country therefore hoped that the Agency would 
continue to advise developing countries on that serious problem and would help 
them to solve it. 
112. His delegation was also very concerned at the Agency's current 
financial situation. As the Director General had mentioned, that situation 
was due to the fact that certain Member States were late in paying their 
assessed contributions, and it might lead to the adoption of measures which 
could harm the reputation and activities of the Agency. His country, which 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 28 


had paid its contribution in full, appealed to all States which had not yet 


done so to pay their contributions as soon as possible. In that context, he 


wished to emphasize that the Agency should adhere to the principle of zero 


real growth when establishing its budgetary forecasts. 


113. Certain issues, after being considered by the Board of Governors, had 
been regularly returning to the agenda of the General Conference for years 


without any consensus being reached. It was illogical that after so many 


years the Agency's governing bodies should have been unable to deal with those 


issues thoroughly and to resolve them. His delegation therefore hoped that 


the changes in the international situation would help the Agency to overcome 


the disagreements and difficulties which had hindered the settlement of those 


issues. 


114. Mr. WATKINS (United States of America), having congratulated the 
President on his election and having welcomed the four new Members of the 


Agency, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Yemen, read the following message from 


the President of the United States, Mr. Bush, to the General Conference: 


"For more than three decades, the International Atomic Energy Agency 


has been in the forefront of international efforts to stem the spread 


of nuclear weapons. 


"Since the end of the Gulf war, the IAEA has responded resourcefully to 
unprecedented challenges in fulfilling its responsibilities under 
United Nations Security Council resolution 687 to inspect, sequester 
and destroy Iraqi nuclear weapon-related capabilities, materials, and 
equipment. Agency efforts to date have shown that international 
concerns about Saddam Hussein's nuclear ambitions were well-founded. 
Indeed, for the first time ever the UN Security Council found that a 
Party had violated the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, on the basis 
of the Agency's conclusion that Iraq had breached its safeguards 
obligations. Continued vigilance will be required for a long time to 
come if we are to prevent resurrection of an Iraqi nuclear weapons 
programme. 


"The case of Iraq has highlighted the need to strengthen the Agency's 
safeguards system, and we hope the General Conference will advance this 
objective. That strengthening must begin with efforts to ensure that 
Agency safeguards are fully and promptly implemented. Success in these 
efforts is particularly important in North Korea today. 


"At the same time that Saddam Hussein had challenged the global norm 
against nuclear weapons proliferation, other nations have reinforced 
it. The United States welcomes the accession of Tanzania, Zambia and 
South Africa to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, as well as the 



GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 29 


commitments of France, the People's Republic of China and Zimbabwe to 


accede to the Treaty. We also look forward to the early conclusion of 


comprehensive safeguards agreements with Argentina and Brazil, as well 


as the full entry into force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco in all of 


Latin America. 


"The dramatic events of the past year entail both challenges and oppor


tunities for our non-proliferation efforts. The challenges are clear 


to all of us; the opportunities stem from the growing appreciation the 


world over for the need to address these challenges with renewed 


vigour. This will require building upon well-established foundations 


as well as considering new and imaginative ways to confront the 


problem. The Agency will continue to have a vital role to play in 


these efforts. On behalf of the people of the United States, I wish 


the Agency success in doing so in the years ahead." 


115. He commended the Director General and the entire staff of the Agency 
for the extraordinary work they had accomplished in the past few months tasks 
which had involved, among other things, implementing those parts of 
Security Council resolution 687 that related to the Iraqi nuclear programme. 
The determination they had shown in implementing Security Council 
resolution 707 also deserved praise. Working in frustrating and sometimes 
dangerous conditions, the Agency's inspectors had shown courage and 
determination in refusing to be deterred from reaching their objectives. 
116. On behalf of the United States Government, he thanked all Agency staff 
members and volunteers from various countries who had directly or indirectly 
participated in that work. He was proud that the United States Department of 
Energy had been able to contribute by providing personnel, equipment and 
technology. 
117. History recorded a few pivotal events in every century, and those of 
the twentieth would surely include the Bolshevik Revolution and the Second 
World War. He believed that the last two years had marked a third such 
turning point. Surely the long march of history had never before seen such 
rapid and breathtaking change in such a brief period, from the fall of the 
Berlin Wall, the collapse of the Iron Curtain in Eastern and Central Europe 
and the failure of the attempted coup in August in the Soviet Union itself, to 
the dismantling of apartheid in South Africa, and the concerted and rapid 
response of the international community to block Iraqi aggression and assert 
the rule of law. Events since 1989 had provided unprecedented opportunities 
to define the future in terms of personal freedom, political pluralism, market 
economies and international co-operation. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 30 


118. The Agency had also reached a turning point. Several States had joined 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty or announced their decision to do so, at a time 
when the situation created by Iraq had illustrated the need for new safeguards 
approaches. At the same time, the post-communist Governments of Eastern and 
Central Europe as well as the Soviet Union were grappling with problems of 
nuclear safety and placing new demands on the Agency and its Member States for 
technical assistance and information. 
119. Those major trends and the opportunities they offered the Agency and 
the international community for building a more stable and mutually supportive 
world order deserved attention. 
120. Progress had been made in expanding and strengthening the global 
non-proliferation system, thanks largely to the persistent efforts of the 
Agency. As President Bush had stated in his message, in the past year many 
countries had acceded to NPT. Others had announced their decision to do so, 
and yet another country had taken that decision in principle. Those actions 
clearly reflected international determination that proliferation should be 
halted and they confirmed the continued vitality of the Treaty. 
121. Another important milestone was the recent bilateral agreement between 
Argentina and Brazil for the control of nuclear materials, and the decision 
taken by those countries to negotiate a full-scope safeguards agreement with 
the Agency. Those agreements would draw the two largest nations in South 
America, both with major nuclear programmes, into the global non-proliferation 
system and would assure the Agency's deeper involvement in that rapidly 
developing and vital region. 
122. South Asia was another region where the dangers of nuclear 
proliferation required urgent attention. An important first step had already 
been taken with the conclusion by India and Pakistan of an agreement not to 
attack each other's nuclear facilities. His country would encourage the 
parties concerned to expand on that good beginning by developing broader 
regional non-proliferation arrangements. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 31 


123. Looking ahead, the new arms control initiative for the Middle East 
announced by President Bush in May could dramatically strengthen the 
non-proliferation system. That initiative, supported by all of the major 
suppliers of conventional arms to the region, relied on the work of the Agency 
and other institutions to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in that 
critical region of the world. 
124. Whether in the Middle East or elsewhere, the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons was a problem which threatened the security of all nations. As there 
was a strong international consensus against such proliferation, countries 
seeking to acquire nuclear weapons had unfortunately chosen to do so in secret 
and through subterfuge. 
125. The clandestine programme set up by Iraq to develop nuclear weapons 
well illustrated the problem, and it was a serious challenge to the Agency's 
safeguards system. His country welcomed proposals to enhance safeguards 
against covert proliferation and would support the Agency in that vital effort. 
126. The strengthening of safeguards required first of all the 
acknowledgement that they could only function properly after a safeguards 
agreement had been concluded with the country concerned. It was therefore 
essential that such agreements should be negotiated and implemented in a 
timely manner. Parties to NPT shared the common responsibility of ensuring 
that the safeguards required by Article III of the Treaty were put in place 
within the time limit set by that article. 
127. Many Parties to NPT had pressed the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea to comply with its Article III obligations. The United States welcomed 
the fact that a safeguards agreement with that country had just been approved 
by the Board of Governors, but that was just one step in a process which had 
to be continued. The agreement should be ratified and brought into force 
without delay. 
128. The lessons from the Iraq affair should then be learnt: in future, 
States should permit the Agency to make full use of its powers. The standard 
safeguards agreement signed by Parties to NPT had long provided for special 
inspections of undeclared facilities, and States should now agree to allow the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 32 


Agency to exercise its full authority. For the vast majority of States, the 
fact of submitting to special inspection would reinforce confidence in their 
compliance with non-proliferation obligations and would strengthen international 
peaceful nuclear co-operation. 


129. Finally, it seemed a particularly appropriate time to strengthen the 
Agency's safeguards system and the worldwide nuclear non-proliferation 
regime. In his message to the Agency, President Bush had stated that he 
supported that action. The Director General had also stated his commitment to 
develop enhanced safeguards capabilities. 
130. The system should be strengthened in ways that would facilitate the 
early detection of undeclared nuclear activities. He urged all countries to 
endorse that action and to work with the Director General and the Board of 
Governors. He strongly advocated that procedures for the conduct of special 
inspections should be adopted as soon as possible. He also urged all 
NPT Parties who had not yet done so to conclude safeguards agreements as 
quickly as possible. South Africa's prompt negotiation of its safeguards 
agreement following its accession to NPT in July was an example which should 
be widely emulated. It was a major step in enhancing peace not only in 
Southern Africa but in the world as a whole. 
131. Turning to a related matter, he acknowledged the special responsibilities 
of the nuclear-weapons States for reducing the potential risks of 
nuclear war. A turning point had been reached in Moscow in July when 
Presidents Bush and Gorbachev had signed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty 
(START). The Treaty was a significant achievement as it was the first-ever 
arms control agreement to actually reduce the number of strategic nuclear 
weapons deployed by each side. 
132. Further arms control measures might also be expected soon in Europe, 
particularly in the area of short-range nuclear systems. Contrary to the 
opinion of some, arms control did not lead to changes in defence attitudes, 
but rather followed changing security perceptions, capturing them in formal 
agreements. As international security relationships evolved in a global 
climate of increasing openness and co-operation, further arms control measures 
might well be possible. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 33 


133. In such a climate, the nuclear weapon responsibilities of the United 
States Department of Energy would continue to shift towards closing production 
facilities and dismantling weapons. The Department of Energy was currently 
confronting serious waste disposal and clean-up problems at contaminated 
nuclear sites. As progress was made in developing advanced technologies to 
resolve those problems, his country would share its experience with the 
international community. 
134. Although safeguards and proliferation issues had dominated public 
attention over the past year, nuclear reactor safety remained at the top of 
the international agenda for peaceful nuclear energy applications. Safety had 
to be a paramount concern throughout the entire life cycle of a reactor, from 
site selection to construction, operation and decommissioning. The results of 
work to identify generic safety problems and information relating to solutions 
should be widely shared. In that area the Agency had played and should 
continue to play a major role. 
135. The emergence of personal freedom and political pluralism in Eastern 
and Central Europe and the Soviet Union was bringing increased public 
awareness of nuclear reactor safety issues. His country welcomed that 
development and was working with others, both through the Agency and directly, 
to improve the safety and operating practices of nuclear reactors in those 
areas. 
136. In that context, substantial progress was being made with the bilateral 
United States/USSR initiative on operational safety. That joint initiative, 
which he had first proposed to representatives of the Soviet Union at the 
General Conference in 1989, had been established as part of the agreement 
between the United States and the USSR on scientific and technical 
co-operation in the field of peaceful nuclear energy applications. Its 
purpose was to share information with a view to improving operational safety 
in the nuclear facilities of both countries. In the context of that project, 
recommendations had already been made by three groups of experts and specific 
operational improvements had been developed for application in 1992 in a 
leading Soviet plant. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 34 


137. The United States was convinced that the safety lessons to be learned 
from such co-operation should be applied where possible to reactors currently 
in operation or under construction in other countries as the safety of 
reactors throughout the world was important for all nations. However, owing 
to their proximity, the United States Government was particularly concerned 
about the reactors nearing completion in Cuba. Cuba had access to technical 
assistance from the Agency, and his country would urge the Agency to spare no 
effort in the attempt to ensure that the reactors in question were built and 
eventually operated in accordance with internationally accepted nuclear safety 
standards. 
138. In conclusion, he said that the international community was living 
through a time when the confluence of events gave it unparalleled 
opportunities to chart a new course for the coming century. It went without 
saying that that course should be charted on the basis of respect for human 
rights and the rule of law by a truly united international community working 
effectively through bilateral arrangements and international agencies such as 
the United Nations and the Agency. 
139. No one knew exactly what the future held, but the committed efforts of 
the present generation would shape the world of the future. If one kept that 
clearly in mind, it would be understood that the Agency's two primary 
missions - the prevention of nuclear proliferation and the provision of 
technical assistance to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - could 
only become more important in future years. 
140. The Agency was facing a myriad of challenges, but each of them offered 
the opportunity of contributing to make the twenty-first century a time of 
international stability and co-operation and perhaps, ultimately, a time when 
nuclear technology would be used solely and exclusively for the health and 
betterment of all peoples in a safe world. He was fully confident that the 
Agency, under the able leadership of the Director General with the help of 
his talented and dedicated staff, would seize that opportunity. 
141. Ms. SANTO (Japan) congratulated the President on his election and 
welcomed the four new Member States of the Agency: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania 
and Yemen. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 35 


142. In view of recent world events concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, Japan considered that the role of the Agency was becoming increasingly 
important with regard to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the 
enhancement of nuclear safety. 
143. The Agency was facing a new challenge in connection with its nonproliferation 
responsibilities. Iraq's clandestine activities, with their 
possible link to the production of nuclear weapons, had been disclosed through 
on-site Agency inspections based on Security Council resolution 687. Since 
Iraq was a Party to NPT and had a full-scope safeguards agreement with the 
Agency, that violation undermined the HPT regime and betrayed the trust of 
Member States who adhered to their safeguards agreements and promoted the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Iraq's violation should, therefore, be 
strongly condemned by the international community. 
144. Considering the current international situation, that regrettable 
incident made it clear how important nuclear non-proliferation was. Moreover, 
as the Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Kaifu, had stated at the United Nations 
Disarmament Conference held in Kyoto in June 1991, the effectiveness and 
credibility of the Agency's safeguards system should be enhanced. Japan 
considered it imperative to improve the system at the international level and 
wanted to put forward two proposals. First, there was a need for clarification 
of the measures and procedures for applying Agency inspections to 
nuclear materials in undeclared facilities, and in particular it would be 
important to examine the practical use of special inspections. Japan 
appreciated the Agency's positive stand, following the initiative of the 
Director General, on that point. 
145. Secondly, the Agency's limited resources under the zero-real-growth 
budget would have to be put to the best use. The application of safeguards 
should become more flexible, taking into account the transparency of nuclearrelated 
activities and the past performance of safeguards implementation in 
each Member State, to allow for redistribution of resources for inspection 
activities. At the same time it would be important to develop new safeguards 
techniques in order to implement safeguards in a more effective and efficient 
manner. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 36 


146. With regard to strengthening the NPT regime, Japan, which had always 
strictly limited its nuclear-related activities to peaceful purposes and had 
made the utmost effort to ensure non-proliferation, welcomed recent important 
improvements such as the signing of NPT by South Africa and by front-line 
African countries, as well as the significant progress towards adherence which 
France and China seemed to be making. France had in fact decided to adhere 
to NPT, and China's Prime Minister, Mr. Li Peng, had announced his country's 
intention to join on the occasion of the visit to China in August 1991 by 
Japan's Prime Minister, Mr. Toshiki Kaifu. 
147. Once those two States became Parties to NPT, all five nuclear-weapon 
States would have joined the NPT regime, thus bringing it closer to 
universality. Japan therefore welcomed those developments as extremely 
significant steps. Furthermore, the joint statement made by Argentina and 
Brazil on their common nuclear policy constituted another significant step 
toward strengthening the non-proliferation regime, because it meant acceptance 
of full-scope Agency safeguards and created a political climate favourable to 
joining the Treaty of Tlatelolco. 
148. Japan appealed once again to those Member States who were not parties 
to NPT, both nuclear-weapons and non-nuclear-weapons States, to accede to the 
Treaty as soon as possible. 
149. From the point of view of maintaining the reliability of the NPT 
regime, it was regrettable that one State had failed to fulfil its obligation 
to accept full-scope Agency safeguards, although it had already signed NPT and 
was involved in considerable nuclear-related activities. That undermined 
mutual trust between Member States and severely reduced the prestige of NPT, 
to which a large number of countries were party. Japan urged the country 
concerned to conclude and fully implement a full-scope Agency safeguards 
agreement without any conditions. 
150. With regard to the export of nuclear equipment and materials, Japan had 
made acceptance of full-scope Agency safeguards by recipient countries a 
condition for the granting of export licences and strongly urged other 
exporting countries to adopt a similar policy. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 37 


151. Application of safeguards to peaceful nuclear activities in 
nuclear-weapons States should be expanded gradually within the resources of 
the Agency in order to increase the universality of the NPT regime. 
152. Japan hoped that during the NPT Extension Conference, scheduled for 
1995, the Treaty would be made more comprehensive and its functions 
strengthened and extended towards the 21st century. 
153. Japan, as a promoter of the strictly peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
would continue to make every effort on behalf of non-proliferation and also to 
contribute to the maintenance and strengthening of a healthy international 
regime in the field of nuclear energy. 
154. Since the Chernobyl accident, public awareness of the importance of 
international co-operation in nuclear safety had become especially acute. 
Recently, the international community had expressed some concern about the 
safety of nuclear power plants located in Central and Eastern Europe, and at 
the London Summit it had been recognized that safety evaluations and new 
safety measures should be initiated as a matter of urgency. Japan appreciated 
the immediate action the Agency had taken on that matter. 
155. Some developing countries were promoting nuclear power programmes, in 
addition to the utilization of radiation and radioisotopes, to meet the 
predicted increase in energy demand, and Japan was doing as much as it could 
to help them. The technical co-operation which they received through the 
Agency was particularly valuable because of the Agency's vast experience in 
the field of safety. Japan, with its excellent record for the safety and 
reliability of its nuclear power plants, would continue to promote international 
co-operation by providing experts and accepting trainees under 
governmental and non-governmental schemes. 
156. The use of nuclear energy in various forms - radioisotopes and 
radiation in such fields as agriculture, industry and medicine, and nuclear 
heat for electric power generation - played an important role in maintaining a 
high standard of living. Advances in nuclear medicine had saved the lives of 
many cancer patients. The application of nuclear energy in agricultural pest 
control, circumventing the use of chemicals, had resulted in the production of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 38 


safer foods. Japan therefore considered that the Agency's activities in 
research and isotopes were very important and would continue to provide 
maximum support for them. 


157. It was the duty of the present generation to pass on an intact 
environment to future generations. At the London Summit, nuclear power 
generation had been considered an important means of solving global 
environmental problems, since it helped reduce emissions of gases which 
contributed to the greenhouse effect. 
158. Nuclear energy accounted for approximately 17% of the world's gross 
electricity generation and Japan was interested in further promoting its 
utilization. Japan, like other countries, was developing its nuclear fuel 
cycle programme, thereby making nuclear energy an economical, stable and 
durable energy source. A fuel reprocessing programme was being implemented 
and the "Monju" fast breeder reactor was under construction. 
159. Furthermore, research and development work on nuclear fusion, a 
potentially inexhaustible source of energy for mankind in the future, should 
be given every possible encouragement. The ITER project, started in 1988 
under the auspices of the Agency and supported by the United States, the 
Soviet Union, the European Community and Japan, was a most impressive 
achievement in international co-operation. Japan would make every effort to 
contribute to the success of the engineering design phase, due to begin 
shortly. 
160. Public support and understanding were absolutely imperative for the 
smooth progress of nuclear energy. The Agency played an extremely important 
role, quite apart from national efforts, in promoting public acceptance of 
nuclear energy. Japan fully supported the public relations activities 
currently being implemented by the Agency. 
161. Since its foundation, the Agency had successfully accomplished its 
mission of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and had contributed 
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Agency and its Member States 
had reached a juncture where important decisions aimed at strengthening the 
non-proliferation regime and safeguards had to be made. Japan intended to 
play a positive role in confronting that new challenge, while continuing to 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 39 


contribute to the Agency's important technical co-operation, nuclear safety 
and safeguards work. 


162. Mr. PEREZ SIMARRO (Spain) felt sure that, under the able direction 
of its President, the General Conference would meet its declared objectives 
and the expectations of the Member States. He had found the Director 
General's opening statement particularly interesting as it usefully 
supplemented the information on the Agency's activities given in the 1990 
Annual Report. 
163. As far as nuclear power in Spain was concerned, its contribution to 
aggregate electricity production had risen to 36.7% in 1990. The average age 
of the nuclear installations was 7.2 years, one of the lowest in the OECD 
countries, and 79% of the installed capacity was less than 10 years old. 
164. Production figures and availability of the Spanish nuclear power 
stations demonstrated the maturity of nuclear technology, a direct result of 
which had been the development of a major production industry to provide not 
only equipment and components but also engineering and other services for the 
operating plants. 
165. The OSART missions to two Spanish plants had confirmed that their 
safety and operating conditions were satisfactory. 
166. Recently, the Spanish Government had approved a new national energy 
programme outlining the country's energy policy for the period 1991-2000. The 
average annual increase in demand for electricity over the coming decade was 
estimated at 3.5%. Increased need would be met by rationalization of 
production, the development of renewable energy supplies and, above all, by 
the installation of coal- and gas-fired power plants. The plan anticipated a 
major increase in gas consumption, bearing in mind the need to protect the 
environment, and the exigencies of efficiency, cost and diversification. 
167. Nevertheless, the proportion of gas in Spain's energy programme would 
still fall short of the European Community average. Given nuclear energy's 
significant contribution to electricity production and to the overall energy 
balance, the maintenance of optimal safety conditions and reliability in the 
plants was a priority, as was the implementation of cost-effective programmes. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 40 


168. Furthermore, Spain's nuclear fuel management policy was designed to 
bring about a substantial increase in the coverage of the first part of the 
fuel cycle from national resources: at present the relevant figure was 27%, 
but it was expected to rise to 48% by the end of the programme period, largely 
through increases in domestic yellow cake production to the point where it 
would satisfy 80% of Spain's uranium concentrate requirements. 
169. With regard to the handling of low- and medium-level waste, Spain's 
strategy was to increase the capacity of its El Cabril installations to the 
point where they could accomodate all such material generated in the country 
up to the first decade of the coming century. The site selection programme 
for high-level radioactive waste repositories was to be continued. 
170. Among the aims of the national energy programme were efficient 
utilization of available human resources and optimization of R&D activities 
with a view to improving safety margins in operating power plants and 
extending their useful lifetime; the quest for a permanent solution to the 
problem of high-level radioactive waste storage; development of the technology 
required for decommissioning of installations; and participation in the 
development of advanced reactor types which could help to meet the needs of 
future nuclear programmes, including such new nuclear power options as fusion. 
171. The national energy programme also considered the role Spain could play 
in the context of international co-operation through its participation, as a 
member of various international organizations, in all initiatives aimed at 
harmonizing national nuclear standards and thereby ensuring minimum safety 
levels in all installations throughout the world. 
172. The European energy charter project, seeking a co-operation agreement 
specifically in the field of nuclear energy, would help to strengthen 
collaboration with Eastern and Central European countries as well as the 
Soviet Union, the objective being to give them the international technical 
support they needed to attain the same safety level as Western countries in 
their power plants. Spain would increase aid to and co-operation with those 
countries by making its technological capabilities available to them. 
173. He was pleased to note in his reading of the Annual Report that the 
Agency's nuclear safety and radiological protection activities were given high 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 41 


priority. Assurance of the highest possible technical safety level and 
communication of that assurance were essential for public acceptance of 
nuclear energy. The signing of an agreement between Spain's Nuclear Safety 
Council and the Agency whereby technical staff were to be made available for 
Agency evaluation missions in other countries demonstrated Spain's commitment 
to that important objective. 


174. His delegation praised the very positive outcome of the International 
Conference on Nuclear Power Safety and urged that its conclusions, providing 
as they did a specific schedule for preparing an international convention on 
nuclear safety and drafting safety criteria applicable to all the countries in 
the world, be approved by the General Conference. 
175. The effectiveness of the Agency's initiatives to improve the 
operational safety of nuclear power plants all over the world deserved to be 
mentioned. Those initiatives should be pursued and intensified. In 
particular, Spain continued to support the work of the OSART and ASSET teams 
by making experts available. In 1990, an OSART follow-up mission had visited 
the Cofrentes nuclear power plant, and there had also been an ASSET workshop 
to investigate the Vandellos power plant incident which had taken place in 
October 1989, so that the international community had been able to profit from 
the lessons drawn from that experience. In addition, a training course on the 
utilization of ASSET methodology to analyse incidents had been organized. 
176. The IRS, jointly run by the Agency and the NBA, remained a valuable 
instrument for passing on operating experience obtained in all the world's 
installations. 
177. The NUSS codes, subject as they were to continual revision, were used 
as a reference point in Spain for formulating national regulations. INSAG 
activities were also worthy of mention. 
178. With regard to other key elements in the future utilization of nuclear 
energy, such as radioactive waste management, Spain welcomed the Agency's 
initiative in setting up the new RADWASS programme, which would establish a 
coherent set of norms based on expert knowledge of radioactive waste and its 
behaviour accumulated over years of research. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 42 


179. Emphasis should also be laid on the Agency's activities in radiological 
protection and in the study of the radiological consequences of accidents, 
whereby the completion of the Chernobyl evaluation in keeping with the 
established programme deserved special mention. The report, notable for its 
meticulousness and its high technical level, was a highly valuable tool for 
anyone who wished to acquire a better understanding of the consequences of 
that accident. 
180. The risk of serious accidents in nuclear installations for industrial 
and medical purposes had unfortunately been confirmed by events over the last 
few years. Monitoring of the safety of such installations needed to be 
strengthened, a policy Spain was in fact implementing. In 1990 several 
patients had been victims of an accident in a radiotherapy installation in 
Spain; a report on the incident drawn up by the Spanish regulatory authority 
had been sent to the Agency in the hope that it might help to improve the 
operation of that type of installation in the different countries of the world. 
181. Technical assistance was another fundamentally important Agency 
activity. Having read with interest the Report on the Agency's Technical 
Co-operation Activities in 1990 presented by the Director General, he was 
happy to see that the Agency had succeeded in maintaining an increasing 
technical assistance budget despite budgetary restrictions. Spain continued 
to contribute to technical assistance activities by receiving fellows and 
visiting scientists, by organizing courses in Spain and by providing experts 
for Agency missions. The Spanish Government was ready to collaborate with the 
Agency and its Member States so that other countries could benefit from its 
technical capability. 
182. Besides Spain's regular contributions, he recalled the serious efforts 
it was making to increase its extrabudgetary contributions on behalf of 
footnote-a/ projects as well as other extrabudgetary activities such as the 
WWER-440/230 reactor safety project. Subject to budgetary decisions yet to be 
taken, Spain intended to continue increasing that type of contribution 
considerably. 
183. The past few months had been of particular significance for safeguards, 
another vital aspect of the Agency's work, because of the decisions taken by 

GC(XXXV)/OR.333 
page 43 


certain Member countries and the outcome of the inspections carried out 
in Iraq. 


184. Nuclear electricity, which represented 17% of all the electricity 
produced in the world, had become a major energy source. Nevertheless, 
operational safety, waste management, the decommissioning of nuclear 
facilities and control of the use of materials subject to safeguards raised 
problems which made nuclear energy the most controversial energy solution. 
185. The future of nuclear power depended on the confidence it inspired in 
the public. That confidence could only be won if safe and reliable operation 
of installations were demonstrated over a long period of time all over the 
world. The Agency should continue its task of ensuring a maximum level of 
nuclear safety. 
186. Mr. MAHMOUD (Yemen) congratulated the President on his election 
and thanked the Director General, the Board of Governors and all the 
delegations who had supported Yemen's application for membership of the 
Agency. Yemen was prepared to meet all the obligations that fell to it as a 
Member of the Agency and would support the Agency to the full in its efforts 
to apply the principles and achieve the goals of the United Nations, thereby 
enabling mankind to derive maximum benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The Yemeni delegation wished the General Conference every success. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
21 October 1991 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Monday, 16 September 1991, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (continued) 120 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United Kingdom 1 23 
Australia 24 51 
China 52 67 
Pakistan 68 82 
India 83 92 
Islamic Republic of Iran 93 107 
Brazil 08 120 


[*] GC(XXXV)/982. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 


91-4633 
8891e/838e 



GC(XXXV)/OR.334 


page 2 


ASSET 
CANDU 
CERN 


IAEA 


ICTP 


INES 


INIS 


IPERS 
LEU 
MESA 
NPT 


NUSSAG 
OSART 
PHWR 
Pre-OSART 
PRIS 
RADWASS 
RCA 


SAGSI 


TACF 


THORP 


Abbreviations used in this record 


Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 


Canada deuterium-uranium [reactor] 


European Centre for Nuclear Research 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


International Centre for Theoretical Physics (in Trieste) 


International Nuclear Event Scale 


International Nuclear Information System 


International Peer Review Service 


Low-enriched uranium 


Middle East and South Asia 


Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(reproduced in document INFCIRC/140) 


Nuclear Safety Standards Advisory Group 


Operational Safety Review Team 


Pressurized heavy water reactor 


Pre-Operational Safety Review Team 


Power Reactor Information System 


Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 


Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 


Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 


Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant 
(British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) (continued) 


1. Mr. WALKER (United Kingdom) welcomed Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania 
and Yemen as members of the Agency and endorsed the statement by the delegate 
of the Netherlands on behalf of the European Community. He commended the 
services and expertise of the Agency and its Action Team which had proved 
crucial in assisting the United Nations Special Commission to fulfil its 
duties in Iraq. In spite of such additional pressure, the Agency's sphere of 
activity had remained responsive to the growing needs of Member States in a 
period of difficulty and constraint for the world nuclear industry, when key 
political issues - safety, economics, and non-proliferation - were compelling 
the nuclear industry to satisfy proper public concerns. 
2. In reality, the public depended on nuclear power for 17% of the world's 
electricity, and 10 of the 25 countries with operating reactors met more than 
a third of their electricity needs from nuclear power. Exports from major 
nuclear producers also helped to keep other countries' grids in balance. 
3. Some research had suggested that if the worldwide production of 
elecricity from nuclear stations were replaced by that from coal-fired 
stations, an extra 1.7 million tonnes of CO would be discharged annually 
into the atmosphere - an increase of 25% over current discharges from power 
plants. 
4. While nuclear energy obviously had its problems, it was meeting a fair 
proportion of the world's energy needs. Recent projections indicated that the 
most likely scenario for the next two decades might be a continuation of 
modest levels of nuclear development on the whole, despite plans for 
considerable expansion in a handful of countries. 
5. In the United Kingdom the construction of the first PWR at Sizewell was 
progressing and it was eight months ahead of schedule. The earlier 
generations of reactors were operating satisfactorily. Improved performance 
of the Magnox and advanced gas-cooled plants had led to a record output of 
45 TW'h in 1990-91. The reprocessing industry was benefiting from 
significant overseas contracts for the new THORP facility, which on completion 
would be one of the largest in Europe. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 4 


6. Progress had been made In the search for a solution to long-term 
disposal of intermediate-level radioactive waste. In July, the waste 
management company, UK Nirex, had decided to concentrate its future efforts at 
Sellafield after intensive studies at both Dounreay and Sellafield for a 
proposed deep repository, which included deep boreholes and geological, 
environmental and safety studies. Nirex hoped to submit an application for 
permission to construct the repository in late 1992. 
7. The Government had also initiated a fundamental review of nuclear 
research and development effort in the United Kingdom. The aim was to focus 
its efforts on the key needs for the future, which included decommissioning 
and waste management technologies and safety. A consultation document had 
been published in order to seek a wide range of interested views. A strategy 
for the Department of Energy's nuclear research and development programmes 
would be published by the end of the year. 
8. The nuclear industry was international in all its aspects and no 
country's nuclear industry could flourish in isolation. The Agency, as one of 
several prominent international organizations in the nuclear field, had a key 
role in creating a framework of international confidence and co-operation. 
9. In that context he wished to make a special mention of the Agency's 
work in promoting non-power applications of nuclear energy. It was a mistake 
to think that nuclear power technology requiring a specialized, high-quality 
infrastructure was necessarily the most important objective for all countries, 
particularly when worldwide forecasts of nuclear generating capacity were 
being scaled back, and public acceptance was not assured. Of greater priority 
for many countries was the development and application of advanced nuclear 
techniques in food, agriculture, medicine and industry. Those techniques not 
only contributed to economic development but also had a direct beneficial 
impact on many lives. Those benign uses must continue to be developed and 
supported. 
10. In reviewing the Agency's activities during the preceding year, he 
noted a number of major events. First of all, the work of the Special 
Commission in the aftermath of the Gulf War and in view of the difficulties 
posed by the findings of inspections in Iraq had been of great concern to 
Member States and the Agency. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 5 


11. The second important event had been the submission to the Board of a 
draft medium-term plan. While much work remained to be done, the Board had 
welcomed the greater strategic element contained in the plan which would help 
its Members to reflect on the best way for the Agency to plan for the future. 
The Board would welcome contributions from other Member States at the 
Conference. 
12. Thirdly, an important debate had begun on measures to make the 
safeguards regime stronger and more effective, which issue had acquired a new 
urgency in view of the discoveries in Iraq. His delegation fully supported 
the statement made by the Netherlands delegation on behalf of the 
member States of the European Community both on possible immediate measures to 
strengthen the safeguards system and on the need for fundamental thoughts 
about the future shape of the system and the most cost-effective ways in which 
it could achieve its objectives. 
13. Fourthly, the substantial report of the international experts on the 
radiological consequences of the Chernobyl incident, published by the Agency 
in May, was a much-needed contribution to the understanding of the problem. 
It was an unprecedented effort, mobilizing the resources of the scientific 
community, to produce a balanced assessment. 
14. Lastly, the discussion of objectives and approaches of safety 
programmes at the recent International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear 
Power, and the stronger international effort to deal with safety issues in 
Eastern Europe had enjoyed considerable support from Member States. 
15. Referring to nuclear safety issues, he recalled that governments had 
drawn attention at the highest political levels in recent months to the 
importance of international co-operation in that area. The matter had also 
been emphasized at the summit meeting of the Group of Seven in June. In 
particular, the Governments of the United Kingdom, Belgium, France and Germany 
had issued earlier in the year a joint declaration on co-operation in nuclear 
energy, which included an undertaking to encourage regulators and industry to 
work towards mutual understanding of approaches to safety. His Government 
supported that process. A common objective was to facilitate international 
licensability of future reactor designs. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 6 


16. The Agency's natural role was to bring its technical expertise to bear 
on safety problems. In his opinion, such priority activities could and should 
be included in the Regular Budget. The recent safety problems in Bulgaria, in 
connection with which the authorities had sought international assistance, 
posed a new challenge to the international organizations concerned. In 
particular, when such assistance was urgently needed, it must be well 
co-ordinated and effectively implemented with the full co-operation of the 
host authorities and technical personnel at the site since they were uniquely 
placed to understand what was needed and had the ultimate responsibility for 
the safety of those plants. It was important that the lessons learned from 
the collaboration with Bulgaria should provide a feedback for other possible 
initiatives. 
17. The International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power represented 
an important step towards international consensus on nuclear safety 
standards. In particular, his delegation welcomed the idea that Member States 
and the Agency should consider whether a framework convention on safety 
standards would indeed make a helpful contribution. A step-by-step approach, 
based on existing Agency guidance and documentation, seemed to be the right 
approach. While early agreement on binding standards would be difficult to 
achieve, it might be possible to agree on procedures for increasing the 
transparency of national decision-taking and for strengthening the present 
methods of disseminating best practice. He was also in favour of further 
international discussion with a view to identifying the safety objectives for 
the disposal of radioactive waste. That activity should also be built on 
existing Agency guidance but be separate from the work on plant safety 
standards. 
18. The Agency's OSART and ASSET services had proved their value in 
promoting higher safety standards through peer review. It was necessary to 
consider how the scope of those programmes might be further developed. 
Another example of peer review - the regulators' exchange groups - had also 
shown its worth, and his country hoped to increase its participation in the 
continuing work of those groups. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 7 


19. Lastly, turning to Iraq's non-compliance with its safeguards 
obligations, which was dealt with in the Board's report to the General 
Conference!*], he considered that those violations had rightly been the 
subject of general condemnation and noted that their full implications were 
still being worked out. In that connection, his delegation wished to express 
its appreciation of the work of the inspection teams in Iraq, to whom the 
international community owed a debt of gratitude for uncovering evidence of 
Iraq's clandestine activities and breach of its obligations. 
20. The United Kingdom had willingly provided help and information to the 
Agency and its inspectors, and would continue to do so, if requested. He 
stressed the importance of removing and rendering harmless the nuclear 
material present in Iraq as quickly and efficiently as possible. He regretted 
to note that at its preceding meeting the Board had found further evidence of 
Iraq's failure to comply with its obligations under the safeguards agreement. 
21. Some of the findings of the inspection teams raised worrying questions 
about the effectiveness of safeguards in Iraq. His country had requested the 
Agency to submit its analysis to the Board at the earliest opportunity. He 
welcomed the Agency's proposed long-term plan on monitoring Iraq's future 
compliance with its obligations and hoped that the Agency and the United 
Nations Special Commission would reach early agreement on finalizing their 
respective reports. Ensuring future compliance might require unprecedented 
levels of co-operation between Member States and the Agency. However, the 
prime responsibility for demonstrating convincingly to the international 
community that Iraq was indeed complying fully with its non-proliferation 
obligations lay squarely on that country itself. Its record, including 
examples of lack of co-operation with the inspection team, did not inspire 
confidence. 
22. That was especially regrettable at a time when other countries had 
realized the merits of accession to NPT: he recalled the decisions of 
South Africa, Tanzania, Mozambique, Zambia and Albania to become parties, 
together with statements of intent by France and China. He was pleased to 
[*] Document GC(XXXV)/978. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 8 


note that South Africa had signed a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
Those developments were to be warmly welcomed in their own right and were not 
diminished by Iraq's total disregard of its obligations under the Treaty. 


23. In conclusion, he observed that the advances made in extending and 
strengthening the non-proliferation regime should be consolidated and that the 
Treaty should have a positive future. The obligation to accept 
non-proliferation controls and international safeguards was a prerequisite for 
the benefits of nuclear development to be freely available and for acceptance 
of that development by the public. 
24. Mr. EVANS (Australia) said that the present session of the General 
Conference was the most important in the history of the Agency. The events of 
the past year had underlined the challenges before the Agency and the 
importance for common security of its success. The joint decision of the 
Governments of Brazil and Argentina to conclude a full-scope safeguards 
agreement with the Agency would no doubt encourage the international community 
as a whole to deal seriously with the issues raised by security in the use of 
nuclear energy. 
25. The momentous developments in the world over the past year had reaffirmed 
his country's conviction that efforts to prevent the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction could not be relaxed. In acting against the Iraqi 
invasion of Kuwait through the United Nations, the international community had 
successfully demonstrated both the primacy of the principles of justice and 
the efficacy of collective security. The United States and the Soviet Union 
had agreed on important reductions in their arsenals of strategic nuclear 
weapons. Solutions to the long-festering regional problems in Cambodia and 
southern Africa at last seemed imminent, and efforts to deal with the problems 
of the Middle East and the Korean peninsula were gathering pace. 
26. However, international security could not be assured while the two 
nuclear superpowers still possessed nearly 50 000 nuclear warheads between 
them, three other countries were acknowledged nuclear powers and a small 
number of countries still wished to retain the option of joining them. The 
Gulf War had been a reminder that regional tensions could develop into armed 

GC(XZXV)/OR.334 
page 9 


conflict, and that the States involved could still find reasons to justify at 
least to themselves - the acquisition of a nuclear capability. The world 
needed, more than ever, to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 


27. Australia supported the newly independent Baltic States membership of 
the United Nations and the Agency, and welcomed their accession to OPT as 
non-nuclear-weapon States. That would reassure the international community 
about any possible increase in the number of nuclear-weapon States and would 
make a tangible contribution to a stronger non-proliferation regime. 
Indications from the Soviet Union's highest legislative authority - the 
Congress of People's Deputies - that component Republics of the Union, as a 
condition of their sovereignty, would have to relinquish any right to possess 
nuclear weapons, were also most welcome, as was the approval of a resolution 
by that body on 6 September requiring the Republics to accede immediately 
to NPT as a condition for independence. 
28. The Gulf War had underlined the dangers for international security that 
could arise from a combination of regional ambition, ruthlessness and the 
determination to acquire weapons of mass destruction. It had demonstrated the 
importance of efforts to discourage proliferation, and had shown that the only 
hope of eliminating such weapons lay in effective multilateral institutions 
like the Agency and instruments like NPT. The discovery of the extent of 
Iraq's violations of its obligations under NPT was a sobering message to the 
international community that it would have to make the non-proliferation 
regime even more effective; and the Conference could contribute to that aim. 
29. The enormity of Iraq's unrepentant violation of its obligations had to 
be seen clearly in the context of the Treaty's importance. NPT and the 
Agency's safeguards system were vital for international security, and without 
them the world might well have been caught up in a vicious cycle of suspicion 
and nuclear armament. NPT had been an extraordinarily successful arms control 
treaty and confidence-building measure, and there was a continuing trend 
towards universal adherence. Australia warmly applauded the long-awaited 
decisions by France, China and South Africa, among others, to accede to the 
Treaty, and also the decisions of Zambia, Tanzania, the Baltic States and 
Yemen. The accession to the Treaty of all five permanent members of the 
United Nations Security Council would be of the utmost importance in view of 
their political influence and their role in nuclear trade. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 10 


30. The finding by the Agency's Board of Governors that Iraq had breached 
its NPT safeguards agreement was the first and only such case in the history 
of the Treaty. The main task before the Conference was to deter other States 
which might contemplate developing a clandestine nuclear programme like 
Iraq's. The Security Council's resolution 707 condemning Iraq reinforced that 
message. 
31. The most effective deterrent was to take concrete, practical steps to 
strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime and the Agency's safeguards 
system on which it relied. If the international community tolerated or turned 
a blind eye to violations of international agreements, it would do so at its 
peril, for they constituted one of the foundations of the world order and of 
collective security. Many parties to NPT had still not concluded their 
obligatory safeguards agreements. That was a breach of the terms of the 
Treaty and should not be looked upon as a matter of little consequence: it 
would be comforting to see renewed efforts by the Depository States, other 
parties to NPT and the Director General of the Agency to ensure that those 
agreements were concluded promptly. The States in question must be firmly 
encouraged to live up to their obligations, as the issues involved affected 
the security of all. In that respect, he commended South Africa for the 
negotiation of its NPT safeguards agreement within weeks of its acceding to 
the Treaty and its commitment to bring that agreement into force upon 
signature - a stark contrast to the case of the Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea. 
32. His country was very concerned about the time it was taking to have NPT 
safeguards applied in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. That country 
had operated an unsafeguarded reactor for some time and had, reportedly, been 
building other nuclear facilities. As the only non-nuclear-weapon State in 
the history of NPT to have persisted in operating an unsafeguarded facility 
after accession to the Treaty, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had 
left open the question whether it was pursuing a nuclear-weapons programme. 
Lack of confidence in the nuclear intentions of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea had generated suspicion in what remained one of the world's 
most dangerous security fault-lines. As an Asia-Pacific State, Australia was 
particularly concerned about the destabilizing consequences of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea's behaviour. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 11 


33. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea should not bring into 
operation any further unsafeguarded facilities, but should provide the 
Director General with information on facilities under construction so that 
safeguards could be applied promptly by the Secretariat. 
34. He recalled that, when addressing the Fourth NPT Review Conference in 
his capacity as Australian Foreign Minister, he had called directly on the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to conclude and apply a safeguards 
agreement. He now welcomed the approval by the Board of Governors of the 
safeguards agreement with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, pointing 
out that the resolution adopted by the Board called on it very clearly to sign 
the agreement and implement it fully. 
35. Non-nuclear-weapon States operating unsafeguarded facilities inevitably 
generated suspicions about their nuclear intentions. The way was open to them 
to end that suspicion by accepting international legal obligations not to 
develop nuclear weapons, just as Brazil, Argentina and South Africa were 
proceeding to do, following recent important decisions. Australia hoped 
earnestly that Israel, Pakistan and India would follow that lead. 
36. The international non-proliferation regime could be further consolidated 
by a strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system, the need for which 
had been made very plain by the Gulf War and the subsequent discovery of the 
extent of Iraq's manipulation of that system. As a major supplier of uranium 
to the nuclear energy programmes of many Agency Member States, Australia had a 
particular interest in the effective application of safeguards. 
37. The extent of Iraq's violation of its obligations was now becoming 
evident, for which thanks must be given for the unprecedented authority 
accorded the inspection teams, the intelligence made available to them by 
Agency Member States and the resolute international response to Iraq's 
aggression. The use of force to ensure compliance with international 
obligations could not be ruled out in exceptional circumstances, but it should 
not be necessary to rely on force to ensure compliance with obligations under 
the non-proliferation regime. Iraq's violations had cast doubt on the 
adequacy and effectiveness of IAEA safeguards: that could not be ignored, nor 
was it in the international community's interests to do so. Immediate action 
was needed to strengthen safeguards and to provide the Agency with a better 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 12 


flow of information so that it could take quick action when inconsistencies 
were found. His delegation wished to see the Conference adopt a clear 
statement on prompt and effective action to strengthen the safeguards system, 
and would be introducing a draft resolution to that effect. 


38. As the Director General had pointed out, the case of Iraq showed that 
Agency inspectors could uncover clandestine nuclear activities, provided three 
major conditions were fulfilled, namely that Member States provided intelligence 
information, that the Agency had an unequivocal right to inspect sites 
at short notice, and that the UN Security Council supported such inspections. 
39. Australia agreed with that analysis. Member States should provide the 
Secretariat with design information on new nuclear facilities as early as 
possible, and the Board should take an early decision on that question. 
Universal reporting of nuclear material and equipment transfers, which would 
require an extension of the current reporting practices, would improve the 
Agency's ability to detect clandestine facilities outside the safeguarded fuel 
cycle. Member States should also provide the Secretariat with national 
information on activities or trade affecting the application of safeguards, 
including court proceedings on violations of nuclear export controls. 
40. The Agency deserved commendation for its execution of the tasks 
entrusted to it by the Security Council under resolution 687, and the Director 
General and his staff were to be congratulated for the professionalism they 
had shown. The activities in respect of Iraq had been more demanding that any 
previous inspection tasks, and his country had been pleased to contribute by 
providing expert personnel for the Agency's inspection teams. 
41. Unequivocal right of access to suspect sites was a key element in 
strengthening the safeguards system. The Fourth NPT Review Conference had 
called on the Agency to consider the scope of special inspections, the 
circumstances in which they should be applied and the procedures for carrying 
them out. Quick action was needed, and his country wished to see consideration 
of the issue completed by the time of the Board's session in 
February 1992. 
42. The Iraq exercise would provide useful information on the details of 
inspection practices and assumptions, which the Secretariat should study 
carefully as a matter of priority, with the help of the SAGSI. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 13 


43. Yet another measure needed for strengthening the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime was a tightening of supply and export controls. 
Nuclear suppliers, in line with NPT, had already begun to establish export 
control understandings on nuclear dual-use items where there was a clear gap 
in current arrangements. Australia urged all countries to review the adequacy 
of their export controls, using the control lists of the Zangger Committee and 
the Nuclear Suppliers Group as a standard. 
44. All current and potential nuclear suppliers should adopt the principle 
that new nuclear supply could take place only when accompanied by a legally 
binding commitment to non-proliferation and the application of full-scope 
safeguards, as called for by the Fourth NPT Conference. Despite the events 
that had taken place in the year since then, an extraordinary number of major 
suppliers had still not endorsed that principle. Indeed, four of the 
five permanent members of the Security Council were involved. Despite what 
they had said in previous months, the permanent five had not set an example 
for other States in the area of arms control. He therefore called on France, 
the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and China to take the necessary action as 
soon as possible. 
45. A stronger safeguards system had to be backed up with the necessary 
human and financial resources, which was a challenging task in a climate of 
international financial stringency. Although the Director General had said 
that the Agency would be able to carry out its responsibilities for another 
year with a budget showing no real growth, the importance of strengthening 
safeguards, the growing safeguards obligations resulting from further accessions 
to NPT and developments in the nuclear industry all had implications for 
the resources needed by the Agency. He therefore found it difficult to see 
how the safeguards programme could be held to zero growth for much longer. 
The preparation of a Medium-Term Plan for the period 1993 to 1998 should 
improve the management of the Agency's limited resources in a decade of 
financial restraint, but all Member States would need to review their attitude 
to the Agency's budget and to look critically at the programmes funded by the 
Agency; Australia, for its part, had already begun to do so. 
46. His country remained firmly committed to the Agency's technical cooperation 
programme, thus fulfilling its obligation under NPT to assist 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 14 


developing countries to benefit from the peaceful applications of nuclear 
science and technology. Australia had also hosted and funded two Agency 
training courses during the past year, and had provided training for 30 IAEA 
fellows in fields such as radiation protection and nuclear medicine. Its 
scientists had undertaken about 30 expert missions on behalf of the Agency's 
technical assistance projects and supplied a range of equipment. 


47. Australia would again pledge its full contribution, an amount 
corresponding to its share of the assessed budget, to the TACF for 1992. In 
addition, it would continue to contribute considerable extra funding for 
technical co-operation, particularly in support of the RCA. It was examining 
a programme for the next RCA triennium involving an expenditure of over 
US $1 million on projects in radiation protection, nuclear medicine and 
industrial applications of radiation technology. 
48. Much of that assistance was provided through the Australian Nuclear 
Science and Technology Organization (ANSTO), whose development during the 
previous year underlined the country's determination to build on its expertise 
in nuclear science and technology. Three major facilities had recently been 
commissioned: a large tandem accelerator, a national medical cyclotron, and a 
supercomputer centre. ANSTO had also arranged major new projects under its 
collaboration with Japan's Institute for High Energy Physics and with the 
European Centre for Nuclear Research (CERN) at Geneva. He noted also the 
continuing development of the high-level waste form Synroc, invented in 
Australia, the Soviet Union having joined the growing list of international 
Synroc collaborators. A group of industrial companies in Australia had 
decided to proceed to the next stage in their study of Synroc's commercial 
viability. 
49. In conclusion, he said that the dangers of nuclear proliferation were 
not related exclusively to the military threat. Security was multidimensional, 
and environmental developments could also pose a threat. There 
would be more nuclear plants in the years to come, and the Agency, through its 
technical work in nuclear safety, would have a vital role to play in securing 
adherence to even more stringent standards. The matter could not be left to 
individual States alone; the international community as a whole had a common 
interest in the highest safety standards for nuclear plants. The results of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 15 


the International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power held In Vienna in 
early September, were before the General Conference and warranted careful 
study. Australia supported the idea of an international framework convention 
on nuclear safety and wished to see the matter examined further. 


50. In the past year, those who had forgotten or become complacent about 
the dangers of nuclear weapons proliferation had had an opportunity to look 
over the precipice and had realized, once again, the crucial need for the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime to work well. 
51. The institutions on which International security was based needed to 
adapt to changing circumstances, especially after the enormity of the changes 
over the past few years. That was true even of institutions such as NPT and 
the Agency, which had served the international community well. Action was 
needed to ensure that the non-proliferation regime responded to the rapid pace 
of change. But what was also needed was universal acceptance of the basic 
fact that any international agreement, even one so manifestly in the common 
interest as NPT, would work only when everyone fulfilled their obligations 
under it. 
52. Mr. JIANG (China) extended a warm welcome to the Republics of 
Yemen, Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia, which had just been approved for 
membership of the Agency. 
53. In the past year, the Agency had achieved commendable results in many 
important areas, including the introduction of INES on a trial basis, the 
international project to assess the health and environmental effects of the 
Chernobyl accident, the wide-ranging and in-depth discussions by the Standing 
Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage, which had provided a sound basis 
for a review conference on the Vienna Convention, the elaboration of 
safeguards criteria, and assisting with the implementation of Security Council 
resolutions 687 and 707. 
54. With regard to nuclear power generation, the tremendous shock of the 
Chernobyl accident had led, in some countries, to a slowing down or even a 
complete halt in the pace of nuclear power plant construction. Most 
countries, however, still viewed nuclear power as a viable energy source, and 
had persevered with its development. According to the Agency's statistics, 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 16 


32 out of 83 nuclear power reactors currently under construction were in 
developing countries. The Agency should therefore make greater efforts to 
assist developing countries with nuclear power, for example in formulating in 
development strategies, enhancing Infrastructure, promoting human resources 
development and disseminating successful experience in the design, 
construction and operation of nuclear power plants. 


55. The Agency's research and development work on the new generation of 
power reactors with passive safety features had been very useful. In addition 
to structural simplicity, a short construction cycle and lower investment 
requirements, they had an extremely low probability of serious accidents. 
Breakthroughs in such advanced technology would have a significant impact on 
nuclear power development over the next century throughout the world, and 
particularly in the developing countries. The Agency should not only provide 
a forum for information exchange regarding new generations of reactors, but 
should also make greater efforts to explore new forms of international 
co-operation in the development and construction of those reactors. His 
country would continue to participate in such international exchanges and 
co-operation. 
56. In recent years, the Agency had done a lot of useful work in helping 
Member States to formulate waste management plans. The waste disposal safety 
standards currently being elaborated by the Agency were appropriate to the 
needs of Member States and should therefore be finalized as soon as possible. 
When considering integrated development strategies for radioactive waste 
management, the Agency should give greater attention to the risks to human 
health and the environment posed by highly radioactive liquids. 
57. Nuclear applications in industry, agriculture and medical science 
should be given due attention. In view of differences in national development 
levels and the wide spectrum of nuclear applications, the Agency's activities 
in that area should focus on projects for the development and transfer of 
techniques with significant socio-economic benefits for developing countries, 
and regional co-operation should be further developed. Careful identification 
of priorities was important in view of the policy of zero real growth in the 
Regular Budget. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 17 


58. There was growing awareness among States that the greenhouse effect and 
other environmental problems such as acid rain, air pollution, spent radiation 
sources and radioactive wastes were posing an increasingly serious threat to 
the environment. Both emergency measures and long-term action were urgently 
needed to protect the environment and human health. China appreciated the 
Agency's energetic efforts in recent years in such areas as promoting public 
awareness of the superiority of nuclear power in terms of environmental 
protection and safety, carrying out a comparative assessment of nuclear and 
other sources of energy, guiding the safe use and management of radiation 
sources, and assisting Member States to plan and build radioactive waste 
repositories. The Agency should play a more active role in environmental 
protection. Industrialized countries, with their abundant financial and 
technical resources, should not only protect their own nuclear environment, 
but should assist developing Member States to do the same. 
59. In the development of its nuclear industry over the past three decades, 
China had consistently given first priority to safety and protection. Safety 
had consistently been maintained at a relatively high level by means of 
comprehensive regulations, the establishment of safety and environmental 
protection facilities, and the application of substantial research efforts. 
The Chinese nuclear industry had in 1981 begun an assessment of the radiation 
environment of over 40 nuclear facilities, including uranium mines, uranium 
processing and enrichment plants, fuel fabrication and reprocessing plants, 
reactors and plutonium metallurgy and processing plants. The results showed 
that the radiation impact on the environment of China's nuclear industry over 
the past three decades had been very slight, and that the negative impact had 
been negligible compared to those existing naturally or arising from other 
human activities. China's nuclear industry would continue to make a positive 
contribution to economic development, environmental protection and enhanced 
public health. 
60. The Chinese Government had always attached importance to developing 
co-operative relations with the Agency. Over the past year, China had 
actively supported and participated in the technical committee meetings on the 
design requirements of advanced water reactors and on uranium provinces in 
Asia and the Pacific. China had hosted or financed six regional training 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 18 


courses and technical committee meetings, and provided training for scientists 
and technicians from developing countries, particularly Asian-Pacific 
countries. China had also provided technical expert services in various 
fields for developing countries. In carrying out technical assistance and 
co-operation projects, China had been actively exploring ways and means to 
raise the implementation rate, and had enhanced project evaluation and 
management. As a result of joint efforts, the Agency's technical assistance 
projects in China were playing a positive role in numerous sectors of the 
national economy and had produced substantial socio-economic results. Nuclear 
safety and radiation protection were an important aspect of that 
co-operation. In the previous year, China had invited the Agency to carry out 
Pre-OSART evaluation of the Daya Bay nuclear power plant in Guangdong Province 
and a Pre-OSART follow-up review of the Qinshan nuclear power plant. In 
March, China had formally joined the International Nuclear Event Scale and had 
participated in the Event Reporting System as an observer. China's voluntary 
submission of some civilian nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards was an 
indication of its commitment to supporting the safeguards regime. 


61. In the past year, there had been further progress in China's nuclear 
power development. The Chinese-designed and -built 300 MW(e) pressurized 
water reactor in Qinshan had reached the stage of commissioning and startup. 
Units 1 and 2 of the Daya Bay power plant, which was jointly funded by China 
and Hong Kong, were currently at the stage of equipment installation, and 
preparations for production were continuing according to schedule. Active 
preparation was also under way for the 2 x 600 MW nuclear power plant for 
Phase II of the Qinshan project, and other nuclear power projects were also 
under consideration or being planned. 
62. In developing its nuclear industry, China had given priority to 
research and development for nuclear science and technology. Over the past 
year, significant research results had been obtained using newly-built 
facilities such as an HI-13 tandem accelerator, a high-current pulse electron 
beam accelerator and the China Tokamak HL-1. A series of experiments in, 
inter alia, thermal physics, power escalation and pulse mode operation had 
been carried out on the Chinese-designed and -developed uranium-hydrogenzirconium 
pulsed research reactor. The conceptual design of a fast reactor 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 19 


was virtually complete and major progress had been made in the development of 
mixed oxide fuel pellets and materials for fuel assemblies. Following the 


successful commissioning of the Chinese-designed and -built 5 MW lowtemperature 
heating reactor, 200 MW low-temperature heating reactors were 


currently being designed. 


63. According to the Statute, two of the Agency's major objectives were to 
promote the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and to encourage their use 
for the benefit of mankind. All States had the right to make use of nuclear 
energy techniques, and since the 1980s, numerous developing countries had 
begun activities in that area. Their call for international co-operation in 
the development and use of nuclear power was entirely just and reasonable, but 
the current state of affairs was far from satisfactory. The industrialized 
countries continued to monopolize the technology relating to nuclear science 
and nuclear energy, while developing countries continued to encounter 
financial problems and technical constraints. Some developed countries were 
unfavourable to international co-operation with developing countries on 
peaceful nuclear energy applications, an attitude which could only cause 
serious concern. Although appropriate measures were necessary to prevent the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, and their acceptance was a precondition for 
co-operation, they should by no means hamper or restrict international 
co-operation on peaceful nuclear energy applications. Such restrictions 
compromised the legitimate right of countries, and particularly developing 
countries, to benefit from those, applications. 
64. The Chinese Government had always adopted positive, prudent and 
responsible policies regarding nuclear exports, with strict adherence to three 
main principles, namely, exclusive use for peaceful purposes, acceptance of 
Agency safeguards and no transfer to third countries without China's prior 
consent. China was fully conscious of the sensitive nature of facilities, 
equipment and technologies for uranium enrichment, reprocessing and heavy 
water production, and had therefore placed strict controls on their export. 
No transfers of such equipment or technology had taken place, and none were 
planned. 
65. In order to support safeguards activities, China would continue to 
notify the Agency of her nuclear material exports to and imports from 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 20 


non-nuclear-weapon States, whenever the quantities involved exceeded one 
effective kilogram. 


66. Turning to the issue of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons, China had always advocated the complete prohibition and destruction 
of nuclear weapons. China was not in favour of, and did not encourage or 
engage in, nuclear proliferation, or help other countries develop nuclear 
weapons. NPT was the most universal international treaty in the field of 
disarmament and arms control, and despite its drawbacks and deficiencies, had 
played an important role in preventing nuclear proliferation, thus having a 
positive impact on the maintenance of world peace and stability. China 
supported the three main objectives of the Treaty, i.e. preventing nuclear 
proliferation, promoting nuclear disarmament and facilitating international 
co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In the previous year, 
China had sent an observer delegation to the Fourth NPT Review Conference. In 
order to contribute to achieving the objectives of NPT, Premier Li Peng had 
recently announced in Beijing that China had decided in principle to accede to 
the Treaty. 
67. Looking to the future, great opportunities lay ahead, as well as 
difficulties and challenges. The Agency would surely, with the active 
participation of all Member States, succeed in carrying out the onerous tasks 
entrusted to it and achieve its statutory objectives. Strict compliance with 
the Statute and adherence to the principle of mutual respect of sovereignty 
and equal consultations were necessary. China would continue, with other 
Member States, to contribute to the thriving worldwide development of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
68. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) welcomed Yemen, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania 
as new Members of the Agency. 
69. The General Conference was taking place at a time of crucial changes in 
world affairs. There was greater convergence on the non-proliferation issue, 
highlighted by France's and China's decisions to accede to the NPT, and 
encouraging developments in the area of disarmament, offering opportunities 
for diverting resources from military to peaceful purposes. Although many 
distinguished delegates had called for further strengthening of the Agency's 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 21 


safeguards, the Agency should not lose sight of its equally important role of 
promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy for sustainable development. 


70. Pakistan was firmly convinced that regional commitments to 
non-proliferation could contribute towards achieving a world completely free 
of nuclear weapons. Pakistan had advocated the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia since 1972 and earlier in the year had 
proposed that the United States of America, the Soviet Union and China consult 
with India and Pakistan to discuss and resolve the issue of non-proliferation 
in South Asia with the aim of reaching an equitable agreement to keep the 
region free of nuclear weapons. 
71. Only stability and economic prosperity could lead to lasting peace and 
energy was a prerequisite for sustained economic growth. The use of fossil 
fuels posed serious environmental problems, which would become even more 
serious with further industrialization, unless appropriate alternative 
measures were adopted. Nuclear power offered a way out of the dilemma, as a 
benign, practically inexhaustible resource, which was cost competitive in most 
countries. 
72. To deny developing countries peaceful nuclear technology through the 
fear of the proliferation of nuclear weapons could seriously jeopardize the 
development aspirations of such countries, particularly those which were 
deficient in conventional energy resources. The emphasis should be on 
understanding the energy needs of developing countries and the Agency should 
focus greater attention on the energy requirements of those countries, in 
accordance with Article III.A.2 of the Statute. The Agency could, for 
example, play a catalytic role in developing economically viable, advanced 
small and medium-sized power reactors for use in developing countries as an 
alternative to coal and oil-fired plants and it should actively promote the 
standardization of the design of such reactors. South-South co-operation 
should also be encouraged, since a number of developing countries were in a 
position to share their experience in the design, construction and operation 
of nuclear power plants. 
73. The proposal to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute had been under 
consideration for some fifteen years, but no steps had yet been taken to 
redress the gross under-representation of Africa and MESA in the Board of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 22 


Governors. It was therefore high time to take the necessary measures to 
ensure equitable representation. 


74. Pakistan supported the adoption of the Agency's programme and budget as 
presented in document GC(XXXV)/955. However, as it had repeatedly pointed 
out, the concept of "zero-growth" had outlived its usefulness, although it had 
enabled the Agency's Secretariat to gain valuable experience and expertise in 
the optimum allocation of limited financial and manpower resources. 
Allocations for technical assistance should be substantially increased and 
freed from the uncertainties of voluntary contributions. It was regrettable 
that so far the ratio of payments to the target for the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund was less than 40%. For its part, Pakistan had paid its 
assessed Regular Budget contributions and voluntary contributions to the TACF 
for 1991 very early in the year and had also pledged its share to the TACF 
for 1992. With regard to the Medium-Term Plan, Pakistan fully shared the 
views of the Group of 77 that a proper and equitable balance had to be 
maintained in all the Agency's activities. 
75. The recently concluded International Conference on the Safety of 
Nuclear Power had provided a forum for a valuable exchange of views. It had 
suggested many tasks which the Agency should undertake, especially in ensuring 
the safety of older reactors. Although Pakistan itself had an active interest 
in nuclear power, it should be remembered that two thirds of the Agency's 
members did not have any nuclear power reactors, and for them the Agency's 
programmes in the areas of radiation protection, regulatory infrastructures, 
guides for the safe transport of radioactive material and so on were of 
greater relevance. The Agency should therefore maintain a proper balance in 
its nuclear safety activities. 
76. His delegation appreciated the various services (such as OSART, ASSET, 
RADWASS, IPERS) which the Agency offered to its Member States and the work 
done by NUSSAG and SAGSI. Pakistan was also a participant in the Agency's 
INES programme. Equally commendable were the databases such as INIS and PRIS, 
which provided a forum for the exchange of safety-related data and operating 
experience among different countries. 
77. The Director General had made commendable efforts to reduce the serious 
imbalance in the representation of developing countries on the Agency's 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 23 


Professional staff. However, much still needed to be done to give adequate 
representation in the Secretariat at the higher and policy-making levels. 


78. With regard to developments in Pakistan, the country would need large 
inputs of energy in order to maintain a reasonable level of economic growth 
and to meet the growing aspirations of its people. Pakistan's limited fuel 
resource potential called for a carefully planned gradual and smooth 
transition to non-fossil energy options, of which nuclear electricity was the 
major alternative. Consistent with its longstanding policy, any nuclear power 
plant acquired from abroad would be placed under Agency safeguards. 
79. Pakistan appreciated the help it had received from the Agency in 
ensuring the safe operation of its Karachi nuclear power plant. His 
delegation hoped that the Agency would further strengthen its efforts in the 
area of safety by speeding up the implementation of General Conference 
resolution GC(XXXI)/RES/474 calling upon supplier States to share all relevant 
safety information with recipient States. 
80. Pakistan was also grateful for the technical assistance provided by the 
Agency in the form of expert missions and scientific visits to assist it in 
the conversion of its 5 MW research reactor from high enrichment fuel to low 
enrichment fuel and its upgrading to 10 MW. The first core of LEU fuel had 
been received from China and was being installed. The upgraded reactor would 
of course continue to be under Agency safeguards. 
81. Pakistan was also actively engaged in promoting the use of 
radioisotopes and radiation sources in agriculture, medicine and industry. 
Pioneering work had been undertaken in biotechnology and genetic engineering 
and in the area of the diagnosis and treatment of malignant diseases. There 
were at present nine centres in Pakistan treating more than 170 000 patients 
from all over the country every year. 
82. For the past fifteen years Pakistan had organized the International 
Summer College on "Physics and Contemporary Needs" co-sponsored by the 
Agency's International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste. Pakistan 
had also hosted several workshops and training courses under the RCA and his 
country greatly appreciated the role played by the RCA in fostering 
South-South co-operation. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 24 


83. Mr. IYENGAR (India), welcoming the Republics of Yemen, Lithuania, 
Latvia and Estonia as new Members of the Agency, said that the Conference 
assumed special significance against the background of a number of important 
recent events. It was unfortunate that unforeseen and unprecedented 
circumstances had led the Agency to carry out intrusive Inspection activities 
exceeding its statutory role and the provisions of the safeguards 
agreements. Though that task had been mandated by the UN, it was essential 
to avoid the natural tendency to globalize such actions. A single 
international experience should not be allowed to fundamentally alter the 
character of the Agency, as spelt out in its Statute. 
84. It should be remembered that the Agency's fundamental role, as 
envisaged by the Statute, was promotional. Article II, setting forth the 
objectives of the Agency, laid down that it should seek to accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity, 
subject, of course, to safeguards against abuses for military purposes. The 
aim of the provisions in the Statute for safeguarding nuclear materials and 
facilities was to prevent the abuse of atomic energy originally intended for 
peaceful purposes. However, that should not result in a major proportion of 
the overall budget being consumed by the safeguards function alone; a balance 
must be maintained between the Agency's promotional and regulatory activities. 
85. In that context, the enormous energy requirements of the developing 
countries was an obvious area where the Agency could play a leading role. 
The recently held symposium on electricity and the environment in Helsinki had 
also highlighted the need to contain carbon dioxide emissions by substantially 
reducing the burning of fossil fuels for electricity generation, in which 
context nuclear energy was an obvious alternative. There was an immediate 
need to develop new reactor designs to generate low-cost electricity, increase 
safety and enhance fuel resource utilization for the energy-hungry developing 
world in particular. It was welcome, therefore, that, in its draft 
Medium-Term Plan, the Secretariat had proposed that attention be devoted to 
the development of small and medium-sized reactors and specialized reactors 
for the desalination of water, which should be given the highest priority. 
Making small and medium-sized reactors competitive would be of considerable 
relevance to the developing countries, and the use of thorium, as important a 
resource as uranium, also merited active consideration. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 25 


86. It followed that any policy formulated in the Agency should not cloud 
the atmosphere and hamper the efficient functioning of the Agency in 
discharging its promotional functions and responsibility. Further, it must 
be ensured that there was no interference in the internal policies of Member 
States and no infringement of their fundamental right to carry out research 
and development and thereby to benefit from its spin-offs. An emphasis on 
"special inspections" or, as sometimes referred to, "challenge inspections", 
beyond the provisions of existing documents was bound to cloud the atmosphere, 
for the simple reason that "challenge inspections" essentially presupposed the 
acquisition by the Agency of information through questionable means. 
87. Another important issue would be the way "sensitive technology" was 
defined. The dividing line between sensitive and non-sensitive technology 
was rather thin, one of the essential characteristics of modern science and 
technology moreover. To achieve its objective of promoting the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, the Agency should therefore ensure that no artificial 
barriers were raised to impede the development of high technologies. 
88. Scientific discoveries could not remain perpetual secrets. History 
had taught that science could never be the preserve of only some nations, a 
lesson that was equally applicable to technology. Further, unethical 
practices by some countries infringing on committed international norms had 
undeniably resulted in sensitive scientific and technological know-how being 
passed on indiscriminately. Hence, signing an agreement or treaty was 
patently not by itself the recipe for preventing proliferation. More 
important was self-restraint, a policy which, despite having developed nuclear 
technology several years ago, his country continued to practise. Deeply 
committed to the cause of disarmament, it had submitted a comprehensive Action 
Plan to the Third Special Session of the UN General Assembly devoted to 
disarmament, calling upon the international community to negotiate a binding 
commitment to eliminate nuclear weapons within a specific time-scale, 
appropriate commitments being assumed by non-nuclear-weapon States. 
Important developments in the area of disarmament were heartening, and it was 
hoped that the dismantling of psychological and political barriers would lead 
to further progress towards the widely cherished objective of the complete 
elimination of nuclear weapons. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 26 


89. India continued to regard the Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) as 
a valuable Instrument for promoting co-operation among developing countries, 
particularly in human resource development. During the past year, it had 
hosted regional training courses in research reactor safety principles and 
isotope techniques in hydrology. Three more training programmes and 
workshops had been planned for 1991-92. Activities under RCA should be 
expanded to create a base for nuclear power generation and should therefore 
Include areas such as surveying and prospecting of atomic minerals, reactor 
operations and waste management. To contribute further to the human resource 
development of RCA member States, he had recommended that the Agency consider 
establishing a regional institute to provide training facilities in various 
nuclear science and technology disciplines and his country would be happy to 
provide a site for such a useful institution. It was also vital to restore 
the enthusiasm and dedication with which the Agency's technical co-operation 
programmes were initially conceived. He pledged India's assessed share of 
voluntary contribution to the Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Fund for 1992. 
90. During the past year, India had made significant progress in her 
various programmes for the peaceful application of nuclear energy. All the 
seven operating nuclear power reactors were functioning satisfactorily. The 
coming months were expected to see the commissioning of two more pressurized 
heavy water reactor (PHWR) units of 220 MW(e) each at Narora and Kakrapar. 
The setting up of two 500 MW(e) PHWR units at Tarapur had been approved and it 
was hoped that the Indian nuclear power programme would be stepped up. The 
lessons learnt in building and operating the indigenous PHWRs had contributed 
to the development of new reactor designs and also to the resolution of 
critical operational and maintenance problems. The infrastructure for the 
production of uranium fuel and zirconium tubes had also considerably expanded 
and two new heavy water plants had commenced production, all of which augured 
well for the future development of the indigenous nuclear power generation 
programme. 
91. The 60s and 70s had seen a number of Agency-sponsored international 
meetings, at which scientists from different areas of fundamental science 
interacted constructively in developing new areas of research related to the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 27 


emerging technologies. It was regrettable that those activities had recently 
been diluted in favour of those dealing mainly with rules, regulations, 
accounting and safeguards, which, though by no means trivial, seemed to 
dominate the stage. The Agency was a unique UN organization devoted to 
promoting international co-operation in advanced areas of science and high 
technology. However, an examination of the Agency's resource allocations to 
various areas of activity clearly demonstrated the need for a reorientation of 
priorities. The absence of an active scientific advisory committee was a 
major lacuna needing to be filled, and he therefore urged the Agency to seek 
the advice of eminent international experts so that its activities were not 
reduced merely to performing mundane tasks. The inaugural address had 
referred to the cycle of growth in nuclear power, possibly occasioned by new 
scientific and technological breakthroughs, a very important aspect where the 
need for advice from senior scientists to the Agency needed to be stressed. 


92. With reference to the recently held international conference on the 
safety of nuclear power, it should be noted that, universal as the principles 
of nuclear safety might be, the details varied from one type of reactor to 
another, as reflected in the various IAEA safety codes and guides, which 
Member States should be encouraged to use in the design, construction and 
operation phases. Effective compliance with the principles involved in 
safety must be verified by the national regulatory bodies. The IAEA should 
play a greater role in assisting countries needing to develop and manage the 
safety of nuclear power plants independently. However, any attempts to 
establish an international convention or binding regulation for nuclear power 
safety would only be counter-productive, especially where developing countries 
were concerned. In conclusion, he said that the increased representation of 
developing countries on the staff of the Agency's Secretariat was welcome. 
93. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), speaking first of all on 
behalf of the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, welcomed the 
gathering of the thirty-fifth regular session of the General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and expressed the hope that the Agency's 
endeavours to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would continue 
unabated. Although the peaceful use of nuclear science and technology was 
currently beset with problems, he believed that the utilization of that energy 
form was essential to the evolution of human civilization. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 28 


94. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran would uphold all the 
international instruments of control and verification relating to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. Equally, considering military applications of 
nuclear energy to be inadmissible under any pretext, it supported the concept 
of a nuclear-weapon-free world and, in particular, a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in the Middle East and the Indian Ocean and would do its utmost to achieve 
that goal. Attempts to use nuclear science and technology for non-peaceful 
purposes not only seriously endangered global safety and security, they 
Inhibited the peaceful uses of that energy form in Third World countries for 
the purposes of development and progress. If the manufacture of nuclear 
weapons was not stopped and nuclear weapon arsenals were not destroyed, future 
generations would always be threatened by nuclear conflicts. It was the 
responsibility of world leaders to discharge their duties in that respect. He 
hoped that the International Atomic Energy Agency would ensure, as far as it 
was able, that nuclear technology supplier countries did not prevent 
Third World countries from gaining access to nuclear technology and would not 
set up obstacles to the spread of peaceful nuclear applications. He 
commended the outstanding work of the Director General who, despite various 
difficulties, had achieved success in meeting the prescribed objectives. 


95. Speaking next on his own behalf, he congratulated the President of the 
Conference on his election. 
96. The thirty-fifth regular session of the General Conference was being 
held at a time when positive trends were becoming apparent in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Greater interest was being shown by various 
States in the NPT and IAEA safeguards. The acceptance of safeguards by 
South Africa and the revision by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of 
its policies concerning the NPT and safeguards, which he hoped would 
eventually lead to full acceptance, were all significant developments that 
would further isolate the usurper Israeli regime as a nuclear threat blatantly 
ignoring all international means of control and verification. He urged all 
States which had not yet joined the NPT or had not accepted safeguards, and 
particularly developing countries, to reconsider their past policies in that 
respect. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 29 


97. Currently, global transformations were taking place which all pointed 
to the imminent formation of economic power blocks. Eventually the North 
would be reorganized into three or four blocks of States; the States within 
each block would be united via economic as well as political charters, and the 
blocks thus formed would be linked by agreements on trade, technology transfer 
and resource allocation. That would be a truly commendable development, but 
only as far as the East and West were concerned. The polarization it would 
cause meant that the States of the South would have to form closer ties with 
one another and, eventually, economic blocks in the South to counterbalance 
those of the North. Disunity and divergence of interest would render the 
States of the South impotent against the dominance of the North. For that 
reason, it was imperative that the developing countries reassess seriously 
their current and often outdated policies, bearing in mind the broad 
implications of contemporary developments. 
98. It was possible that the economic blocks of the North had already 
identified their domains of influence and interest in the South, a strategy 
which could be termed "new colonialism". If such arrangements were allowed to 
take root, the developing States would never be able to define freely their 
future course of progress and would remain in a perpetual state of 
"development", ideologically and politically alienated from one another and 
the rest of the world. The advent of the "new colonialism" was clearly 
manifesting itself in the form of increasingly restrictive policies imposed by 
the North to regulate the transfer of technology to the South. In that 
regard, the so-called "trigger list" of "off-limit" technologies to which 
developing countries were given only strictly controlled access was constantly 
expanding and was already in force. Nuclear energy and associated 
technologies, even when used for peaceful purposes, were high on the list. 
99. Thus, the following issue merited serious contemplation by all 
Member States, particularly those belonging to the South. - Considering the 
fact that the developing countries could not at present readily benefit from 
nuclear energy for power production purposes, and considering also the fact 
that advanced applications of nuclear science and technology in the developing 
countries for peaceful purposes were practically impossible, what role could 
the peaceful applications of nuclear energy play in the future of the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 30 


developing countries and, by extension, what was the Agency's role in that 
respect in the light of its statutory objectives? 


100. On the other hand, the unfortunate misapplication of nuclear science 
and technology by certain misguided regimes had played into the hands of the 
technology-holders. Iran had always given its full support to sanctions 
against States misusing that technology and would continue to do so. However, 
isolated instances should be treated individually and should not be used as 
grounds for a general penalization of the developing countries. If recent 
events pointed towards intended proliferation by some countries then, rather 
than depriving all developing States of the benefits of nuclear technology, 
the causes of the adoption of such policies should be identified. The main 
cause was clearly the potential nuclear threat of the usurper regime of Israel 
which, encouraged by the complacency of the international communities, had 
manufactured and stockpiled nuclear weapons, blatantly ignoring international 
treaties of control and verification regimes. The establishment of peace and 
security in the Middle East was not feasible without the complete nuclear 
disarmament of Israel. The potential nuclear threat of Israel had been and 
would continue to be the source of the tension and insecurity in the 
Middle East. 
101. The Agency's safeguards system involved great effort and considerable 
expense. Colossal international efforts were being channelled into 
implementing the NPT and keeping it alive after 1995 through the organization 
of costly and time-consuming review conferences. However, the growing 
restrictions on access to nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes 
were a clear indication that supplier countries realized that the current 
instruments of control and verification were inadequate. If that were not the 
case, why were independent restrictive measures being imposed by the 
technology holders such as those in the "Nuclear Suppliers Group" and the 
"Zangger Committee", and why did some supplier countries, in clear violation 
of the terms of NPT, unilaterally enact legislation restricting, often 
retroactively, the transfer of nuclear science and technology even to those 
countries which were NPT signatories and had accepted full-scope IAEA 
safeguards? It was also disturbing to note that the Agency reflected such 
restrictions in its own documents, such as INFCIRC/209/Rev.1 and INFCIRC/254, 

GC(KXXV)/OR.334 
page 31 


without adopting an official position. The so-called "new world order" could 
only be meaningful if mankind were able to benefit from the progress of 
technology without prejudice. All men should have an equal share in the 
benefits of modern technologies and, needless to say, in their potential 
risks. Currently, however, 96% of the benefits of nuclear power accrued to 
the peoples of the developed countries only, whereas the potential risks were 
faced by all. 


102. Iran's nuclear power programme had been a technically sound but 
capital-intensive undertaking supported by qualified indigenous manpower. The 
current chronic power shortages in the country and the amount of capital which 
had been sunk in unfinished nuclear power plants were strong incentives not to 
abandon such projects, notwithstanding the refusal of the Government of 
Germany to fulfil its obligations under bilateral agreements totally 
disregarding the fact that Iran had been among the first countries to accept 
international systems of control and verification. Such refusals clearly had 
political motivations. In any event, the developing countries should be aware 
that, if the discriminatory policies of the Government of Germany prevailed, 
the future of the nuclear industry in all developing countries might become 
highly questionable since the credibility of bilateral agreements had been 
completely destroyed. Iran was, nevertheless, deeply committed to completing 
the project, even if that meant having to buy or order again the parts which 
had been blocked, and expected the Agency's co-operation at all stages 
including construction and even operation. Under the circumstances, Iran was 
left with no alternative but to pursue its claims through the competent 
arbitration tribunals. 
103. Despite the promotional endeavours of the Agency, the impressive 
performance of nuclear power plants worldwide, and the extremely effective 
peaceful applications of nuclear science, the politics of the issue had 
attained such disproportionate importance that the peaceful benefits of 
nuclear energy had been totally overshadowed by its strategic implications. 
The restrictive policies of supplier countries were irreconcilable with the 
mandate of the Agency. The Agency could not possibly fulfil its mandate of 
"accelerating" and "enlarging" the contributions of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world while it was constrained by the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 32 


formidable political, technical and financial restrictions imposed by supplier 
Member States. The peaceful use of nuclear energy was the inalienable right 
of all sovereign nations and, having once accepted effective means of control 
and verification, no country should be deprived of the benefits thereof, 
unless of course it was found to be in violation of its non-proliferation 
obligations. 


104. It was often asked why a country rich in indigenous fossil fuel 
resources, especially oil and gas, needed nuclear power. The more salient 
reasons were as follows. - Firstly, it was imperative that such countries 
reduce their total dependency on a single depletable commodity and shift their 
oil-based economy to other industries. Secondly, nuclear technology in 
general and nuclear power in particular had a tremendous potential for 
upgrading the technical and industrial infrastructure in a country and 
enhancing its qualified manpower resources. Thirdly, the environmental 
arguments against the use of fossil fuels for power production which had been 
put forward in the industrialized States should, by logical extension, also 
apply to developing countries irrespective of their indigenous fossil fuel 
resources. A document recently published by Siemens, commenting on a German 
Parliamentary report entitled "Preventive Measures to Protect the Earth's 
Atmosphere", argued in favour of expanding nuclear power for environmental 
reasons. Siemens was the contractor for the unfinished Iranian nuclear power 
plants and was currently refusing to fulfil its obligations. Siemens and the 
Government of Germany were clearly applying double standards. Fourthly, 
relying solely on depletable resources was hardly commensurate with sound 
policy and the prosperity of future generations. Indeed, the USA and the USSR 
which possessed considerable petroleum and gas resources, did not rely solely 
on fossil fuels. Developing countries, irrespective of their indigenous 
energy resources, were faced with increasing population growth, expanding 
towns and cities, and the implementation of increasingly demanding development 
programmes, all of which resulted in an ever-increasing demand for electrical 
energy. In view of the well-established drawbacks of fossil fuels, the only 
primary energy resources suitable for electrical power generation for the 
foreseeable future were hydroelectric power and nuclear power. Hydroelectric 
power had limited potential, particularly in the developing countries; thus, 
nuclear power appeared to be the only option. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 33 


105. Positive steps needed to be taken by the developing countries and 
supplier countries which, with the assistance of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, might help resolve the current impasse. The following steps 
could be taken by the developing countries. - Firstly, there should be full 
acceptance of all internationally approved control and verification mechanisms 
particularly by those States which already operated nuclear power plants. 
Those States might otherwise find the maintenance and future expansion of 
their nuclear power programmes increasingly difficult. Secondly, close and 
formal regional ties should be established with a view to achieving 
nuclear-weapon-free zone status. Iran had been the first country to propose 
such a measure for the Middle East and would continue to support the issue. 
Thirdly, States should give their full support to the NPT and its extension 
beyond 1995. On the other hand, supplier countries should continue their 
joint efforts to develop new generations of small- and medium-size nuclear 
power reactors featuring enhanced passive safety features with particular 
emphasis on standardization, reduced lead time and, consequently, reduced 
capital requirements. Advances in fuel efficiency combined with lower capital 
costs should make nuclear power plants increasingly competitive by comparison 
with plants running on fossil fuels. 
106. On the basis of the above, the Islamic Republic of Iran was seeking to 
initiate a programme designed to resolve the current deadlock with regard to 
nuclear power projects. That programme would aim broadly at the following: 
firstly, a review of the deficiencies of the current systems of control and 
verification with a view to strengthening those systems so as to mitigate all 
proliferation concerns expressed by supplier countries; secondly, the 
promotion of new-generation nuclear power plants with enhanced safety, design 
and operational features which would remove proliferation concerns; thirdly, 
the promotion of control strategies and of support for the extension of the 
NPT beyond 1995, perhaps with some revisions; fourthly, the promotion of 
closer and more direct dialogue between supplier and recipient countries with 
a view to fostering greater understanding. The Agency should play a central 
role in the successful implementation of that programme. The resolution of 
the deadlock was important not only to the future progress of the developing 
countries, but also to the preservation of the integrity of the Agency. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 34 


107. In conclusion, he outlined the activities which the Atomic Energy 
Organization of Iran (AEOI) had undertaken during the previous year. - Iranian 
nuclear research centres were engaged in various projects in the fields of 
nuclear physics, radiation chemistry, plasma physics, laser techniques, 
production, the application of radioisotopes and radiopharmaceuticals, and 
various other radiation applications. The Gamma Irradiation Centre, which 
had a capacity of 200 000 Curies, had been very active and, during the 
previous year, 40 000 packages of various items had been sterilized. The 
laboratories for the application of nuclear techniques in agriculture had 
succeeded in producing strains of wheat, barley and other cereals with 
improved characteristics. The AEOI was also responsible for the protection of 
all personnel working with ionizing radiation. Therefore, all imports and 
exports, and all activities connected with radiation were routinely controlled 
and supervised by the AEOI. Furthermore, the AEOI was responsible for the 
inspection of radiation application centres and provided radiation protection 
services to 9000 personnel employed at 1400 laboratories and other 
institutions which used radiation throughout the country. The Conference on 
High Levels of Natural Radiation had been held in Ramsar with the co-operation 
of the Agency. He thanked the scientists who had taken part in the Conference 
and made it a success, and the Agency and other supporting organizations which 
had provided assistance. 


108. Ms. MACHADA QUINTELLA (Brazil) welcomed Estonia, Latvia, Lituania 
and the Republic of Yemen as new Members of the Agency and expressed 
appreciation for the wide range of highly qualified services the Agency had 
rendered to Member States and the international community in 1990. Her 
Government placed special emphasis on nuclear safety and radiological 
protection. A number of significant Initiatives had been carried out in those 
areas, and others were proposed as a follow-up to the International Conference 
on the Safety of Nuclear Power: Strategy for the Future. 
109. The Agency's services in radioactive waste management were of special 
relevance to Brazil, which had received an Agency mission in 1990 that had 
furnished valuable assistance in achieving the disposal of wastes resulting 
from the radiological emergency at Goiania in 1987. The Angra I nuclear power 
plant had attained a high level of operational safety and a good performance 
record, thanks largely to two OSART missions sent by the Agency. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 35 


110. Ever since the Chernobyl accident, the idea that the effects of nuclear 
accidents could not be confined geographically had been reinforced among the 
general public. Nuclear accidents thus became the concern of all. 
International nuclear co-operation was the key word in the promotion of safe, 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Considerations of global security had 
necessarily to take into account the fact that nuclear safety should be 
attainable by developing countries, and to that end, there should be an open 
exchange of experiences and technology. Whenever the exchange involved 
sensitive technologies that might be used for proscribed activities, they 
could take place under international supervision. Yet the risks of misuse of 
such technologies should by no means hinder international co-operation. 


111. At the April 1991 session of the United Nations Disarmament Commission, 
Brazil and Argentina had presented a joint initiative that related, inter 
alia, to the benefits that both supplier and recipient countries could derive 
from the establishment of broadly based, transparent and equitable multilateral 
regulations for international transfers of goods, services and 
know-how in relation to sensitive technology. The lack of effectiveness of 
current regulations, and the restrictions they caused on legitimate commerce 
and on access to advanced technology, impaired their credibility. 
112. Turning to the Agency's role in promoting and providing international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, she said her delegation 
had always been a strong supporter of the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme. Its importance for developing countries could not be overemphasized, 
yet it also significantly benefited industrialized nations. 
113. Environmental protection had become a priority in Brazil. Without 
losing sight of its development requirements, Brazil was doing its part to 
preserve its ecosystems and expected other countries to do the same, 
especially those that were primarily responsible for environmental 
deterioration. Her country was looking forward to the United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development, to be held in Rio de Janeiro 
in 1992. 
114. In the past, Brazil had been one of the main beneficiaries of the 
Agency's technical co-operation. More recently, it had started contributing 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 36 


to the programme - sharing its experiences with other developing countries, 
especially in Latin America, through ARCAL. In 1990, ARCAL had continued to 
promote nuclear development in participating countries without binding them to 
financial counterparts they could not afford, and while taking fully into 
account the orientation and capabilities of their nuclear programmes. ARCAL's 
present organizational structure had proven to be adequate for accomplishing 
the programme's objectives. Some reorientation of project areas might be 
beneficial, however, as might the thorough revision of the programme's 
guidelines recommended by the Planning and Co-ordination Committee. 


115. She reaffirmed her Government's support for the Agency's safeguards 
system operating on the basis of non-discrimination and of negotiations with 
sovereign States. In providing safeguards services to Member States, the 
Agency was expected to give due consideration to their right to preserve the 
technological advances they had already achieved, for those advances had 
involved significant efforts to overcome constraints. 
116. The current Brazilian Government had demonstrated its strict adherence 
to the principle of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Brazil's nuclear policy 
was governed by the Constitution, promulgated in 1988, which stated that all 
nuclear energy had to be used for peaceful purposes, and by the Treaty of 
Tlatelolco. Although that Treaty was not in force in Brazil, the country's 
policy had been to abide fully by it. Since assuming office, President Collor 
had established a policy of making the nuclear programme more transparent, in 
compliance with the wishes of Brazilian citizens. 
117. In its statement to the General Conference in 1990, the Brazilian 
delegation had referred to the dynamic process of political consultation, 
economic integration and technical collaboration between Brazil and 
Argentina. That process had born fruit. In November 1990, the Presidents of 
Brazil and Argentina had signed a declaration on common nuclear policy that 
constituted a landmark for both countries. Besides reaffirming the commitment 
of the two countries to the use of nuclear energy solely for peaceful 
purposes, the declaration had approved three steps: the establishment of a 
common system for accounting and control of nuclear materials, the negotiation 
of a joint safeguards agreement with the Agency, and the adoption of measures 
conducive to the full entry into force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.334 
page 37 


118. Brazil and Argentina had signed a bilateral agreement that was now 
under consideration by both national parliaments. The agreement would create 
a Brazilian-Argentine agency for accounting and control of nuclear materials. 
The two countries had already begun negotiation with the Agency of a joint 
safeguards agreement, and they looked forward to its early signature. 
119. Brazil's commitment to safeguards on its nuclear activities was not an 
isolated gesture. In a declaration signed with Argentina and Chile on 
5 September 1991, the Brazilian Government had committed itself to prohibiting 
chemical and bacteriological weapons even before the conclusion of 
negotiations on the convention concerning chemical weapons. 
120. In recent months there had been additional signings of safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. That process reflected the voluntary decisions of 
each country, which was as it should be. Safeguarding nuclear activities was 
one of the Agency's most important roles, and was also one of the most 
delicate. Its effectiveness depended upon the technical soundness of the 
system and on the expertise of its professionals, as well as on its political 
acceptance. Save in exceptional cases, safeguards should be applied by 
working side by side with the country Involved. Confidence in the Agency's 
technical expertise and trust in its unbiased motivations were essential to 
effectiveness. 
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
12 May 1992 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 17 September 1991, at 10.10 a.m. 
President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (continued) 81 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Venezuela 
Republic of Korea 
Hungary 
Nigeria 
Romania 
1 17 
27 
39 
63 
16 
26 
38 
62 
81 
Arrangements for the Conference 
(a) Adoption of the agenda and 
allocation of items for initial 
discussion 82 94 


[*] GC(XXXV)/952, Add.1 and Add.2/Rev.1. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 


91-04639 
9767e/905e 



GC(XXXV)/OR.335 


page 2 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
(b) Closing date of the session and 
opening date of the next session 95 98 
General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (resumed) 99 163 
Statements by the delegates of: 
GermanyByelorussian Soviet Socialist RepublUnion of Soviet Socialist RepublicsArgentina 
99 - 110 
ic 111 - 120 
121 145 
146 - 163 

Abbreviations used in this record 


AFRA African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 


and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 


Science and Technology in Latin America 
BIGOT Biological Control of Tsetse 
CANDU Canada deuterium-uranium [reactor] 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
ICRP International Commission on Radiological Protection 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
NUSS Nuclear Safety Standards 
OPANAL Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and 


the Caribbean 
RAPAT Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 


Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 


(for Asia and the Pacific) 
SSR Soviet Socialist Republic 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 
US $ United States dollar 
USSR Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
WAMAP Waste Management Advisory Programme 
WHO World Health Organization 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor (Soviet Union) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) (continued) 


1. Mr. PABON GARCIA (Venezuela), after welcoming the four new Members 
of the Agency and congratulating the President and the officers on their 
election and the Director General on his introductory statement, commended the 
quality and volume of activities accomplished by the Agency, as reflected in 
the Annual Report for 1990. 
2. His Government had always given extensive support to those activities, 
particularly those relating to technical assistance and co-operation, as they 
were of vital importance for the socio-economic growth of developing countries 
and thus contributed significantly to maintaining international peace and 
security. His delegation had therefore always urged that they should be 
supported as far as possible - indeed should be regarded as the Agency's main 
objective. He emphasized once again that efforts should continue to distribute 
the resources of the Agency's budget in a more equitable manner among its 
various components, so that the necessary resources were available for 
technically sound co-operation projects. 
3. It was a cause for concern that technical co-operation continued to 
depend on voluntary contributions to the TACF and that some Member States did 
not pay their contributions on time, thus rendering it difficult to use them 
as required for the implementation of planned projects. That situation, 
together with the reduced level of pledges in relation to the target for 
the TACF, showed the urgent need for financial resources to be assured, 
predictable and adequate if technical co-operation was to respond effectively 
to the growing needs of developing Member States. 
4. He noted with satisfaction that the implementation rate for technical 
co-operation and assistance activities had increased substantially in 1990 and 
that, as in preceding years, Latin America had benefited extensively. He 
particularly congratulated the Department of Technical Co-operation for its 
notable and tangible efforts to improve project implementation. 
5. Technical co-operation with the Agency had enabled Venezuela to make 
considerable progress in the application of nuclear techniques and isotopes in 
priority sectors such as health, agriculture and stock-breeding, radiation 
protection, industry and the environment. Some problems, however, had not yet 
been solved, and further co-operation with the Agency was required. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 4 


6. He reaffirmed his country's support for the ARCAL programme and its 
infinite gratitude to the Agency for the way in which it had contributed to 
that regional co-operation effort, which was a valuable tool for working 
towards shared objectives in the application of nuclear techniques to 
agriculture, medicine, industry, research and teaching, areas where 
development would improve living conditions in the participating countries. 
He invited the Agency to continue those efforts to ensure that ARCAL projects 
had the financial resources necessary for their implementation. He thanked 
the countries and institutions outside the region which had already provided 
financial support for the ARCAL programme, and emphasized the importance of 
such assistance for its success. 
7. The Fourth NPT Review Conference and the events which had taken place 
in the Gulf earlier in the year had drawn attention to the deterioration in 
the non-proliferation situation and the need for a more comprehensive and 
coherent approach to the problem. The international community had been 
impelled to give new emphasis to the establishment of an international 
security system. Under its Statute and the agreement it had concluded with 
the United Nations, the Agency had an important role to play within its own 
area of competence. 
8. The arms race, whether horizontal or vertical, involving nuclear or 
conventional weapons, not only increased military expenses throughout the 
world, but also added to insecurity and mistrust between States. At a time of 
serious crisis such as the Gulf war, the international community became aware 
of the threat posed by the use of weapons of mass destruction and the need to 
design and implement specific measures to eliminate such threats. His country 
therefore welcomed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) recently 
concluded between the United States and the Soviet Union as a very significant 
milestone in the annals of bilateral negotiations on arms control. That 
treaty should contribute to establishing a climate of greater transparency in 
international relations and to replacing nuclear deterrence by a strategy 
based on joint security. 


9. As a party to the NPT, Venezuela was particularly interested in the 
Agency's safeguards system, which had helped to prevent the horizontal 
proliferation of nuclear weapons; however, it was concerned at the persistent 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 5 


imbalance in the budget between the funds allocated to safeguards on the one 
hand and to technical assistance on the other. Venezuela supported the 
strengthening of the safeguards system in order to consolidate the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime, but was convinced that that objective could be 
reached without increasing the financial burden on Member States, particularly 
those whose nuclear development was modest or just beginning and did not 
therefore justify such a measure. Accordingly, he urged that the system be 
revised by rationalizing expenditure and making better use of safeguards 
support programmes financed by extrabudgetary contributions, which could 


absorb the cost of increased activities in that area. He recalled that the 
Fourth NPT Review Conference had also appealed to the Agency to take the 
necessary measures to increase the funds for technical assistance. 


10. His country took great interest in the Agency's activities in the field 
of nuclear safety and radiation protection, as they were of benefit to the 
whole of humanity. Nevertheless, given that some of those activities were of 
more immediate benefit to developing countries, his delegation would recommend 
that those directly related to power reactor safety should be financed from 
extrabudgetary funds. That would ensure that financial resources were 
available to improve the safety of nuclear techniques used in medicine and 
agriculture, industry and research, and to strengthen the radiation protection 
infrastructure in developing countries. 
11. Venezuela would support the development of internationally accepted 
basic principles, standards and guidelines to guarantee the safe use of 
nuclear techniques. The conclusions and recommendations of the International 
Safety Conference should be closely examined, particularly those which could 
affect the developing countries and have financial implications for the Agency. 
12. His delegation had already given its opinion on the Medium-Term Plan, 
to which it attached great importance, and wished simply to restate its 
preference for a strategic plan sufficiently flexible to enable the Agency to 
meet its obligation of responding to the individual needs of Member States, 
and in particular to help the developing countries to complete their projects 
relating to both power and non-power applications of nuclear techniques. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 6 


13. He reaffirmed his Government's support for safeguards and nuclear 
safety activities. However, the bias of the Medium-Term Plan in favour of 
those activities was disturbing, as it might, in view of the Agency's limited 
financial resources, lead to the non-power applications to which his 
delegation gave priority being neglected. He therefore once again stressed 
the need to maintain an equitable balance in the Medium-Term Plan between the 
Agency's various areas of activity. 
14. His delegation realized that nuclear energy, together with renewable 
energy sources, would in the future be called on to play an important role in 
countries lacking energy resources. It was also aware of the uncertainties 
affecting conventional resources, both with regard to the size of the existing 
reserves and to pollution problems. All the same, some of the opinions which 
had been expressed on the environmental effects of using fossil energy 
sources, including oil, should be seriously questioned, especially since 
experts were still studying the data on the extent of the pollution caused by 
those energy sources. Most surprising of all were certain tax measures 
adopted in some countries to reduce energy consumption, which were aimed 
primarily against oil and its derivatives. His delegation had many times 
emphasized that simplistic decisions should be avoided when dealing with 
energy and the environment. All matters relating to the environment must be 
considered in a global, objective and impartial way if sustainable development 
was to be achieved. It was quite unacceptable to promote any energy source in 
a biased manner without proper scientific basis. 
15. His delegation noted with satisfaction that the Standing Committee on 
Liability for Nuclear Damage had dealt in depth with many important aspects of 
civil liability and had discussed issues of extreme importance. However, some 
issues still required attention in order to ensure that victims of a nuclear 
accident received fair and equitable compensation for the damage sustained. 
To that end, a general liability regime needed to be established, based on 
State liability. His delegation accordingly supported the efforts made in the 
Standing Committee to obtain from the international community more extensive 
commitments to guarantee prompt and appropriate compensation for victims of a 
nuclear accident. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 7 


16. Finally, he thanked the Director General, the Secretariat and 
particularly the staff of the Department of Technical Co-operation for their 
efforts in implementing the Agency's programmes, which would continue to 
receive his delegation's full support. 
17. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea) welcomed the admission of Estonia, 
Latvia, Lithuania and Yemen to the Agency. He also noted with great 
satisfaction that the NPT family had expanded further with the accession of 
South Africa to the Treaty and France's announcement of its decision, and 
China's of its intention, to do the same. 
18. He was pleased to announce to the General Conference that in the course 
of the day the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea (DPRK) would become members of the United Nations. That was an 
important milestone not only for the Korean Peninsula, which had been divided 
for the past four decades, but also for the international community as a 
whole. However, while the admission of the two Koreas to the United Nations 
was a great privilege for the Korean nation, it was also a heavy burden in 
view of the overwhelming responsibilities involved. Full respect for 
international law was an essential condition for being considered a peaceloving 
State in the sense of Article 4 of the United Nations Charter. As a 
founding Member of the Agency and a party to the NPT, and having concluded an 
NPT-type safeguards agreement with the Agency, the Republic of Korea was 
firmly attached to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime, as the Republic's President, Mr. Roh Tae-Woo, had 
emphasized in his statement of 27 April 1991. 
19. His delegation noted the approval given by the Board of Governors the 
previous week to a safeguards agreement between the Agency and the DPRK. In 
concluding that agreement, the DPRK had taken an important step towards 
meeting its obligations under the NPT, to which it had been a party for almost 
six years. Although it had been exceptionally slow to meet the obligations in 
question, he congratulated the DPRK on respecting the commitments made at the 
Board meetings in June 1991. Nevertheless, it was disappointing that the DPRK 
had remained evasive until the last moment with regard to the signature and 
ratification of the agreement approved by the Board of Governors the preceding 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 8 


week. The delegation of the Republic of Korea took particular note of a 
threatening gesture from the DPRK which could be interpreted as a refusal to 
meet immediately its obligations under the NPT. 


20. The DPRK should be aware, however, that the strategy of delaying the 
fulfilment of its obligations would no longer work. The resolution adopted by 
the Board of Governors the preceding week reflected the firm resolve of an 
overwhelming majority of countries. The fact that the DPRK had not 
immediately followed up that resolution continued profoundly to disturb the 
world community and could lead to compulsory inspections of that country's 
nuclear facilities and materials. He therefore appealed to the DPRK to sign 
the approved agreement forthwith, to ratify it without delay, and to discharge 
its NPT obligations faithfully. 
21. His country was particularly interested in establishing an Agency 
regime of special inspections to be applied in the case of violation of 
NPT safeguards agreements. The case of Iraq was a cause for grave concern for 
the entire international community, which feared that other States might 
violate NPT safeguards agreements in a similar manner. His country was 
therefore closely observing the way in which the United Nations Security 
Council and the Agency were dealing with that case. The mandating of the 
Agency to conduct special inspections in Iraq under Security Council 
resolution 687 was the beginning of a new era in its history. He 
congratulated the Agency's Secretariat on the admirable way in which it had 
carried out that task. 
22. Action to ensure the effectiveness and credibility of the Agency's 
safeguards system should be initiated as soon as possible so as to take 
advantage of the momentum of current efforts to strengthen the role of the 
United Nations in maintaining international peace and security. In that 
connection, his delegation supported the proposal made the previous day by the 
Director General to develop and strengthen the Agency's special Inspection 
system by issuing a clear mandate and indicating detailed procedures for the 
Agency's competent bodies. It was in any case essential that the system 
should be linked to the action of the Security Council. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 9 


23. Nuclear safety was an extremely important subject, and everything 
possible should be done to avoid another Three Mile Island or Chernobyl. 
Those accidents had nevertheless caused greater care to be taken in the 
operation of nuclear plants and had accelerated research and development in 
that area. His country commended the results of the International Safety 
Conference which had taken place at the beginning of the month in Vienna. 
24. Public acceptance of nuclear energy was also very important, particularly 
where the disposal of radioactive wastes was concerned. International 
work in that field under the auspices of the Agency should be strengthened so 
that the public would have a greater understanding of peaceful nuclear 
energy. The Republic of Korea was prepared to support meetings such as the 
one organized by the Agency in Vienna the previous week on public information 
in the field of nuclear energy. 
25. Nuclear power accounted for 50% of electricity production in the 
Republic of Korea, which had various projects in that area: nuclear fuel 
fabrication, standardization of power plants, research and development work 
for an advanced reactor, enhancement of operational safety, and radioactive 
waste management. While implementing a footnote-a/ project on computerassisted 
nuclear safety analysis, the Republic of Korea would be organizing 
the fourth RCA training course on nuclear power pre-project activities and 
manpower development in October 1991. It was also preparing a programme of 
simulator training for plant operators. 
26. Regional co-operation in the field of peaceful nuclear energy was of 
growing importance, particularly for the countries of Asia and the Pacific. 
He hoped that all the countries of the region, including the DPRK, would be 
able to contribute to the development of regional nuclear co-operation. The 
Republic of Korea was prepared to share its nuclear technology and experience 
with the DPRK, including that related to the construction and operation of 
power plants, as soon as the DPRK allowed the Agency to inspect its nuclear 
facilities and materials within the framework of an NPT safeguards agreement. 
27. Mr. PUNGOR (Hungary) said that the past year had been one of 
historic significance which would determine the course of events for a long 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 10 


time to come. From the point of view of the Agency, the positive developments 
in the area of nuclear non-proliferation had been particularly important. He 
welcomed the decision of France and China to join the NPT and hoped that their 
accession would take place in the near future. He also welcomed the accession 
of South Africa to the NPT and the prompt conclusion of the full-scope 
safeguards agreement between that country and the Agency, which had entered 
into force on the previous day and must be regarded as a positive response to 
the wish expressed on many occasions by the international community. He hoped 
that that striking development, which had followed the accession of 
Mozambique, Zambia and Tanzania, would soon lead to the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in southern Africa. He urged all other States which 
had not done so to follow the example of the States mentioned. It was also 
vital that all States Parties to the Treaty should conclude a full-scope 


safeguards agreement. 


28. The other major event of the previous 12 months with the most direct 
impact on the Agency had been Iraq's violation of its obligations under 
the NPT, and in particular the provisions of the safeguards agreement it had 
concluded with the Agency. It was the first time that the Agency had detected 
such a violation, and his delegation vigorously supported the prompt and 
resolute measures taken by the Board in response to that event. He also 
commended the Director General and his colleagues for the very competent and 
skilful manner in which they had carried out the extremely sensitive and 
complex tasks entrusted to the Agency by the Security Council. 
29. Given the weaknesses in the existing safeguards regime which had only 
recently become apparent, the exercise in Iraq should not be considered as a 
special case having no consequences for routine safeguards activities. On the 
contrary, the Board of Governors and the Secretariat should be asked to look 
into the matter and to propose the short-, medium- and long-term measures 
needed to eliminate those weaknesses. For the short term, his delegation 
supported the relevant conclusions of the most recent Board meetings, and in 
particular the specific proposals made by Member States of the European 
Community concerning initial priorities for improvement of the Agency's 
safeguards system. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 11 


30. He shared the opinion of other delegates that the political changes in 
the Soviet Union would have significant repercussions for the Agency's future 
work on nuclear safety and non-proliferation. The Agency should pursue its 
major task of offering its considerable experience to contribute to the 
operational safety of nuclear power plants in the Republics of the Soviet 
Union and in the emerging new States. In that context, he wholeheartedly 
welcomed the admission of the Baltic States to the Agency - which should help 
them make a clear separation between their military and civilian nuclear 
activities so that they could continue to fulfil existing non-proliferation 
commitments. His country was ready to co-operate in that endeavour on such 
crucial questions as nuclear safety, safeguards, technical assistance, 
budgetary issues and the revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole. 
31. In the light of recent political developments in the countries of 
central and eastern Europe, the issue of prohibiting attacks on peaceful 
nuclear facilities should not be forgotten. That was of course an extremely 
sensitive issue,but it must nevertheless be pursued until an appropriate 
solution had been negotiated. 
32. Hungary belonged to a region where changes of true historical 
significance were taking place. Its economic recovery was far from complete 
and specific help in the form of expertise and know-how were required in order 
to adjust to the new rules, practices and standards. Reactor safety remained 
a priority in that respect, and in the past ten years two five-year research 
and development programmes for the improvement of safety at Hungary's nuclear 
power plant had been completed. His country was convinced that the 
operational safety of that plant should be periodically reassessed in the 
light of the latest scientific advances. The relevant Hungarian organizations 
were therefore developing a new programme for that purpose. 
33. International co-operation in that field should be organized in such a 
way as to minimize expenditures for donor countries and to maintain efficiency 
at the highest possible level. To that end, international efforts should be 
co-ordinated and the necessary structure created, particularly as new 
countries were expected to emerge in Europe in the near future. Hungary, 
whose nuclear plant had an internationally recognized good safety record, 
wished to contribute to those activities. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 12 


34. His delegation noted with satisfaction that the International Safety 
Conference held recently in Vienna had produced an international consensus on 
the main topics. Its conclusion that responsibility for the enforcement of 
nuclear safety must primarily remain at national level was very important. At 
the same time, his delegation fully recognized the need for an integrated 
international approach to all aspects of nuclear safety, including those 
concerning radioactive waste management. The Agency should facilitate the 
elaboration on a step-by-step basis of a framework convention on that issue. 
35. The changes in Hungary had also affected governmental supervision and 
control of nuclear power plants. In accordance with a decree adopted at the 
end of the previous year, the Hungarian Atomic Energy Commission had been 
reorganized to act as an independent nuclear regulatory body responsible for 
regulation, licensing and inspection of all nuclear facilities. In addition, 
the Commission would fulfil all of its previous tasks and thus remain the 
national nuclear authority responsible for maintaining relations with relevant 
international organizations such as the Agency. The main objective of that 
restructuring had been to ensure the independence of the Commission in order 
to facilitate full implementation of all safety requirements. In performing 
backup research, the regulatory body could draw on its own resources (experts 
or research contracts) instead of relying on results provided by the 
electrical utility. Those changes were in line with both the NUSS recommendations 
and the general endeavour of the international nuclear community to 
strengthen control in the nuclear power field. 


36. The Hungarian WWER-213 nuclear power plant was the most reliable energy 
source in the country. It had an excellent operational record and the annual 
and cumulative load factors of its units were among the best in the world. 
The further development of electricity production would be based on a 
diversity of energy sources, and in that connection he underlined the 
importance of the initiative for a European Energy Charter. The choice of the 
type and size of units for the new base-load power plant depended on various 
economic, social and political factors, and his country hoped to make use to a 
large extent of foreign capital and technology. It was also vital to obtain 
public consent when formulating the main concepts of a future energy policy. 
It was therefore urgent to provide the public with the necessary information. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 13 


An important step in that direction had been the seminar on the most 
challenging problems of nuclear energy held with the Agency's assistance for 
the media and local administration in Budapest in May. 


37. The report on technical co-operation in 1990 showed that the Agency had 
taken further successful measures to improve the efficiency and effectiveness 
of its activities in that area. He noted with satisfaction that the funds 
available for Agency technical assistance had increased once again. In that 
connection, he announced that his Government had pledged a voluntary contribution 
to the TACF for 1992 corresponding to its share of the target. 
38. In conclusion, he approved the Agency's Annual Report for 1990. 
39. Mr. CHIKELU (Nigeria) welcomed the four new Members of the Agency, 
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Yemen, and thanked the Director General and his 
colleagues for the excellent documentation they had produced for the General 
Conference. 
40. His delegation had read with interest the report on the Agency's 
activities contained in document GC(XXXV)/953 and was pleased to have contributed 
to them, as on the whole they showed that the Agency was continuing to 
work towards the achievement of its statutory objectives. The aim of those 
activities was to ensure the safety of nuclear facilitiess, an issue about 
which the international community was rightly concerned in view of the 
increasing use of nuclear energy for electricity production, to place 
safeguards on nuclear materials so as to ensure their peaceful use in Member 
States, and, in particular, to provide enhanced technical assistance in the 
areas of nuclear applications, food and agriculture, medicine, and training. 
41. The Agency's dynamic role had received well-deserved commendation from 
all Member States. The United Nations General Assembly, at its forty-fifth 
session, had reaffirmed its confidence in the Agency's role in the use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. His delegation noted with satisfaction 
the professional manner in which the Agency had carried out the special task 
entrusted to it by the Security Council in its resolution 687(1991). He 
commended the Agency and hoped that it would not relax its efforts in that 
area. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 14 


42. Nigeria attached great importance to the Agency's role in promoting 
international co-operation in nuclear technology and its applications. In the 
past year the Agency had increased its involvement, together with other 
international organizations, in activities relating to the health and 
ecological consequences of the Chernobyl accident, the safety analysis of 
various types of power reactor and the Helsinki Symposium on Electricity and 
the Environment. 
43. It was clear from document GC(XXXV)/INF/294 that the scope and value of 
the Agency's technical co-operation activities continued to grow. The overall 
implementation rate for technical co-operation had increased from 56.5% 
in 1989 to 67% in 1990. That positive development was no doubt due to the 
introduction of the two-year cycle. His delegation looked forward to the 
outcome of the programme evaluation to be undertaken in the present year by 
the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee. However, it was already 
evident that additional resources would be necessary for the proper implementation 
of the technical assistance programme. He hoped that, in the process 
of evaluation, the issue of the transfer of nuclear technology to developing 
countries would be dealt with in detail. 
44. He welcomed the fact that Africa's share of the Agency's technical 
assistance had increased substantially, from 18% in 1989 to 23% in 1990, and 
that the expenditure reflected regional development priorities. His country 
Intended to provide US $105 000 as a voluntary contribution to the TACF 
for 1992, thus expressing its satisfaction with the overall results obtained 
by the Agency in implementing its technical assistance and co-operation 
programme. 
45. With regard to nuclear safety, there was continued emphasis on 
improving radiation protection services in developing countries, and RAPAT and 
WAMAP missions had taken place in a number of countries in the region, 
including Nigeria. It was reassuring that the training of radiation 
protection officers had been stepped up. In December 1990 Nigeria had hosted 
a regional workshop on basic radiation protection and development of a 
national infrastructure for radiation safety, which had brought together 
various participants from African countries. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 15 


46. His Government had recently approved the final text of a decree on 
nuclear safety and radiation protection. The RAPAT and WAMAP missions had 
recommended the adoption of such legislation, which was considered essential 
for the effective control and regulation of the use of ionizing radiation and 
the management of radioactive waste. 
47. For the eighth consecutive year, the Agency would in 1992 maintain the 
principle of zero real growth in its budget. However, the Agency was 
increasingly being called upon to carry out tasks which could scarcely be 
accommodated within a zero-growth budget. To carry out those tasks, the 
Agency must be able to rely on the timely payment of contributions by Member 
States. He therefore urged Member States to respond to the Director General's 
appeal to pay their contributions in a timely manner so that the Secretariat 
would not have to ask for further increases in the Working Capital Fund in the 
immediate future. He also urged them to reconsider the zero-growth policy, 
which, if continued, would seriously hamper the Agency's activities. 
48. In that context, the extrabudgetary resources available to the Agency 
were of great importance for developing countries, including Nigeria, and they 
should therefore be increased so as to facilitate the implementation of a 
greater number of projects. Of the 159 projects completed in 1990 under the 
technical assistance and co-operation programme, two had been in Nigeria, in 
the areas of nuclear medicine and pest control. 
49. The BIGOT project for the biological control of the tsetse fly had been 
launched in 1979 with extrabudgetary resources from four Member States, namely 
Belgium, Germany, Sweden and the United Kingdom. He thanked those countries 
for their assistance, and also the United States Government for its contribution 
towards the nuclear medicine project. 
50. In the case of the BIGOT project, a good foundation had been laid for 
the second phase, which aimed at expanding the tsetse fly eradication 
2 
programme to cover an additional 12 000 km of agricultural and grazing 
land. In view of the good results already obtained using the sterile insect 
technique, his delegation was confident that donors would come forward to 
support the second phase. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 16 


51. Turning to the African Regional Co-operative Agreement (AFRA), to which 
12 States were already parties, he expressed the conviction that it was 
essential for providing effective assistance to the region. The meeting of 
the first technical working group, which had taken place in Cairo in 
September 1990, had been followed in July 1991 by a second meeting in Algiers, 
and Nigeria had participated in both. Those meetings had resulted in the 
identification of specific projects in the areas of food preservation, 
irradiation processing and the use of radioisotopes in animal production and 
plant mutation breeding which were now Included in the Agency's programme. 
Full advantage should be taken of AFRA to expand co-operation among African 
countries, and his country wished to assure AFRA Member States of its full 
co-operation to that end. 
52. The question of amending Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute, which 
had been on the agenda of the General Conference for over ten years, remained 
a cause for concern. The time was long overdue for reaching agreement on the 
issue of under-representatlon of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia on 
the Board of Governors. The divergence of views on that issue could be 
bridged if all parties would show greater determination and a spirit of give 
and take. 
53. As the Fourth NPT Review Conference in September 1990 had once again 
emphasized, safeguards were one of the Agency's main areas of activity. It 
was encouraging that the safeguards role had been acknowledged on many 
occasions by the international community. Confidence in the Agency's 
safeguards was reinforced by the 1990 Safeguards Implementation Report, which 
confirmed that nuclear material under Agency safeguards had remained in 
peaceful nuclear activities or had been otherwise adequately accounted for. 
54. He regretted the lack of agreement, despite years of debate and 
numerous consultations, on the issue of the financing of safeguards and 
technical co-operation. At a time when the benefits of nuclear technology 
were becoming universally available, all Member States should make an effort 
to place safeguards and technical co-operation on a sound financial basis. 
His delegation was convinced that all Member States would exhibit the 
necessary qualities of political will and flexibility. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 17 


55. Nigeria attached great importance to the issue of radioactive waste 
management and had strongly advocated the adoption of measures to protect 
developing countries against the dumping of radioactive wastes and toxic 
materials on their territories. He noted the expeditious manner in which the 
Director General had circulated to Member States the Code of Practice on the 
International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste. He looked forward 
to the implementation of the Code and its use as the basis for the development 
of a convention. 
56. His delegation had supported the idea of drawing up a Medium-Term Plan 
in the belief that such a plan would assist in the formulation of bold 
strategic policies and in setting achievable goals for the Agency. He 
therefore thanked the Director General and his colleagues for the efforts they 
had made to that end, and expected that the crucial issue of technical 
co-operation and resource mobilization would be properly addressed when the 
Plan was finalized. 
57. His country had followed with interest the political developments in 
the Middle East and their potentially positive impact on non-proliferation in 
the region as a whole. It was encouraging that all parties were trying to 
tackle the problems which had so far prevented the establishement of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. He urged them to take full advantage 
of the present opportunity to resolve the outstanding problems. 
58. Africa also was undergoing significant changes. He noted the release 
of political prisoners and the removal of legal barriers created by the 
apartheid system in South Africa. It was also clear from the documents before 
the General Conference that South Africa had acceded to the NPT and had 
negotiated and signed a safeguards agreement with the Agency. The prospects 
for nuclear non-proliferation in the region had thus been considerably 
enhanced. 
59. Those developments confirmed the wisdom of previous General Conference 
decisions on that matter. However, as events in other parts of the world had 
recently shown, caution was required. The steps taken by South Africa in the 
nuclear field should be reinforced by full co-operation with the Director 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 18 


General to ensure that the entire nuclear programme was adequately and 
effectively safeguarded and that the full benefits of nuclear energy could be 
enjoyed by all the people of South Africa. 


60. Despite the euphoria created by those developments, the international 
community should not forget that some crucial obstacles remained. There was a 
continuing need to work towards an atmosphere conducive to the development of 
democratic and constitutional institutions. The course of events would depend 
to a great extent on the South African Government. The Nigerian Government 
and the Organization of African Unity had declared their readiness to support 
the return of South Africa to the community of nations, provided of course 
that that country took definite and irreversible steps to dismantle apartheid 
and live in peace with its neighbours. 
61. At the thirty-fourth session of the General Conference, the prospect of 
important developments in the nuclear non-proliferation area had emerged, and 
those hopes were now being fulfilled. In particular, it had become clear that 
the non-adoption of a final document at the Fourth NPT Review Conference had 
not been due to a lack of will to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. He 
welcomed the decision of France and the expressed intention of China to accede 
to the NPT. All those developments, together with the emerging trend towards 
non-proliferation in Africa as well as other regions, were important 
components of the non-proliferation regime which the Agency was responsible 
for promoting. 
62. The responsibilities of the Agency were growing with the continued 
expansion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, science and technology, but 
he was convinced that the Agency was capable of meeting those challenges - if 
it was given the necessary resources. He hoped, therefore, that the will to 
strengthen the Agency would be amply demonstrated at the present session. His 
delegation would participate as fully as it could in the process of 
revitalization. 
63. Mr. MUSATESCU (Romania) thanked the Director General for his 
tireless efforts to strengthen the Agency's role and its participation in 
solving the serious problems facing the international community, to increase 
the Agency's contribution to the development of peaceful applications of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 19 


nuclear energy, and to enhance its international prestige. On behalf of his 
country, he welcomed the admission of Yemen, Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania, 
which was a further step towards universal membership of the Agency. 


64. The peaceful use of nuclear energy had been and remained a major 
element of Romanian economic policy. His Government therefore attached 
particular importance to the Agency's promotional activities and to international 
co-operation in that area. It welcomed the results achieved in the 
past year, which confirmed the increasingly important role of the Agency for 
Member States and the international community as a whole. 
65. Romania gave high priority to the Agency's programmes and activities in 
the areas of enhancing the safety of power plants and other nuclear 
facilities, radiation protection, effective implementation of the safeguards 
system, technical assistance and co-operation, and nuclear research and applications. 
Through all those activities the Agency had become an indispensable 
part of the present worldwide system of international co-operation and 
security. 
66. His country regarded the NPT as a vital element in international 
stability and security. As a party to the Treaty, it had fulfilled the 
relevant obligations in full and in good faith, and hoped to extend its 
co-operation with other States to help achieve the objectives of the NPT. 
There was no doubt that confidence in peaceful nuclear applications was 
heavily dependent on respect for the nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
67. His country was convinced that the objective of the safeguards system, 
namely the prevention of nuclear-weapons proliferation, could only be achieved 
by means of effective control measures, and the system should be further 
strengthened and expanded to cover all nuclear facilities in non-nuclearweapon 
States. His delegation had noted with satisfaction that important 
developments in the past year had contributed to the strengthening of the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime, including the decision of France and China 
to accede to the NPT, the conclusion by South Africa of a safeguards agreement 
with the Agency, and the accession to the NPT of Mozambique, Tanzania and 
Zambia. He also hoped that the process of concluding a safeguards agreement 
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Agency would soon be 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 20 


completed. His country welcomed all those political acts as important steps 
towards universal application of the NPT, an objective which should be pursued 
by the international community. It fully supported the values which the NPT 
and the Agency's safeguards system were aiming to uphold. 


68. As a party to the NPT and to the Agency's safeguards system, his 
Government had already taken regulatory and institutional measures to comply 
with the most rigorous international standards and to ensure their strict 
application with regard to nuclear exports. To that end, Romania had 
incorporated in its national legislation principles applicable to the control 
of nuclear exports in accordance with the provisions of documents INFCIRC/209 
and INFCIRC/254, principles to which the Romanian delegation had drawn 
attention in an information document. The fact that Romania had participated 
for the first time in the work of the Zangger Committee bore witness to the 
confidence of other Member States in its policy of non-proliferation and 
control of nuclear exports, as well as in the effectiveness of the measures it 
had taken to implement that policy. 
69. His country saw the application of safeguards as a key element in its 
non-proliferation policy, in its trading activities and in international 
co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Romania had also 
accepted simplified procedures for the designation of Agency inspectors, and 
had concluded the necessary agreements with the United States and the Agency 
for the replacement of highly enriched fuel for its experimental reactor by 
fuel enriched to less than 20%. It also supported the application by the 
Agency of the provisions of the framework agreement on unannounced and special 
inspections and the access for inspectors to additional information and sites, 
as well as the idea of carrying out special inspections at the request of 
Member States. It also favoured the establishment of a universal Agency 
notification system, and had accepted and was observing the principle of 
applying full-scope safeguards, which should become the norm in international 
nuclear co-operation and trade. 
70. As members were aware, Romania had, from the outset of its nuclear 
energy programme, opted for the CANDU-type reactor in view of its inherent 
characteristics, particularly those relating to safety. Construction of the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 21 


first Romanian nuclear power plant had begun in 1980 at Cernavoda. The most 
important recent step had been the renewal of the contract concluded between 
Romanian firms, Atomic Energy of Canada Limited, and Ansaldo Implanti (Italy). 


71. His country was grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had 
provided by sending several missions to analyse in depth the safety of the 
Cernavoda nuclear power plant, and was resolved to implement the recommendations 
of those missions. In the field of safeguards, a seminar-workshop had 
been organized jointly by the Agency and Romania in June 1991 in order to 
determine the system to be established in that power plant. 
72. The Agency deserved congratulation on its activities in the past year. 
Its accomplishments were presented in a comprehensive manner in the Annual 
Report for 1990, which showed that the Agency had carried out the tasks 
entrusted to it as well as possible in the face of financial constraints. 
Technical co-operation was one of the Agency's essential activities and was 
just as important as safeguards and nuclear safety. In recent years the 
Secretariat had made significant efforts in that area in order to respond 
better to the needs of Member States. The new system based on the two-year 
programming cycle had begun to yield good results, as shown by the increase in 
implementation rates and the more equitable distribution of resources by area 
and by region. It was gratifying that the total real value of new resources 
available for the programme in 1990 had reached the highest level yet, which 
indicated that the programme and its financing methods remained healthy. 
73. His country attached a high level of priority to the technical 
co-operation programme because of its importance for the promotion of nuclear 
science and technology, and hoped to continue to benefit from it. He thanked 
the Agency and Member States which had contributed to technical assistance for 
Romania. That assistance had been very useful and effective, particularly in 
the case of approved projects relating to nuclear safety and licensing for the 
Cernavoda power plant, which had reached an advanced stage of construction. 
74. Romania gave high priority to all matters concerning nuclear safety and 
radiation protection, and its nuclear programme had been established on a 
sound basis. The Cernavoda nuclear power plant project had been subject from 
the very beginning to control and supervision by the competent body, which was 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 22 


ensuring strict compliance with national and international standards at all 
levels - design, technology, construction, material and equipment, quality 
assurance and control - as well as appropriate personnel training to maintain 
operational safety at the plant. He drew attention to the international 
co-operation which had thus been established and which would increase further 
thanks to the efforts of the Agency and Member States. His Government was 
convinced that nuclear safety activities were an essential element in 
promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 


75. The enhancement of international co-operation did not in any way 
relieve the countries concerned of the responsibility to apply effective 
safety and radiation protection measures within their borders. Nuclear safety 
was equally relevant to all Member States, whether or not they operated 
nuclear power plants. Conscious of the vital need to protect its population 
and its territory against the possible transboundary effects of nuclear 
accidents, Romania was very interested in activities such as the extrabudgetary 
project on WWER-440/230 reactors. In that connection, he thanked 
the Director General for his favourable reception of the joint request from 
the Romanian and Bulgarian Governments relating to a safety review of the 
Kozloduy nuclear power plant. Germany had already carried out a detailed 
evaluation of its WWER-440/230 reactors, and Romania intended to use that work 
as a basis for future evaluations of that type of reactor. The nuclear 
industry was evidently capable of showing exemplary objectivity in the 
evaluation of its own safety. 
76. His Government had initiated the necessary process for Romania to 
become a party to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material, to the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, and 
to the Joint Protocol Relating to the Application of the Vienna Convention and 
the Paris Convention. 
77. The content of the Agency's programme for 1992 was satisfactory; his 
delegation was prepared to accept the proposed budget figure and noted with 
pleasure the efforts made to maintain that figure within the limits of zero 
real growth. With regard to the draft Medium-Term Plan, he appreciated the 
work already carried out, but hoped that the Plan's final version would show a 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 23 


better identification of priorities, as great attention must be paid to highpriority 
activities such as the nuclear safety and radiation protection 
programmes, safeguards, technical assistance, and the applications of 
radiation and isotopes in various areas. His Government would provide the 
Agency with ten fellowships in 1992, for periods of six to ten months each, to 
enable specialists to receive training at Romanian institutions in various 
areas of nuclear physics research and nuclear applications. 


78. Romania was fully prepared to extend and diversify its co-operation 
with the Agency and Member States in order to assist the Agency in carrying 
out the important tasks assigned to it in connection with international 
co-operation and the implementation of safeguards. It was in that spirit that 
the Romanian Government had decided to seek election to a seat on the Board of 
Governors. 
79. The current session had been called upon to map out the future activity 
of the Agency, particularly in view of the Agency's participation in the 
implementation of United Nations Security Council resolutions concerning the 
Gulf War and its consequences. Romania was a member of the Security Council 
and had taken an active part in the drafting and adoption of those 
resolutions. Accordingly, it appreciated the measures taken by the Agency to 
implement them within its own sphere of activity. His delegation was ready to 
join others in supporting the Agency in carrying out the tasks entrusted to it 
by those resolutions. 
80. The necessary lessons should be learned and effective measures taken to 
strengthen the NPT, the Agency's safeguards system and the international 
nuclear non-proliferation regime in general, while avoiding any adverse impact 
on the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
81. In conclusion, he reaffirmed the importance which Romania attached to 
the Agency's vital role, the confidence it had in that organization and the 
Director General, and its willingness to continue to co-operate actively 
towards achieving the Agency's objectives. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 24 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXXV)/952, Add.1 and Add.2/Rev.1) 
82. The PRESIDENT reported that the General Committee recommended to 

the General Conference that the agenda for the current session should include 
all the items listed in document GC(XXXV)/952, together with the supplementary 
item A (Iraq's non-compliance with its safeguards obligations) proposed by the 
Board of Governors in document GC(XXXV)/952/Add.1, and the supplementary 
item B (Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East) requested by a 
group of Member States in document GC(XXXV)/952/Add.2/Rev.1. The General 
Committee further recommended that the items in question be allocated for 
initial discussion as indicated in those documents. 


83. With respect to the order of items, the Committee recommended that 
supplementary item A be inserted between items 21 and 22 of the provisional 
agenda, and that supplementary item B be inserted between items 7 and 8, the 
items being renumbered as necessary. 
84. The General Committee also recommended that the conclusions of one or 
two of the groups which would be meeting under the special scientific 
programme should be reported to the General Conference during a plenary 
meeting, interrupting the general debate briefly if necessary. He would 
invite the chairman of the group or groups in question to take the floor at a 
suitable moment. 
85. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) recalled the position which her delegation had 
adopted within the General Committee: the issue of the application of IAEA 
safeguards in the Middle East should come between items 20 and 21 of the 
agenda and should not be dealt with immediately after the general debate, for 
a number of reasons. It was a new item. Negotiations between delegations 
were still in progress. The item should be viewed in the context of 
safeguards in general and should not be linked to the issue of Israeli nuclear 
capabilities and threat. She requested that those points be borne in mind 
during the discussion of the President's proposal. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 25 


86. Mr. AMMAR (Tunisia), Mr. AL-TAIFI (Saudi Arabia), Mr. SALLOUKH 
(Lebanon) and Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) endorsed the suggestion put 
forward by Egypt. 
87. Mr. LEE (Canada) pointed out that the question had already been 
discussed at great length by the General Committee. The Canadian delegation 
had supported the President's proposal that the item on the application of 
IAEA safeguards in the Middle East should be included in the agenda either as 
item 7(a), or between items 7 and 8, since the issue was clearly closely 
linked to that of Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat. To a certain 
extent the issues were identical. It would therefore be sensible to deal with 
them one after another. Thus, it would be preferable to go along with the 
General Committee's decision. 
88. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium) agreed with the delegate of Canada that 
the issue of Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat and supplementary item B 
on the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East were clearly 
connected. In the interests of efficiency they should be discussed close 
together. A compromise solution might be to place the supplementary item 
between items 20 and 21, as suggested by the delegate of Egypt, and to insert 
item 8 between the new item 22 and the current item 22. He hoped that might 
prove acceptable. 
89. Mr. de KLERK (Netherlands), recalling the position adopted by his 
delegation in the General Committee, said he favoured a joint discussion of 
the two issues for the reasons put forward by the delegate of Canada. 
Moreover, as the issue of the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle 
East could attract a broad consensus, it would be preferable to discuss it 
first. Though he was speaking on behalf of his own delegation, he thought 
that his statement also reflected the position of the countries of the 
European Community. 
90. Mr. STOIBER (United States of America) and Mr. RIHA 
(Czechoslovakia), endorsing the comments made by the delegate of Canada, 
expressed their support for the General Committee's decision regarding the 
order of items on the agenda. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 26 


91. Mr. LAMPARELLI (Italy) and Mr. RIOBO (Chile) suggested that the 
two items should be moved nearer the end of the agenda, as had been proposed 
by the delegate of Belgium. 
92. Mr. AL-SAEID (Kuwait) said that, as the issue of Israeli nuclear 
capabilities and threat had already been discussed many times and at length 
and had on several occasions been voted upon, discussion of it would probably 
take up a great deal of time. By contrast, the issue of the application of 
safeguards would probably attract a near-total consensus, and discussion would 
be brief. Moreover, Member States were still involved in consultations on the 
issue. If it were to be discussed immediately after the general debate, 
delegations might not be quite ready. It would therefore be wiser to place it 
between items 20 and 21. 
93. The PRESIDENT, noting that the General Committee had discussed the 
issue at length, and that the Committee represented all regions and all 
interests and had been able to examine all the positions put forward, 
suggested that the General Conference should adopt the agenda recommended by 
the General Committee. 
94. It was so decided. 
(b) CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
95. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee recommended to the 
General Conference that Friday, 20 September 1991, be set as the closing date 
of the thirty-fifth regular session. Should it prove necessary to extend the 
session, however, he would consult the General Conference again. 
96. The General Committee's recommendation was adopted. 
97. The PRESIDENT further reported that the General Committee recommended 
that the thirty-sixth regular session of the General Conference should 
commence on Monday, 21 September 1992, and that it should be held in Vienna. 
98. The General Committee's recommendations were adopted. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 27 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) (resumed) 


99. Mr. ZILLER (Germany), speaking for the first time on behalf of the 
united Germany, said that it took its responsibilities towards the Agency as 
seriously as the Federal Republic of Germany had always done since the 
establishment of the Agency. He extended a sincere welcome to the delegations 
of the three Baltic republics and united Yemen as new Members of the Agency. 
100. In Germany, nuclear energy continued to make a major contribution to 
diversification of the energy supply and therefore also to energy security; by 
avoiding carbon dioxide emissions, it also contributed to environmental 
protection. Nuclear energy remained indispensable, and international 
co-operation on the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, particularly with 
European partners in the East and the West, constituted an integral part of 
German policy. 
101. Since the previous session, events in the Gulf had taken a dramatic 
turn and had caused grave anxiety, but they had also produced a ray of hope. 
While the re-establishment of the sovereignty of Kuwait was a subject for 
rejoicing, it was horrifying that, at the very moment when the General 
Conference was discussing environmental protection and the role nuclear energy 
could play in that regard, hundreds of oil wells were burning and polluting an 
entire region. Unfortunately, the problems did not stop there: the action 
taken pursuant to Security Council resolution 687 had revealed that Iraq had 
been misleading the Agency and its Member States for many years. That country 
had gravely violated its commitments under the safeguards agreement it had 
concluded with the Agency pursuant to its obligations under the NPT by 
deliberately concealing from the Agency nuclear materials and activities. He 
called upon Iraq to honour its obligations in their entirety, to comply fully 
with the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors, to abide completely by 
both the letter and the spirit of resolution 687, and to discharge 
scrupulously its responsibilities under international law. 
102. It was to be hoped that that instance of serious violation of a 
safeguards agreement would remain an isolated case. Nevertheless, care should 
be taken to ensure that the situation did not repeat itself. Together with 
its European partners, the German Government had emphasized the necessity of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 28 


further enhancing safeguards effectiveness, as set out in the statement of the 
European Council in June 1991. The long-term reliability of safeguards would 
be strengthened if the proposals submitted recently by the European Community 
were implemented promptly. The Director General had already put forward his 
proposals concerning Agency safeguards and the Board had discussed them in 
detail. The German Government would support all efforts aimed at reinforcing 
the effectiveness of international safeguards with a view to inspiring 
confidence and thus ensuring peace. 


103. He therefore appealed to all the countries in the Middle East to play 
their part in ensuring that all peoples in the region could look forward to a 
peaceful future after the horrors of the war. The States concerned should try 
to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone, or a zone free of all means of mass 
destruction, where full-scope safeguards would be applied. Such a zone would 
be in the interests of the region and the international community. 
104. He once again appealed to all countries which had not yet done so to 
accede to the NPT. He welcomed the imminent accession of France to the Treaty 
and China's expressed intention to accede to it. It was cause for particular 
satisfaction that South Africa had also joined the NPT, and that the relevant 
safeguards agreement had been signed in record time, had entered into force, 
and would be applied without delay. He noted the positive influence which the 
accession of Zambia and Tanzania had had in that regard, and expressed his 
conviction that it would initiate a major move towards peace in the southern 
African region. It was equally pleasing that the negotiations between the 
Agency, Argentina and Brazil concerning full-scope safeguards were progressing 
well. 
105. The fact that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was delaying 
the conclusion of a safeguards agreement with the Agency was causing serious 
concern to the German Government, which expected that country to sign the 
agreement forthwith, to provide for its entry into force without delay, and to 
embark Immediately on preparations to ensure its full application as soon as 
it had entered into force. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 29 


106. The NPT and the system of full-scope safeguards which was based upon it 
constituted the main means of ensuring that nuclear energy was used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes throughout the world. It was the policy of 
the German Government to refuse licences for any significant nuclear export if 
the importing State was not willing to submit its whole nuclear fuel cycle to 
Agency safeguards, and he expressed the hope that all supplier countries would 
make similar arrangements. 
107. International co-operation in the nuclear safety area also needed to be 
reinforced. Five years after the event, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
were still suffering from the traumatic consequences which Chernobyl had had 
for several countries. The International Safety Conference organized by the 
Agency had come at exactly the right moment. He welcomed the findings of that 
Conference and the recommendations of the Board of Governors. The General 
Conference should act swiftly and positively to ensure that a start could be 
made with the step-by-step setting up of an international regime covering all 
aspects of nuclear safety. The German Government was confident that an 
international framework convention on safety could be concluded rapidly. 
108. As in previous years, Germany would be pledging a contribution to 
the TACF based on its rate of assessment, and would make additional voluntary 
contributions for footnote-a/ projects. However, it had to be recognized that 
the targets which had been fixed for the TACF in recent years had risen to 
such an extent that it was quite impossible to meet them. 
109. On the other hand, the German delegation shared the Director General's 
concern with regard to the payment of contributions. In view of the major 
importance of the Agency's tasks for the world, he could not see why so many 
Member States did not pay their contributions promptly. 
110. In conclusion, he recalled that international co-operation within the 
Agency in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy remained one of the 
cornerstones of international peace. He felt sure that the Agency would face 
the new challenges successfully. 
111. Mr. MARTINENKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic), noting 
that the Chernobyl tragedy had affected one Byelorussian in five, expressed 
his deep gratitude to all those who had taken part in the International 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 30 


Chernobyl Project. His delegation was greatly appreciative of the efforts 
which had been made to gather objective information on the current situation 
five years after the accident. He thanked the 200 scientists from 
25 countries who had made regular evaluations and studied the development of 
the situation. As a scientist himself, he felt that their conclusions might 
be open to serious criticism owing to the complexity of their task. However, 
that in no way diminished the gratitude of Byelorussia or undermined its 
attitude to the project. 


112. Since it was impossible to predict the development of a non-linear 
dynamic system on the basis of a body of statistical data which could, at 
best, be viewed only as initial information, the scientific community could 
not take seriously any conclusions concerning the expected development of the 
consequences of Chernobyl, the study of which had only reached a first stage. 
For that reason, Byelorussia was officially requesting that cognizance be 
taken of the need to carry out a more in-depth study of all the radiophyslcal, 
chemical, radiochemical, technical, medical and biological problems which the 
consequences of the Chernobyl accident had given rise to. Definitive 
judgements could not be made until reliable data had been collected. A 
complete picture was required both by Byelorussia and the USSR and by the 
forces of international nuclear co-operation in order to ensure that the 
efforts to eliminate the consequences of the accident were deployed in the 
most effective way, and in order to determine, amidst all the rumours and 
flights of fancy, what specific action needed to be taken in the short term. 
The future of atomic energy as a whole would depend in large measure upon the 
efficiency and effectiveness with which the work to heal the wounds of 
Chernobyl was conducted. 
113. The future of power production was directly linked to nuclear energy 
and would depend in large part on the situation in the Chernobyl region. The 
Chernobyl accident had frozen the development of nuclear power for several 
years. The best way of encouraging continued development would be to plan for 
the construction of a nuclear power plant in Byelorussia, where one was needed 
in terms of energy demand, but where social factors were clearly against such 
a move. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 31 


114. Such an approach to the situation by the international community seemed 
entirely justified. No one had the right, vis-a-vis future generations, to 
ignore the immense quantity of concrete data which had been collected 
following the tragedy, in an area where the health of hundreds of thousands of 
people was deteriorating seriously. The nuclear community and all the Member 
States of the Agency must be made aware of how all the medico-biological and 
radiophysical consequences of the accident were developing, for nobody could 
be sure that something similar would not occur again. For that reason, an 
arsenal of protection resources had to be amassed. Thus, it now seemed 
essential that the Agency should include all aspects of the Chernobyl 
catastrophe in its permanent technical programmes and, in particular, that it 
should encourage the various countries involved in the development of nuclear 
power to lend their assistance and to provide resources to help clean up the 
consequences of the accident. He felt sure that the moral principles 
proclaimed by the Agency would be translated into specific measures to that 
end. 
115. In addition, he expressed his sincere thanks to the Co-ordinator of 
United Nations activities relating to Chernobyl, Ms. Anstee, for the efforts 
which she and her colleagues had made. He hoped that the international 
community would respond appropriately to the appeal of the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations by providing support to help eliminate the consequences 
of Chernobyl within the framework of the Chernobyl Pledging Conference to be 
held on 20 September in New York. 
116. At the end of 1990, the Board of Governors had approved a footnote-a/ 
project to set up a radiological monitoring station in Byelorussia as part of 
the Agency's technical co-operation programme. Byelorussia had a strong 
interest in seeing that project implemented and the Byelorussian Government, 
in view of the fact that an agreement was already in existence concerning the 
provision of technical assistance by the Agency to the Byelorussian SSR, 
appealed to all the policy-making organs of the Agency to try to find 
appropriate ways of funding that important project. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 32 


117. Although he was not sure that he had all of the information at his 
disposal, he was astonished that the Agency had no programmes on alternative 
energy sources or energy-saving measures. Nowadays, all industrialized 
countries took an interest in energy conservation efforts at regional level, 
and so programmes of that kind should also form part of the Agency's work. 
118. The Secretariat should consider setting up joint WHO/IAEA and UNEP/IAEA 
divisions or sections with a view to co-ordinating more closely the study of 
ecological and especially medical problems related to nuclear energy. It 
would also be useful if the Agency were to take an active part in a broadbased 
examination of world energy and ecology problems, in particular during 
the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) which 
would be taking place in 1992. One major way of restoring public confidence 
in nuclear power would be to strengthen the role played by the Agency in 
environmental protection, and to pay greater attention to the link between the 
safe use of atomic energy and improvement and protection of the environment, 
as well as the problem of final disposal of radioactive waste and spent 
reactor fuel. 
119. Byelorussia attached great importance to, and supported with all the 
means at its disposal, the development of the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme which occupied such an important position in the 
Agency's work. Clearly, the increased volume of activities in that programme 
called for a corresponding increase in the resources allocated to it. In that 
regard, it was essential that the current programme for the elimination of the 
consequences of the Chernobyl accident be included in the programme. 
120. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the Agency's role and 
position of authority with respect to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the 
elimination of the consequences of the Chernobyl accident, and the solution of 
world energy and ecology problems would continue to expand. 
121. Mr. RYZHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that for 
some time his country had been experiencing events and changes of truly 
historic significance. Totalitarian structures and an autocratic mentality 
were being replaced by a genuinely democratic system of government based on 
the primacy of values common to all men and respect for the rights and 
liberties of both individuals and nations. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 33 


122. By granting freedom to others, the Soviet Union was liberating itself 
and entering, once again as a free democratic union of peoples sharing a 
thousand-year history, a new era in its development as a constituent part of 
the democratic world. A new union of sovereign States was being born, and, 
like all births, it was painful. The Soviet Union nevertheless believed that 
the great Eurasian democracy would become a cornerstone of a new free and safe 
world. 
123. The international community was following events in the Soviet Union 
closely. That was natural, since it was an enormous country made up of a 
multitude of nationalities, rich in natural resources, with a large and 
diversified economy, shaken by serious crises, and, finally, possessing a vast 
military potential, including nuclear weapons. Understandably, participants 
in the Agency's General Conference were primarily interested in the nuclear 
aspect of events in the Soviet Union, meaning the situation with respect to 
nuclear arms, nuclear energy and the nuclear industry. 
124. The leaders of the Soviet Union and of the Republics attached the 
highest importance to the nuclear aspects of current events in the Soviet 
Union. The recent Extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies of the USSR had 
taken fundamental decisions on how the State would be governed during the 
transition period. Under no circumstances would that period entail a vacuum 
in political power or State control. The decisions which had been taken 
guaranteed continuity and no interruption in activities. One of the first 
decisions towards creating a new union of sovereign democratic States had been 
the drawing up and conclusion of an agreement between the Republics on the 
principles of joint security and defence according to which a single armed 
force would be retained, with unified control of the arsenals of nuclear, and 
other, weapons of mass destruction. During the transition period all the 
international agreements and obligations entered into by the Soviet Union, 
including those relating to arms reduction and control, would be upheld 
without exception. 
125. An economic union of States would define the regulations and mechanisms 
of a single economic area and would also solve all problems involved in the 
management of nuclear energy and the nuclear industry in the Soviet Union, 
including the safety of power plants and all nuclear fuel cycle installations 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 34 


intended for peaceful as well as military use, nuclear exports, the physical 
protection of nuclear installations and material, and international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear energy, including co-operation with the 
Agency. 


126. In that context, he wished to express his delegation's great satisfaction 
at the acceptance of the three independent Republics of Estonia, 
Latvia and Lithuania as Member States of the Agency. His delegation felt sure 
that those three Republics would adhere to the NPT without delay and conclude 
safeguards agreements with the Agency. The Soviet Union also congratulated 
Yemen on becoming a Member of the Agency. 
127. It seemed fitting and important, at a session of the General Conference 
of the Agency, the international organization entrusted with watching over the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, to dwell on some aspects of the 
non-proliferation problem. Remarkable achievements had been seen in the past 
year. Two nuclear powers, France and China, had announced their intention to 
become parties to the NPT. 
128. The process of change in South Africa initiated by President de Klerk, 
which was leading to the breakdown of the inhuman system of apartheid, also 
had nuclear implications. After three years of negotiations with the 
Depositary Governments of the NPT, the South African Government had officially 
acceded to the Treaty and had concluded, in an unprecedentedly short space of 
time, a safeguards agreement with the Agency which had been approved the 
preceding week by the Board of Governors, had been signed on 16 September and 
had entered into force the same day. Those actions by South Africa brought 
with them an easing of the situation in the Agency and its policy-making 
organs and an end to factors which had interfered with its work. 
129. Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia had adhered to the NPT at an earlier 
stage. Now Angola had just taken the decision, in principle, to do the same. 
He commended the leaders of those African States on their wisdom. Those 
decisions meant that the conditions had been met for the creation of a 
denuclearized zone in southern Africa which would make the entire African 
continent a nuclear-weapon-free zone, as advocated by the Organization of 
African Unity. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 35 


130. He also welcomed the decision by Argentina and Brazil to accept fullscope 
safeguards and to conclude an agreement to that effect with the Agency. 
He hoped that that decision, together with Cuba's new status as an OPANAL 
observer, would help strengthen the Tlatelolco Treaty and the international 
non-proliferation regime. 
131. The fact that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Agency 
had been able to agree on the text of a safeguards agreement, and that the 
Board of Governors had approved it, was also encouraging. The Soviet Union 
urged the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to sign, ratify and implement 
that agreement as soon as possible. That would help to normalize the 
situation on the Korean Peninsula and in the Far East as a whole, and improve 
the chances of creating a denuclearized zone in that region. 
132. He approved and welcomed the inclusion of the item "Application of IAEA 
safeguards in the Middle East" in the agenda for the current session of the 
General Conference and hoped that a resolution on that matter would be adopted 
by consensus, since implementation of such a resolution would help strengthen 
confidence and contribute to the attainment of a lasting peace and the 
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in that region. 
133. It would be desirable for the beneficial processes of strengthening and 
universalization of the international non-proliferation regime also to spread 
to other regions of the world. However, events in the Persian Gulf area 
contrasted unfavourably with the encouraging results obtained elsewhere in 
strengthening the non-proliferation regime. Iraq's aggression against Kuwait 
and the decisive steps taken by the United Nations Security Council to bring 
it to a halt had led to a chain of events and actions following which the 
Board of Governors, on the basis of Agency inspections carried out in Iraq in 
accordance with Security Council resolution 687, had concluded that Iraq had 
failed to meet its safeguards obligations. The case of Iraq did not prove 
that there was any inherent weakness in the Agency's safeguards system, but 
merely showed that a State intent on pursuing evil aims of its own could 
circumvent the system. The task now, therefore, was to prevent irresponsible 
politicians from misleading the peace-loving community in the future, and to 
that end it was important to take appropriate measures swiftly and prudently 
to enhance the effectiveness of the Agency's verification system. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 36 


134. The most important aspects of the strengthening of the 
non-proliferation regime were nuclear disarmament and the prohibition of 
nuclear testing. The process of effective nuclear arms reduction which had 
started with the signing of the Treaty Between the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their 
Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles, pursuant whereto all means of 
transport of such missiles in those two countries had been destroyed during 
the current year, had continued with the drafting and the signing in Moscow of 
the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty. The Soviet Union was prepared to go 
still further towards radical reductions of nuclear weapons, including the 
banning of underground tests. 
135. The Annual Report showed that the Agency had essentially acquitted 
itself of its tasks relating to the organization of international 
collaboration in the field of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. It had 
again demonstrated its ability to react swiftly and accurately to a changing 
situation and to the emergence of new problems. He wished to draw particular 
attention to the independent international assessment of the consequences of 
the Chernobyl accident and to express his delegation's heartfelt gratitude to 
all involved in that project and to the staff of the Secretariat who had 
ensured that it was carried out efficiently. 
136. The Soviet Union attached high priority to the Agency's activities 
aimed at safeguarding the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy and to 
improving the operation of the Agency's international safeguards system, which 
played a key role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear arms and 
facilitating normal international trade in nuclear materials, installations 
and technology. 
137. While welcoming the Director General's report on the Agency's 
activities pursuant to Security Council resolution 687, his delegation, as 
already noted previously, would like to see a clearer distinction made between 
the Agency's activities in accordance with safeguards agreements, which 
constituted its normal statutory activities, and activities related to the 
implementation of special tasks entrusted to it by the Security Council. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 37 


138. The Soviet Union co-operated closely with the Agency in the inspection 
of its peaceful nuclear installations under the agreement for the application 
of safeguards in the USSR. It also gave the Agency material and technical 
help with increasing the effectiveness of safeguards through its national 
programme of scientific and technical support. The 1991-92 programme, for the 
financing of which 5 million roubles had been made available, provided for 
research work, training courses for Agency inspectors, courses on nuclear 
material accountancy and control systems, the development of methods and 
instruments, etc. 
139. Among the most important elements of the Agency's activities, and also 
of major importance to the Soviet Union, were the further development of 
nuclear energy and the guaranteeing of its safety. Prior to the Chernobyl 
accident there had been scarcely any doubt about the need to develop nuclear 
power as a priority, and the Soviet energy programme had provided for a rapid 
increase in nuclear generating capacity. The Chernobyl accident had marked a 
turning point. Strong and mounting opposition to the further development of 
nuclear energy and even to the operation of nuclear power plants had been 
voiced by the public. It should be pointed out, however, that public opinion 
had recently shown a shift in favour of nuclear energy; thus, the Councils of 
People's Deputies in several regions of the USSR had decided to construct new 
units with a total capacity of 12 million kilowatts. 
140. The Soviet nuclear industry had significant reserves at present and 
could therefore undertake a programme to modernize a number of nuclear fuel 
cycle installations and to adopt new technologies aimed at protecting the 
environment and ensuring fuller utilization of uranium ores. 
141. An important element of Soviet participation in international 
co-operation was the provision of nuclear fuel cycle services. Until 
recently, those services had been limited to uranium enrichment and fuel 
fabrication for nuclear power plants and installations constructed with Soviet 
aid. The USSR had just entered the world market, where it proposed selling 
natural and enriched uranium. During the period 1991-95, it could sell up to 
5000 tonnes of natural uranium per year, an offer it could increase if there 
were sufficient demand on the world market. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 38 


142. The total uranium reserves of the Soviet Union were estimated at 
2 million tonnes, of which 735 000 could be extracted for less than $60 per 
kilogram. The technology of isotope separation by centrifugation meant that 
foreign trading partners could be offered, alongside long-term contracts, 
short-term and, if necessary, single-delivery contracts. 
143. The Soviet Union was also actively involved, with a deep sense of 
responsibility, in improving nuclear power safety and enhancing standards of 
personnel training, and was making use of foreign expertise to do so. The 
problem of radioactive waste was considered particularly important. The 
technical policy in that area was to look for integrated solutions to the 
waste problem in operating and planned installations. In that context, the 
International Safety Conference which had just taken place in Vienna had been 
extremely useful, and he congratulated it on its success. 
144. In order to solve the energy problems which confronted mankind, 
especially in the field of nuclear energy, it was essential that international 
co-operation in that area be strengthened. The collective approach to major 
world problems had already proved its worth. The Agency had an exceptionally 
important role to play in that context by actively contributing to the 
development of international co-operation in the field of nuclear science and 
technology. 
145. Finally, he approved the Agency's Annual Report, and commended the 
Agency on its activities, the success of which could be attributed to the 
efficient work of the Secretariat and the Director General. 
146. Mr. M0NDIN0 (Argentina) welcomed, on behalf of his Government, the 
four new Member States of the Agency: Yemen, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. 
147. His country believed that nuclear power would play an increasing role 
in the present decade, and that its true importance as the only viable energy 
option from the technical, economic and ecological point of view, as confirmed 
by the conclusions of the recent Helsinki Symposium, would emerge by the end 
of that period. Argentina was at present in the midst of a difficult process 
of economic adjustment and change, but the first signs of a promising future 
were already visible. A sharp increase in electricity demand was anticipated 
in the future, and it would therefore be necessary to complete construction of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 39 


the country's third nuclear power plant, already at an advanced stage, as soon 
as possible and to begin construction of the next plant, long delayed because 
of the serious economic crisis. 


148. Nuclear activity in Argentina had nevertheless been intense. The two 
nuclear power plants currently in operation continued to function under very 
satisfactory conditions. In particular, the Embalse plant, with a load factor 
of 96.1% in the period from September 1989 to September 1990, had taken first 
place among the world's 340 nuclear power plants in the over 150 megawatt 
category. In 1990 it had taken second place, among the 26 power plants of the 
same type, with a load factor of 95.3%. Nuclear power production had 
accounted for 16.9% of total electricity production in Argentina in 1990 and 
was achieving a monthly average of 17.7% during the current year. 
149. Another encouraging fact was that commissioning tests, also long 
delayed because of economic difficulties, had begun at the Arroyito heavy 
water plant. Construction was almost completed and it was hoped that 
industrial production would start around the middle of 1992. The first 
Argentine research reactor, RA-1, which had been shut down for several years, 
had been put into operation again after modernization. That reactor had been 
entirely designed and constructed in Argentina in 1958. Its restart confirmed 
Argentina's resolve to continue pursuing nuclear energy. 
150. With regard to co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
Argentina was convinced that it was both necessary and just to make all the 
advantages of nuclear energy available to all nations without restriction or 
discrimination, but with appropriate safeguards to ensure that the technology, 
installations and materials transferred would be used only for peaceful 
purposes. Argentina's continued activities in the field of technical 
co-operation, both multilateral and bilateral, demonstrated that it was 
prepared to act on those principles. 
151. Within the framework of the Agency, Argentina continued to take part in 
the technical co-operation and ARCAL programmes by hosting courses and 
workshops, training numerous fellows and scientific visitors and making a 
considerable number of experts available to the Agency. In 1990, Argentina 
had ranked third among all Member States in training scientific visitors and 
fellows, and fourth in providing experts and lecturers. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 40 


152. With regard to bilateral co-operation he pointed out that, since the 
last session of the General Conference, three new co-operation agreements had 
been signed (with the Soviet Union, Romania and Morocco), and biennial 
co-operation programmes had been adopted within the framework of existing 
agreements with Cuba, Chile and the Soviet Union. 
153. Argentina strongly supported worldwide efforts to prevent nuclear 
weapons proliferation, both vertical and horizontal. The Argentine Government 
not only pursued a policy of purely peaceful uses of nuclear energy, but also 
continued to support, through all international bodies, full disarmament under 
strict and efficient international control, and in particular nuclear 
disarmament, since nuclear weapons presented the greatest danger to the 
survival of mankind. It was in that spirit that the Argentine President, 
Mr. Carlos Menem, and the Brazilian President, Mr. Fernando Collor de Melo, 
had made a joint declaration on 28 November 1990 at Foz do Iguacu on 
Argentine-Brazilian nuclear policy, establishing three successive stages to 
give full transparency to the nuclear activities of both countries: setting 
up of a common system of accounting and control of nuclear materials in all 
installations; negotiation of a joint full-scope safeguards agreement with the 
Agency covering verification of the common system of accounting and control; 
and steps to update and improve the text of the Tlatelolco Treaty with a view 
to its full entry into force for the two countries. 


154. The common system of accounting and control of nuclear material had 
already been implemented. The required legal framework to ensure credibility 
and stability had also been established: the agreement for the exclusively 
peaceful use of nuclear energy, signed on 18 July 1991 at Guadalajara 
(Mexico), was currently being ratified. In addition, negotiations on an 
Argentine-Brazilian full-scope safeguards agreement with the Agency had 
reached an advanced stage, and Argentina hoped that the Board of Governors 
would soon be able to approve that agreement. Finally, during its twelfth 
session, in May 1991, the General Conference of the Tlatelolco Treaty had 
approved a resolution calling for the co-operation of OPANAL in the implementation 
of the Foz do Iguacu Declaration. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 41 


155. Argentina was firmly convinced that those steps, together with the 
technical co-operation agreements which had been concluded with Brazil in 
the 1980s, gave the international community the broadest assurance regarding 
the aims of the two countries' nuclear programmes. 
156. He commended the Secretariat on the perseverance it had shown in 
resolving problems relating to technical assistance and expressed his 
delegation's acknowledgement of the results obtained. After a break of ten 
years, Argentina had in 1991 once again taken full advantage of the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme. The reasons for those two decisions had 
been given at the time they were made; he wished only to emphasize that his 
delegation was most satisfied with the Secretariat's response and that the 
first results achieved fully justified his country's decision. 
157. Like other Member States, Argentina considered the effectiveness and 
credibility of the Agency's safeguards system to be of prime importance, as 
was borne out by the fact that twelve safeguards agreements were currently in 
force between the Argentine Government and the Agency, and that Argentina and 
Brazil had agreed to entrust the Agency with verification of their common 
system of accounting and control of nuclear material. 
158. Accordingly, he urged the Secretariat to improve the reliability of 
safeguards through radical rationalization of implementation methods, rather 
than by simply introducing additional control measures entailing potentially 
intolerable cost increases, as demonstrated by the current attempts to find 
new financing formulas. 
159. He commended the work done by the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage, which had made considerable progress in examining a number of 
points with a view to revising the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damage. Argentina was a party to that Convention and had always 
called for universal adherence thereto. 
160. He was also pleased at the success of the International Safety 
Conference, reflected in the formulation of a coherent set of conclusions 
which, together with the new ICRP recommendations, could serve as guidelines 
for the Agency. There was justification for extending the scope of Agency 
activities in nuclear safety, on condition that it was done carefully and in a 
progressive and well-planned way. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.335 
page 42 


161. There was a clear consensus in favour of developing international 
safety criteria, but there was serious doubt as to the necessity of 
establishing mandatory international standards within the framework of an 
international convention. Nuclear safety was primarily based on national 
regulatory mechanisms and the strict application of safety criteria and codes 
of practice. Any step which reduced responsibility at the national level 
would lead to a deterioration, and not an improvement, in safety. 
162. Once again, the Agency was to be congratulated on the results obtained 
in the fields of food and agriculture and biological and physical sciences. 
The International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste also deserved its 
customary thanks from Argentina for the quality of the work it had been 
carrying out for many years. 
163. As in previous years, the Argentine Government sincerely commended the 
Director General and the entire Secretariat staff on their devotion and 
efficiency, which had compensated for the negative effects of the policy of 
zero-real-growth budgets. As always, Argentina was prepared to offer full 
support for and active participation in the Agency's activities. Finally, his 
delegation approved the Annual Report for 1990. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
30 October 1991 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Tuesday, 17 September 1991, at 3.30 p.m. 


President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 
later: Mr. AAMODT (Norway) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (continued) 1 - 163 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Ukraine 1 -23 
Netherlands 24 -42 
Tunisia 43 -48 
Uruguay 49 -56 
Algeria 57 -85 
Yugoslavia 86 -90 
Mexico 91 -104 
Canada 105 -111 
Poland 112 -132 
Belgium 133 -143 
Zimbabwe 144 -153 
Commission of the European 


Communities 154 -163 


[*] GC(XXXV)/982. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 


91-4598 
(8922e/840e) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 2 


AFRA 


ARCAL 


CEC 
ECU 
EURATOM 
IPERS 
MERCOSUR 
NPT 
OPANAL 


OSART 
RAPAT 
RCA 


SSR 
TACF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 


UNOV 
U8 $ 
USSR 
WAMAP 
WANO 
WWER 


Abbreviations used in this record 


African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of 
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America 
Commission of the European Communities 
European currency unit 
European Atomic Energy Community 
International Peer Review Service 
South American Common Market 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 


(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Soviet Socialist Republic 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America 
United Nations Office at Vienna 
United States dollar 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Waste Management Advisory Programme 
World Association of Nuclear Operators 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor (Soviet Union) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) (continued) 


1. Mr. VISHNEVSKY (Ukraine) welcomed the Republics of Lithuania, 
Latvia, Estonia and Yemen as new Members of the Agency and assured them of his 
delegation's full co-operation in all aspects of the Agency's activities. 
2. The present session of the General Conference was taking place at a 
time of radical change throughout the world, with the Governments of many 
countries actively seeking to strengthen international co-operation in matters 
of vital importance to mankind. Evidence of the new atmosphere of global 
responsibility was the recent historic signing of a strategic arms reduction 
treaty by the Soviet Union and the United States of America, which his 
delegation acclaimed as an important step towards a nuclear-weapon free world 
characterized by the non-use of violence for settling problems, the quest for 
mutually acceptable solutions, and collective efforts to develop democracy and 
raise the living standards of the peoples of the world. Ukraine, for its 
part, pursuant to the provisions of its Declaration of Sovereignty and Act of 
Proclamation of Independence, intended to maintain a policy of strict 
neutrality, non-membership of military blocs, and adherence to the three 
non-nuclear principles not to produce nuclear weapons, not to acquire them, 
and not to allow them on its territory. 
3. In that context, he welcomed the accession to the NPT of South Africa, 
Tanzania and Zambia, as well as the declarations of China and France that they 
had decided, in principle, to accede to the Treaty. His delegation favoured 
the strengthening and further development of the NPT regime, with the Agency 
playing a major role, and endorsed the appeal for the NPT to be made a 
universal legal instrument. 
4. His delegation noted with satisfaction the strengthening of 
co-operation between his country's institutions and the Agency in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. It believed that the current International situation 
was conducive to the Agency's achieving its statutory objectives, and a great 
deal had already been accomplished in that direction, although much still 
remained to be done. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 4 


5. The Agency's Annual Report for 1990 presented a serious analysis of the 
results of all the Agency's activities, which overall deserved positive 
appraisal. A logical continuation of the Agency's work had been the convening 
in Vienna of the International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power, 
where matters of nuclear safety about which it was desirable to come to 
agreement at international level had been considered and recommendations had 
been formulated with a view to ensuring optimum safety levels for present and 
future generations of nuclear power plants, including proposals for Agency 
action in that area. It had been the first time that problems crucial to the 
future development of nuclear power had been discussed at such a high level in 
the light of all the relevant scientific, technical, economic, ecological and 
socio-political aspects. The Conference had shown that, provided there was a 
high level of safety, nuclear power had definite advantages over other sources 
of energy. 
6. In 1990, the United Nations General Assembly had adopted by consensus 
resolution 45/190 on international co-operation to address and mitigate the 
consequences of the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant; that 
resolution reflected the worldwide concern to pool efforts and mobilize the 
world's potential in dealing with the long-term consequences of the disaster. 
His delegation was grateful to the United Nations Co-ordinator for Chernobyl 
and Director-General of UNOV, Ms. Anstee, for undertaking to implement the 
provisions of the resolution, including the drawing-up of a plan to combine 
the efforts of all the international organizations involved in mitigating the 
consequences of the Chernobyl accident. His Government was eager to 
co-operate with the international organizations, and in particular the Agency, 
in carrying out the plan. 
7. In that context, he wished to remind the Conference that, on 
20 September in New York, there would be a pledging conference for contributions 
to the United Nations Chernobyl programme. His delegation hoped that 
the appeal from the United Nations and from the Governments whose territories 
contained areas afflicted by the disaster would meet with generous support 
from the Agency's Member States. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 5 


8. His country felt keenly the tragedy which had taken place at Chernobyl 
in April 1986, bringing suffering to many millions of people. Although the 
Government was carrying out a broad range of measures to deal with the 
consequences, the situation in the affected areas continued to be extremely 
difficult. International assistance had been offered in the form of efforts 
to determine how best to mitigate the effects of the disaster. In 
September 1990, the Chernobyl Centre for International Research had been set 
up, and over 20 countries and 4 international organizations had declared their 
willingness to participate. An agreement had been signed between the 
Governments of the USSR, Ukraine and the Byelorussian SSR on the one hand, and 
the Agency on the other, for international research to be conducted at the 
"Pripyat" scientific centre, and the International Chernobyl Project to assess 
the radiological consequences of the accident had been launched. 
9. In evaluating the radiological situation in a number of afflicted areas 
and formulating recommendations regarding radiation protection and human 
health, the international experts had made a valuable contribution. However, 
because of the limited scope of the Project, no provision had been made for 
evaluating the health of the inhabitants of the 30-kilometre zone who had been 
evacuated immediately following the accident, or the population living in the 
worst-affected areas, or of the members of the cleanup teams, the so-called 
"liquidators". 
10. The conclusions of the Project was that the study had been unable to 
resolve all issues related to potential health consequences, and indeed his 
delegation felt that the study put forward an excessively optimistic view of 
the future consequences to the health of the population. Unfortunately, 
medical data showed a considerable increase in the incidence of various 
diseases over the recent period which might have been caused by the chronic 
effects of low radiation doses or by the impact of a single occurrence of 
unfavourable radiological and chemical factors. 
11. Accordingly, the work needed to continue, with particular attention 
being given to the medical study of the population living in the worstaffected 
areas, so that, on the basis of a multifactor analysis, reliable data 
concerning the health status of the population could be obtained and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 6 


recommendations drawn up for improving it. A sound forecast of future trends 
was needed, and his delegation noted with satisfaction the Director General's 
announcement in his opening statement that the Agency was ready to move in 
that direction. The Ukrainian Government, for its part, would co-operate to 
the utmost in implementing such a study and make available for that purpose 
all the information and equipment at its disposal. 


12. Such an undertaking would be fully in line with the spirit of the 
measures proposed by the Agency for strengthening international co-operation 
in matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection. Given that 
another major accident at any nuclear power plant would undoubtedly discredit 
the very idea of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Agency was fully 
justified in attempting to elaborate basic nuclear safety principles and to 
set up a co-ordinated programme for co-operation, which might even Include the 
establishment of an international centre for nuclear safety on whose services 
all countries could draw. Only a concerted international policy could ensure 
the highest levels of safety worldwide and dispel the misgivings aroused by 
nuclear power. 
13. Chernobyl was the site of a great tragedy, but it also constituted a 
unique testing ground for the study of important physical, technical, 
biological and social problems arising in the aftermath of a nuclear accident 
and for resolving the problem of assuring the radiation protection of the 
population. No less important was the problem of the final disposal of large 
volumes of radioactive waste resulting from the accident. His delegation was 
convinced of the need for an international project under which optimum methods 
for the processing and disposal of radioactive waste could be developed and 
then made available to all countries. 
14. Thus, the copious information resulting from the various Chernobylrelated 
projects would become common property and could be of great help in 
raising safety levels and working out measures to minimize the consequences of 
extremely improbable, but unfortunately still possible, future accidents at 
nuclear power plants. 
15. In his country, the field of nuclear safety and radiation protection 
was not a mere abstraction, but part of the harsh daily lives of many hundreds 
of thousands of people, who had suffered from a nuclear accident ranked at 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 7 


level 7, the highest level on the International Nuclear Event Scale. As a 
result, his country had been paying special attention over the past few years 
to the particularly important areas of operational safety and the Agency's 
OSART missions. 


16. On the territory of Ukraine, there were currently five large nuclear 
power stations, the Chernobyl, Rovno, (visited by an OSART team in June 1990), 
Zaporozhe, Khmelnitskij and South Ukrainian stations. Between them they 
comprised 16 reactors with a total capacity of 15 000 MW, accounting for 
approximately 25% of all electric power generated in the Republic. The 
Supreme Soviet of Ukraine had recently adopted a measure transferring to 
Ukrainian jurisdiction all State enterprises and organizations previously 
under All-Union jurisdiction situated within the territory of the Republic. 
That decision applied to all five nuclear power stations, as well as to a 
number of other installations. Clearly, the transfer must not in any way 
affect the safe operation of the facilities. A certain amount of time would 
be required to resolve a number of legal, organizational and other matters 
that had arisen following the Ukrainian Parliament's decision. Appropriate 
structures were being set up that would ultimately regulate the activities of 
Ukraine's national nuclear industry. In particular, a Ukrainian State 
Committee for the safe operation of nuclear power plants had already been 
established. 
17. His delegation wished to emphasize that, despite the serious opposition 
to the development of nuclear power which now existed in Ukraine - largely as 
a result of the "Chernobyl syndrome" his country could not conceive of its 
future economic development as a sovereign State without nuclear power plants. 
18. Turning to the subject of safeguards, he expressed his delegation's 
appreciation for the Agency's verification activities, which were taking on 
greater importance as the world moved into an age of nuclear disarmament. At 
the same time, the example of Iraq showed the need to increase the 
effectiveness of the present system of safeguards. The Agency's programme and 
budget for 1993-94 should provide for the practical implementation of a system 
of special inspections, and define clearly the mechanism for carrying them out. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 8 


19. His delegation also endorsed the Agency's efforts to implement Security 
Council resolution 687 concerning the monitoring of Iraq's nuclear activities. 
It was in favour of giving fresh impetus to the idea of creating a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and of continuing efforts to bring 
all countries in the region into the NPT regime and to have them place their 
nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards. 
20. In the opinion of his delegation, the Agency's budget for 1992 was, on 
the whole, well-balanced. However, for future years there was a need to 
conduct a comparative analysis of the results of the Agency's various projects 
in order to establish an order of priority for them, thus ensuring that 
expenditure on the most important projects could be increased as necessary, 
and the financing of less vital projects cut accordingly. Such flexibility in 
financial planning could considerably enhance the effectiveness of the 
Agency's work. 
21. Such an analysis was even more essential where the Agency's Medium-Term 
Plan for the period 1993-98 was concerned. The Plan needed to provide for the 
possibility of re-allocating resources in accordance with changing priorities 
and should serve as a guide in the formulation of subsequent years' 
programmes, so it must be periodically re-examined and updated on the basis of 
consultations between the Agency's Secretariat and Member States. 
22. In conclusion, he reiterated his country's great appreciation and 
support for the Agency's multi-faceted activities in strengthening 
international co-operation in matters concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, and promised that Ukraine, as a Member State, would do everything in 
its power to help accomplish the important tasks confronting the Agency. 
23. Mr. PLUG (Netherlands), speaking on behalf of the European 
Community and its member States, said that the previous year had witnessed 
important events which had affected, and would continue to affect, the work of 
the Agency. 
24. The European Community and its 12 member States were gravely concerned 
about the reports by the Director General that Iraq had failed to comply with 
its obligations under its safeguards agreement with the Agency and under 
Security Council resolution 687, which called upon Iraq to declare all its 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 9 


nuclear activities to the Agency. The nuclear activities concealed by Iraq 
were of such a nature and scale, the Iraqi attempts to keep them secret so 
elaborate, and the cost so much in excess of the economic benefits that it was 
clear that the programme had not been for purely peaceful purposes. The 
Twelve were pleased that the Agency had played such a prominent and skilful 
role in the implementation of Security Council resolution 687 and supported 
the Director General in those efforts, while deploring the way in which the 
Agency inspection teams had been deceived and obstructed in carrying out the 
Security Council's mandate. The European Community and its member States 


condemned Iraq's non-compliance with its NPT safeguards agreement and called 
upon it to remedy that situation unconditionally, swiftly and with no further 
circumvention, in accordance with the relevant provisions of its safeguards 
agreement with the Agency, with the resolutions adopted by the Board of 
Governors and the Security Council on Iraq's violation of its commitments, and 
with the Board's conclusions the previous week. 


25. Following France's decision to accede to the NPT, the objectives of 
which that country had always supported, all member States of the European 
Community would soon be formal Parties to the Treaty, which constituted a 
cornerstone of the international non-proliferation regime. The Agency and its 
safeguards system played a key role in upholding the Treaty by improving 
confidence and mutual trust between nations and promoting the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. Current efforts by the Agency's Secretariat, under the 
guidance of the Board of Governors, to strengthen and update its safeguards 
system were to be commended. In line with the valuable suggestions to that 
end offered by the Director General, the Twelve had, as a first step, proposed 
a set of relatively straightforward measures which could be implemented fairly 
quickly. Those measures ought to include: 
An obligation for States to declare any new facilities to the 
Agency at least 180 days before the start of construction work; 


An obligation to declare all civil nuclear materials, including 
uranium ore concentrate (yellow cake), produced in the territory 
of a State; 



GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 10 


Effective use by the Agency of special inspections, including 
their use in relation to undeclared nuclear facilities; 


The setting up by the Agency of a universal register of exports 
and imports of sensitive nuclear equipment and, at the discretion 
of the Agency, verification that: 


(i) Such equipment was actually located in a safeguarded facility; 
(ii) 
All nuclear materials processed in that facility were 
effectively safeguarded; 
An obligation for the Secretariat to notify the Board of Governors 
of any request for exemption under the terms of Articles 36 and 37 
of an INFCIRC/153-type agreement before acceding to such a request. 


The Twelve were gratified that the Board of Governors had taken up those 
proposals and that the Agency would examine them urgently, together with 
Member States and the Community, giving consideration also to their likely 
cost and benefits. The Twelve looked forward to fruitful and conclusive 
discussions on those proposals in the Board of Governors in February 1992. 


26. The Twelve welcomed the accession of additional States to the NPT. The 
announcement by China that it had decided to join the Treaty illustrated the 
extent to which non-proliferation had become a universal objective. Albania, 
Mozambique, South Africa, Tanzania and Zambia also deserved to be commended on 
having become Parties since the previous session of the General Conference. 
The accession of four African States contributed to the prospect of a nuclearweapon-
free Africa. The Twelve also noted with satisfaction the recent 
signing by South Africa of a safeguards agreement with the Agency. Positive 
developments in other parts of the world, as exemplified by the Guadalajara 
agreement between Argentina and Brazil concluded the previous July, also 
provided positive encouragement. The European Community and its member States 
were confident that the negotiations between Argentina, Brazil and the Agency 
on a comprehensive safeguards agreement would soon be completed and the 
agreement put into force, thus preparing the ground for a broadening of the 
scope of the Tlatelolco Treaty. Recent developments in the Middle East, 
notably the joint initiative by several Arab States during the current session 
of the General Conference and the prospect of negotiations between all the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 11 


parties involved, might eventually result In a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
that region too, supported by full-scope Agency safeguards in all the States 
concerned. It was to be hoped that similar initiatives would develop and 
succeed on the South Asian subcontinent. The Twelve were concerned about the 


long delays in concluding and implementing a safeguards agreement with the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and hoped that, following the Board's 
approval of the text of the agreement the previous week, the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea would ensure the swift and unconditional entry into 
force and implementation of the agreement. 


27. For the European Community and its member States, largely dependent as 
they were on external sources of supply, recourse to a diversity of energy 
options was imperative and would probably remain so in the foreseeable 
future. The choice of nuclear power was an important element of the energy 
strategy of several Member States. At the same time, governments and public 
opinion worldwide had become increasingly aware of how energy production 
affected health, safety and the environment. Governments were faced with the 
difficult task of reconciling environmental challenges, security of supply and 
economic competitiveness. In that respect the Twelve took note of the outcome 
of the Helsinki Symposium on Electricity and the Environment. 
28. While the nuclear energy option had the advantage of not producing the 
gases which contributed to global warming and acid rain, its deployment raised 
certain issues, specifically those of nuclear safety and nuclear waste 
disposal. The Agency was the forum par excellence for global discussion of 
those matters and that was why the Twelve had taken the initiative the 
previous year of proposing an international conference to evaluate the safety 
of nuclear power generation and to discuss possible strategies for the 
future. The Twelve were gratified to note that the International Conference 
on the Safety of Nuclear Power, held from 2 to 6 September, had succeeded in 
presenting a thorough evaluation of all the major issues and in formulating 
recommendations which could make an Important contribution to the future 
course of developments in that field. The Community and its member States 
also welcomed the recommendations made by the Board of Governors the previous 
week in favour of embarking on the step-by-step approach towards an 
international nuclear safety convention, as recommended by the International 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 12 


Safety Conference, and of inviting the Director General to incorporate the 
Conference's other valuable recommendations into the Agency's Medium-Term Plan 
and its work programme for the coming biennlum. The Community and its 
member States were firmly resolved to provide maximum assistance in those 
endeavours. 


29. The Twelve had noted with active interest the report of the 
International Chernobyl Project, the conclusions and recommendations of which 
could help provide guidelines for follow-up research and projects aimed at 
improving living conditions for the people in the contaminated area. The 
European Community and its member States, as well as private organizations and 
individuals, had already contributed to endeavours of that nature, for example 
in the framework of the Chernobyl Centre for International Research, and every 
effort would be made to continue those endeavours. 
30. The accident at Chernobyl had provided clear evidence of the very 
serious damage such accidents could cause and the severe Impact they could 
have on society and the environment. The prevention of such accidents was 
obviously a high priority. In developing co-operation between the European 
Community, the Central and Eastern European countries and the Soviet Union in 
the fields of energy and the environment, nuclear safety had been identified 
as one of the main concerns. The Agency's activities relating to the safety 
of older reactors constituted a recent example of such co-operation. The 
Twelve had participated in expert missions and studies under the project on 
the safety of WWER-440/230 reactors in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. 
Following an appeal by the Bulgarian Government, the Community and several of 
its member States, together with the IAEA and WANO, had decided to provide 
immediate financial and technical assistance to help Bulgaria improve safety 
conditions at Kozloduy. 
31. The adoption of a European Energy Charter with a Protocol on nuclear 
energy, including nuclear safety, provided additional opportunities for 
comprehensive co-operation with the Central and Eastern European countries. 
Preparatory work was well under way and a ministerial conference had been 
scheduled for the end of the year in The Hague. The Director General was 
invited to participate in that work and to detail the valuable contributions 
the Agency could make. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 13 


32. Another issue of great importance affecting the public's attitude to 
nuclear power was the international regime for liability in respect of damage 
caused by nuclear accidents. Preparations for the revision of the Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage were progressing, although 
several complicated issues remained to be solved. The Twelve anticipated that 
the work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage would lead 
to a revision conference, to be held as soon as was feasible. 
33. On 6 September the European Community and its member States had 
simultaneously deposited their instruments of ratification for the Convention 
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. Practical experience in the 
day-to-day implementation of the provisions of the Convention by national 
authorities and the European Commission had been gained. The Review 
Conference of the Convention, foreseen for 1992, would provide a timely 
opportunity to evaluate that practice and discuss possible improvements. The 
Twelve intended to be actively involved in the preparations for the Conference 
starting on 7 October. 
34. As expressed in the Declarations by the European Council in Dublin the 
preceding year and more recently in Luxembourg in June of the current year, 
the European Community and its member States attached the greatest importance 
to maintaining an effective international nuclear non-proliferation regime and 
would make every effort to contribute to strengthening non-proliferation and 
encouraging the participation of further countries in the regime. They were 
convinced of the need for the peaceful application of nuclear energy to take 
place under credible, effective and efficient international safeguards. Their 
long-standing commitment to those principles was best illustrated by the 
establishment, as early as 1957, of the EURATOM Treaty, with its principle of 
supranational responsibility for applying safeguards to the use of nuclear 
energy within the Community. 
35. Turning to financial matters and the concern over the Agency's 
recurring cash crises, caused by late payment or non-payment of obligatory 
contributions to the Regular Budget and of pledged contributions to the TACF, 
he appealed to all Member States which were in arrears to remedy that 
situation so that the Agency could fulfil its designated tasks under the 
Statute. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 14 


36. The Twelve were also concerned about the somewhat frustrating debate on 
the financing of safeguards and urged that a long-term solution be found which 
would uphold the principle that safeguards benefited all countries and that 
their cost should therefore be borne by all Member States. 
37. The Agency's activities in the field of scientific and technical 
assistance and co-operation formed an integral part of its mandate. The 
European Community and its member States had always accorded high priority to 
those activities and the steady increase in resources over the past ten years 
amply reflected the interest of Member States. However, it seemed worth 
pointing out that improvement of the safeguards system would facilitate more 
enhanced forms of assistance and co-operation. 
38. The time had come to discuss new targets for the TACF. It was 
essential that the targets be realistic in terms of Member States' ability and 
willingness to pledge and to pay. In recent years there had been a decrease 
both in the number of pledges and in the level of pledges actually paid. An 
effort should be made to reverse that trend, since the quality of programming 
and implementation of technical co-operation activities depended heavily on 
the predictability and reliability of pledges. 
39. The preceding year had seen many important political events. The 
Twelve warmly welcomed the Baltic States Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania and the 
Republic of Yemen as new Members of the Agency. There were many areas in 
which promising developments were occurring that seemed likely to have a 
positive Influence on the work of the Agency, and the Twelve pledged their 
full support for such steps forward. 
40. Finally, turning to his own country's nuclear programme, he said that 
nuclear power played a modest role in the Netherlands, which had two nuclear 
power plants generating approximately 6% of national electricity production. 
Recently, following the practical advice and recommendations of several OSART 
and IPERS missions, decisions had been taken to extend the operational 
lifetime of both reactors. 
41. As a result of the Chernobyl accident, no decision on the construction 
of new nuclear power plants was expected before 1993. The nuclear option 
would be kept open in the meantime by maintaining nuclear know-how and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 15 


infrastructure and by a four-year nuclear safety research programme focusing 


on advanced reactor concepts, especially those with enhanced natural safety 


features. Special attention was being given to reactor concepts which were 
expected to become commercial within a few years. Thus, the Netherlands was 
participating in development of the Simplified Boiling Water Reactor. A 
comparison of other advanced reactor concepts was being made with a view to 
possible participation in a second reactor, perhaps of the "inherently safe" 
type. To improve his country's understanding of new reactor types, an 
assessment of evolutionary and revolutionary reactor concepts had been 
undertaken with the assistance of Agency experts. 


42. The Netherlands continued to attach great importance to radioactive 
waste research. In 1989 it had been provisionally concluded that final 
disposal of radioactive waste in salt rock formations was feasible from the 
technical and safety point of view, but that additional verification was 
required. A follow-up desk research programme was focusing on final disposal 
safety, with attention also being given to new safety-related topics such as 
retrlevability of waste and direct disposal of irradiated fuel elements, and 
with increased attention being given to actinide research. Results of that 
follow-up radioactive waste research programme would be available by 
approximately 1994. 
43. Mr. AMMAR (Tunisia) joined other speakers in welcoming Estonia, 
Latvia, Lithuania and Yemen as new Member States and expressed his conviction 
that they would make a valuable contribution to the Agency's work in the 
service of peace and development. 
44. Having had the honour of being a member of the Board of Governors for 
the past two years, Tunisia highly appreciated the spirit of co-operation 
manifested in that body, and noted that the Agency could not but be directly 
affected by the recent changes in international affairs which were having so 
great an impact in all fields. 
45. The expansion of the NPT with the accession of new States and the 
increase in Agency safeguards activities to protect mankind from the dangers 
of nuclear energy were particularly welcome. However, more efforts should be 
made to promote the use of nuclear energy for the benefit of mankind. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 16 


46. There were still problems associated with the use of nuclear energy, 
such as the disposal of radioactive waste and its impact on the environment. 
The existing measures in that area would continue to be ineffective unless 
supported by international conventions. Efforts made by the Agency to promote 
international co-operation in the areas of nuclear safety, radiation 
protection and the prevention of nuclear accidents had led to tangible 
progress, attributable to the readiness shown by various States to join in 
those efforts. However, while it was encouraging that the new States having 
significant nuclear programmes which were emerging as a result of political 
developments in Eastern Europe had given assurances that they would seek to 
abide by the Agency's safety standards and guidelines, it was clear that 
additional responsibilities would arise there for the Agency. Moreover, the 
fact that some nuclear facilities in that region lacked the required degree of 
safety was cause for serious concern, and his delegation hoped that all States 
would maintain a suitable degree of transparency in their relations with the 
Agency so that it could carry out the appropriate evaluations. 
47. With regard to the Agency's technical assistance activities, developing 
countries attached great importance to the promotion of co-operation with the 
Agency. For its part, Tunisia was grateful to the Agency for the expert 
services which it had provided in areas such as pest control, the eradication 
of the New World screwworm and desalination projects in North Africa. 
48. Finally, his delegation regretted the fact that, at a time of positive 
developments in the area of disarmament and arms control, Israel continued to 
reject international decisions and to obstruct the international community's 
efforts to establish peace in the Middle East. 
49. Mr. CERSOSIMO (Uruguay) said that the new climate in international 
relations was turning away from confrontation towards fostering and 
strengthening international organizations as the most rational and equitable 
forums for dealing with topics of universal concern. The particular aim of 
the current session of the General Conference was to promote universal 
confidence in the peaceful use of nuclear energy as well as international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear science and technology. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 17 


50. His country was co-ordinating its activities with those of Paraguay, 
Argentina and Brazil in order to meet the requirements of the new strategy of 
regional integration represented by MERCOSUR. To that end, national expertise 
in the various countries needed to be harmonized and co-ordinated, and Indeed 
that was the guiding principle of all his country's nuclear activities. The 
public and private sectors were now being integrated and were working in 
conjunction with the educational centres using atomic energy. Nuclear 
assistance and co-operation agreements had been signed with Argentina and 
Chile, and a programme was in the pipeline with those countries for joint 
scientific and technical activities. A co-operation agreement had also been 
signed with Canada for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and efforts were 
being made to conclude a nuclear co-operation agreement with Brazil. 
51. The decision by Brazil and Argentina in favour of the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy was welcome, for it meant that those two countries could soon 
become parties to the Tlatelolco Treaty. Nuclear energy could be put to 
either peaceful or military uses; which option was chosen was determined by 
the political will of each individual country. However, at certain levels of 
nuclear development, when States possessed so-called sensitive technologies, 
the distinctions between the two options narrowed. Therefore, the will to use 
nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposes must be stated with conviction so 
that no doubts subsisted, within the overall context of confidence-building 
measures in the pursuit of peace as the guiding principle. Although the NPT 
and the Tlatelolco Treaty played a vital role in that process, they were not 
the only instruments. There were also other forms of agreements permitting 
the verification of compliance with commitments to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, and the Agency, through its safeguards system, played a key 
role in that respect. He appealed to other countries to become parties to a 
system whereby effective safeguards could be applied to their nuclear 
installations and materials. In that connection, he strongly condemned the 
attitude of the Government of Iraq towards the IAEA officials, who had been 
impeded in the performance of their duties despite the existence of a 
safeguards agreement. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 18 


52. There was no doubt that the key to success in the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy lay in the promotion of measures for its rational use, with due 
attention to radiation protection and nuclear safety. Although nuclear 
technology could generate fears and misgivings, the great social and environmental 
benefits its peaceful use could provide had been amply demonstrated. 
On the other hand, it could also present a risk to human health or adversely 
affect the environment in the event of an accident; even a small nuclear 
accident would have major repercussions throughout the world. However, the 
fact remained that 17% of global production of electrical energy came from 
nuclear power plants and that nuclear technology also brought benefits in the 
field of medicine, animal health, agriculture and industry. 


53. The greatest efforts were required in the fields of radiation 
protection and nuclear safety, and any measures to that end deserved suppport, 
for they would enhance confidence in the benefits to be gained from the 
application of nuclear technology. 
54. Environmental radiation protection was a mechanism for verifying that 
levels of radioactivity in the environment were normal, and he urged the 
creation of a co-ordinated system to monitor environmental radioactivity in 
both normal and abnormal situations and take the requisite remedial measures 
in the latter. The environment recognized no frontiers and its conservation 
was essential to the survival of the human race. Conservation of the 
environment and development should be interdependent and compatible 
activities. However, before a co-ordinated network to measure environmental 
radiation at the national, regional and global levels could be set up, an 
advisory group first needed to be established to report on how such a network 
could be implemented. 
55. Turning to the Agency's technical co-operation activities, he noted 
that such valuable programmes as ARCAL, RCA and AFRA should receive the 
necessary financial backing to ensure proper and timely implementation of 
planning activities at the regional level without the need to call upon 
financial contributions from the host country as had been the case on the 
occasion of the Vlllth ARCAL planning and co-ordination meeting held in his 
country in May 1991. He urged the Director General to give consideration to 
the best way of organizing that new form of co-operation and to adapt the 
Agency's system of financing to that end. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 19 


56. His country wished to make its contribution to the Agency as in 
previous years and would pledge a voluntary contribution for 1992. In 
Uruguay, it was the most downtrodden sections of society which most 
desperately needed to enjoy the benefits of scientific and technological 
development, key elements in improving the standard of living. Technology 
would indubitably be at the centre of future efforts to promote social and 
economic development and he therefore acclaimed the present session of the 
General Conference as a milestone in his country's path towards progress and 
development. 
Mr. Aamodt (Norway) took the Chair. 


57. Mr. CHERIF (Algeria) observed that since the preceding session of 
the Conference there had occurred profound changes in the world, which gave 
rise not only to hopes but also to apprehensions. In the present 
international situation, all States should strive for peace, the elimination 
of tensions and mutual co-operation with a view to overcoming the complex 
problems engendered by the daily upheavals taking place in the political, 
social, cultural and even technological arenas. 
58. It was the duty of all Member States participating in the Conference to 
work towards realization of the Agency's objectives, namely placing the 
benefits of the atom at the service of peace and the well-being of mankind as 
a whole. In a changing world, the Agency's credibility would increasingly 
depend on how it carried out its statutory function of promoting and 
accelerating the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Constructive consultation 
and closer co-operation between Member States that took into account the 
interests of each would not only safeguard the Agency from tensions and 
conflicts but contribute to the establishment of an international framework 
ensuring fairness and creating confidence among nations. 
59. Thanks to the spirit of voluntary co-operation, the Agency, during the 
34 years of its existence, had achieved a great deal in making the benefits of 
nuclear applications available to most countries. That calm atmosphere must 
be maintained in the future. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 20 


60. The Agency had made strenuous efforts in recent years to revitalize the 
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, especially nuclear power. 
The Annual Report for 1990 gave an idea of the range of the Agency's 
activities and the progress of its major programmes, confirming its positive 
role and its ability to meet the serious challenges before it. 
61. Algeria wished to express its appreciation of the quality of the 
assistance received under the technical co-operation programme and of the 
Secretariat's support in Implementing projects. 
62. It was needless to point out that the numerous applications of nuclear 
energy were of the utmost usefulness and were becoming an essential factor in 
economic and social development. For that reason, national scientific and 
technological infrastructures must be strengthened in order to allow the 
widest possible use of nuclear techniques in medicine, agriculture, water 
management, industry, energy production and research, despite unfavourable 
economic conditions. In fact, those conditions made it imperative to promote 
those promising techniques in order to alleviate the effects of recurrent 
crises and to establish firm bases for development. 
63. In Algeria, the highest priority would continue to be attached to 
health and agriculture, sectors in which the needs were urgent and the results 
could have social and economic impacts in the short term. 
64. In the health sector, 12 nuclear medicine services for diagnosis and 
therapy and four new cancer radiotherapy centres had been set up; considerable 
progress had been made in medical physics and in the quality control and 
production of radiopharmaceuticals. Algeria hoped to meet a large part of its 
demand for radiopharmaceuticals from local production, thanks to Agency 
assistance, which would hopefully be stepped up. 
65. Agency assistance had also been instrumental in Implementing a number 
of projects relating to agriculture, animal production and hydrology. An 
industrial irradiator for food preservation and sterilization of medical 
supplies was to be Installed shortly. Nuclear techniques were being used to 
study the rise in the water-table in some regions of the Sahara, a phenomenon 
which could be disastrous for the date palm. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 21 


66. Research In the nuclear field enabled Algeria to develop capacities and 
know-how which were useful for the industrial sector. Its nuclear research 
centres were making their experience and capacities for engineering studies 
and quality control available to the petroleum, petrochemical, steel and powergeneration 
sectors. 
67. As for nuclear installations, the Nur research and training reactor, 
the first in Algeria, had been in operation for two years and was used for 
training various types of personnel in the nuclear area. It was also utilized 
for experimental purposes to produce small quantities of radioisotopes. 
68. Other activities were being organized gradually, including a programme 
on neutron beams for materials study and activation analysis, which was 
receiving Agency assistance. 
69. Another research reactor with a capacity of 15 MW was being constructed 
in co-operation with the People's Republic of China. It was expected to meet 
the country's radioisotope needs and research requirements. It had been named 
"Salam" (peace) in honour of Professor Abdus Salam and, at the same time, to 
symbolize Algeria's commitment to peace and the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. In that connection, he referred in particular to the spirit of mutual 
confidence and respect which characterized Algeria's co-operation with China 
under that project. 
70. As in the case of the Nur reactor, his Government had informed the 
Director General of its decision to place the Salam reactor voluntarily under 
Agency safeguards. For that purpose, it intended unilaterally to begin 
negotiations with the Agency with a view to concluding a safeguards agreement. 
71. Other research and development laboratories in various areas of nuclear 
science and technology such as nuclear applications, analytical methods, 
geology, materials science and nuclear fuel were being installed progressively. 
72. With regard to regional co-operation, the fact that a large number of 
African States had within a short time become party to AFRA indicated the 
interest which that programme had aroused in the region as an instrument for 
promoting co-operation in the area of nuclear applications. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 22 


73. The preliminary results of the AFRA programme in Algeria, which had 
been reviewed at the meeting of the technical working group in July, were 
encouraging, and accordingly Algeria was striving hard to create the necessary 
conditions for implementing all the projects. 
74. Under the AFRA regional agreement, apart from the projects financed by 
the Agency, namely two workshops held in Algiers in May 1991 and several 
training courses, only one project had been awarded a grant of US $100 000 
from the French Government. Obviously the objectives could not be met without 
extrabudgetary funding and greater financial support from the Agency. It 
would therefore be desirable for other donors to follow France's example. 
75. He commended the Secretariat and especially the staff of the Department 
of Technical Co-operation for their constant and effective support for the 
AFRA programme. Moreover, Algeria highly appreciated the valuable assistance 
provided by the Agency under projects of interest to the Maghreb sub-region those 
on nuclear desalination, screwworm control and fruit fly eradication. 
He noted with satisfaction the progress made in the eradication of the New 
World screwworm in Libya, and hoped that the experience gained there could be 
used in implementing the sub-regional project on the fruit fly. 
76. The Maghreb area suffered from a chronic shortage of drinking water, 
which was expected to become more acute under the combined effect of 
diminished rainfall, population growth and increased water requirements for 
industry and irrigation. Fresh water resources being limited, the 
conventional methods of water management could not satisfy the rising demand. 
It was necessary therefore to resort to desalination of sea water, and 
preliminary studies seemed to indicate that nuclear energy might be the most 
competitive source of energy for that purpose. In that connection, he praised 
the competence and speed with which the Secretariat and consultants had 
carried out part of the work recommended by the General Conference, and 
expressed the hope that the same tempo would be maintained in the future and 
that the activity would continue to be accorded due priority in the Agency's 
programme. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 23 


77. The foregoing demonstrated the importance of the Agency's technical 
assistance as the principal means of extension of nuclear techniques in the 
world and of reducing the technological disparity between the developed and 
developing countries. While the Agency had made laudable efforts to improve 
its programmes, and in particular its resource utilization and implementation 
rates, it must be pointed out that the financing of technical assistance, 
unlike other activities, continued to be uncertain because of the voluntary 
character of the contributions, which were always dependent on the donor 
countries' political and economic situation. It was essential therefore to 
establish a financing system which would guarantee assured resources and 
continuity of the co-operation programmes. 
78. Concerning the Medium-Term Plan now under study, he had no doubt that 
the Agency needed a strategic plan as guidance for its activities and to 
respond to requirements in the near future. However, such a plan should not 
envisage activities within a rigid framework but set strategic objectives 
providing for: 
(i) 
Elimination of obstacles in the way of developing co-operation in 
the area of nuclear energy; 
(ii) 
Establishment of an essential balance between the different 
activities of the Agency; 
(ill) 
Consideration of the developing countries' needs in a more 
effective manner; 


(iv) 
Financing of technical assistance on the basis of assured, 
sufficient and predictable resources. 
79. In a world concerned about pollution and deterioration of the environment, 
the Agency must continue to accord high priority in its programmes to 
nuclear safety and radiological protection, which were a prerequisite for the 
large-scale use of nuclear energy. Algeria, for its part, attached great 
importance to those activities and noted with satisfaction that the expanded 
nuclear safety programme adopted after the Chernobyl accident had had a 
positive Impact not only on the scientific and technological aspects but also 
on the credibility of nuclear power in the public mind. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 24 


80. The work of the recent International Conference on the Safety of 
Nuclear Power and that of several technical groups on the subject indicated 
the range of the tasks that lay ahead. He hoped that efforts would be 
intensified in the future in order to arrive at a long-term global programme 
of action which would cover all aspects related to the safe utilization of 
nuclear energy and be of benefit to all Member States. 
81. Algeria intended to participate more actively in those endeavours and 
to seek the Agency's services more extensively in the areas of radiation 
protection, safety and waste management. In that connection, a WAMAP mission 
was to visit Algeria by the end of the year and other expert services would be 
requested at a later stage. 
82. His country continued to support the Agency's safeguards system, which 
was an important element in a global approach to the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and a valuable confidence-building measure. However, his 
delegation considered that, to enjoy strong international support, the system 
should be applied with due regard for the sovereignty of Member States and on 
a non-discriminatory basis. For safeguards to be credible it was also 
necessary that the suppliers of nuclear technology should be willing to help 
other countries to acquire the know-how they needed in that area. A climate 
of confidence and co-operation between all Member States would then be created. 
83. Furthermore, in view of its political dimensions, the effectiveness of 
safeguards would depend more on the improvement of the world situation in the 
future. 
84. The burdens and restraints of inspection activities must be evaluated 
in the light of those considerations, keeping in mind that the already high 
cost of those activities must not become unbearable for the Agency and that a 
necessary balance should be struck between the different activities. In that 
regard, he wished to stress that the financing of safeguards ought to be 
provided mainly by developed Member States with large nuclear programmes. 
85. In conclusion, Algeria wished to reaffirm its adherence to the Agency's 
objectives, the realization of which would undoubtedly help create a world 
characterized by confidence and solidarity, a world which sought freedom, 
well-being and prosperity for all. He was confident that the Agency would, as 
in the past, find effective ways of pursuing those objectives. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 25 


86. Mr. BRNELIC (Yugoslavia) noted that the positive social, political 
and economic changes taking place in the world as a whole did not preclude 
uncertainties and the possibility of retrogressive trends in particular 
areas. Threats of local and regional conflict had not yet been averted and 
hardly any part of Europe was immune from the disturbing rise of extreme forms 
of nationalism and intolerance. The main concern of responsible political 
factors in Yugoslavia was to put an end to the devastating war currently being 
waged there and to determine the principles for the future organization of the 
country through negotiations respecting the legitimate interests and 
aspirations of all its peoples and citizens. 
87. Yugoslavia broadly supported the Agency, its safeguards system, its 
technical co-operation programme and its work in the field of nuclear safety 
and was confident that the Agency's role in the application of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes would be further extended. As was noted in the Agency's 
Annual Report for 1990, Yugoslavia had participated in a number of Important 
projects and in courses and seminars sponsored by the Agency. In particular, 
the Agency had provided valuable assistance to projects related to the 
construction of cyclotrons at Vinca and Zagreb. 
88. The Agency had a vital role to play in implementing the conclusions of 
the Fourth NPT Review Conference. International co-operation in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear technology was an integral part of the 
non-proliferation regime. Such co-operation should be subject to Agency 
safeguards on a non-discriminatory basis so that the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons could be effectively prevented. Yugoslavia strongly objected to any 
restrictions on the transfer of nuclear technologies and insisted on the 
extension of such co-operation to areas such as the environment and the 
prevention of dumping of radioactive waste in developing countries. In that 
context, it favoured extensive financial support by nuclear-weapon States and 
other developed countries to encourage peaceful uses of nuclear technologies 
and nuclear energy in non-nuclear-weapon States. Concerted efforts should be 
made to use the positive trends in international relations to strengthen the 
credibility and universality of the NPT. In that context, his delegation 
welcomed the announced intention of China and France to accede to the Treaty. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 26 


89. The Agency's activities to improve and develop legal regulations, norms 
and standards related to nuclear safety and radiation protection, safe 
operation of nuclear power plants, radioactive waste disposal, handling of 
nuclear equipment and management of nuclear material should be promoted 
further. His country had acceded to most international conventions, having 
recently ratified the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency. It noted with interest the recent proposal regarding 
the possible elaboration of a draft convention on the safety of nuclear power 
plants and thought that idea should be studied further with a view to finding 
an integrated international approach to all aspects of nuclear safety which 
could be adopted by all governments. Also, the recent International Safety 
Conference had provided an opportunity to start active co-operation at 
international level with a view to defining a nuclear safety strategy for the 
future. 
90. Yugoslavia attached special importance to the financing of technical 
co-operation and in its opinion that issue, as well as that of the financing 
of safeguards, should be kept under review. Generally acceptable solutions 
had to be found which took into account the limited financial capacities of 
developing countries. Although Yugoslavia had not been able to pay all its 
outstanding contributions to the Agency before the current session of the 
General Conference, owing to the financial difficulties it faced, it would do 
so as soon as possible since it valued its co-operation with the Agency highly. 
91. Mr. ANGUIANO ROCH (Mexico) welcomed as new Members of the Agency 
the Republics of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Yemen, and extended to those 
countries his Government's best wishes for a peaceful and prosperous future in 
which they would be able to exercise fully their sovereign rights. 
92. The Agency had so far played a decisive role in promoting the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy within a safe context while at the same time ensuring 
that such energy was not used for military purposes. With international 
relations in a state of flux, the Agency now needed to engage in a serious 
review of its role in general and of its mechanisms for implementing 
safeguards, formulating policy and setting standards in particular, all with a 
view to promoting the development and modernization of the majority of its 
Member States. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 27 


93. Mexico was committed to strengthening the international nonproliferation 
regime and was fulfilling its obligations under the NPT and the 
Tlatelolco Treaty. It welcomed the accession of Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia 
and South Africa to the NPT and was also pleased that France and Zimbabwe 
would be acceding to it in the near future and that China had decided to do so 
in principle. As the international community moved towards universality in 
its membership of the NPT, it seemed worth pointing out that the NPT entailed 
obligations for both nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States. In 
addition to Article III concerning safeguards, it also included Article IV 
enshrining the inalienable right of all the Parties to the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy and the obligation of those States in a position to do so to 
co-operate in promoting the development of the applications of nuclear energy. 
94. Exceptional cases of non-compliance with those contractual obligations 
should not serve in any way as a basis for disturbing that delicate balance or 
as a pretext for measures violating the sovereign rights of the other Parties. 
95. International co-operation was essential in promoting the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy for economic and social progress as well as in strengthening 
the international safeguards regime and improving nuclear safety. The 
achievement of all three of those objectives could be furthered through the 
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones. Mexico accordingly welcomed the 
recent agreements concluded by Argentina and Brazil, which both strengthened 
the Tlatelolco Treaty and stimulated Chile's interest in that regional 
agreement. Another encouraging sign had been the presence of Cuba as an 
observer at the Xllth General Conference of OPANAL, held in Mexico from 8 to 
10 May. 
96. A distinguished fellow Mexican, Alfonso Garcia Robles, had died 
only a few days previously. Garcia Robles, who had shared the Nobel 
Peace Prize with Alva Myrdal in 1982, had also been one of the pioneering 
spirits behind the Tlatelolco Treaty as well as a staunch and articulate 
defender of NPT. The finest tribute that could be paid to him would be 
to highlight the progress made in both international treaties towards 
full implementation and universality. 
97. Such progress also strengthened the Agency, to which his Government 
wished to renew its pledge of full participation. With the support of its 
regional group, Mexico was hoping to take up a seat on the Board of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 28 


Governors. It could point to many domestic accomplishments in the nuclear 


sphere to support its candidacy, one example being the high productivity of 
Unit 1 of the Laguna Verde nuclear power plant. Since July 1990, when it had 
been commissioned, the unit had delivered over 4% of Mexico's electricity 
production. 


98. In other fields such as medicine, agriculture and hydrology, Mexico had 
attained a level of development on a par with that of other countries in the 
region, as demonstrated by the 32 technical co-operation projects being 
conducted with the Agency, some with extrabudgetary funds provided by various 
Member States, and by the ARCAL projects in which it was also involved. In 
connection with the latter, he pointed out the great success achieved in 
Mexico under the ARCAL XIV programme to eradicate the medfly and the fruit fly. 
99. Regarding some other areas of science and technology, such as the reprocessing 
of irradiated fuel and radioactive waste management, Mexico had expressed its 
interest in participating in technical committees and consultants' meetings 
and hoped that the Secretariat would offer opportunities to interested members 
to become even more involved in such activities. 


100. Mexico welcomed the substantial increase in the implementation rate for 
technical co-operation in the second year of the biennium and noted that Latin 
America and the Caribbean had attained the highest rate of all the regions. 
Significant progress had been achieved in all the technical co-operation 
projects in which Mexico had participated. Unfortunately, although the 
indicative planning figures still showed a steady annual increase, pledged 
contributions to the TACF had decreased drastically. Even more disappointing 
was the fact that by the previous week only 60% of the pledged contributions 
had actually been paid. 
101. His country was fully committed to the safeguards system, which was so 
necessary for mankind's security and peace of mind. However, the 
indiscriminate expansion of the scope of safeguards implied unacceptably high 
costs. Without prejudicing the efficiency or effectiveness of safeguards, 
their costs should be reduced by rationalizing the instrumentation required. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 29 


102. Mexico welcomed the safeguards agreements concluded with South Africa 
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and urged the Secretariat to 
develop innovative ways of ensuring that such new agreements did not lead to a 
further imbalance in the allocation of Regular Budget funds in favour of 
safeguards activities. 
103. In the field of nuclear safety, his Government was looking forward to 
studying the report on the recent International Safety Conference and hoped to 
make its own contribution towards the full implementation of its recommendations. 
Mexico had spared neither money nor effort to ensure the safety of 
its domestic nuclear power programme and was confident that the Agency would 
continue to promote nuclear safety with the help of voluntary contributions 
and extrabudgetary resources. 
104. Mexico was committed to the path of modernization, which it considered 
the only means of meeting the demands of a growing population in terms of 
energy, agriculture, industrial production and health care, all areas in which 
the Agency had a part to play. The developing and Industrialized nations 
should therefore join forces to promote the various peaceful and safe uses of 
the atom. 
105. Mr. LEE (Canada) said that despite the recent progress in nuclear 
arms reduction, there was still reason for international concern about the 
serious threat to world peace posed by the proliferation of nuclear and other 
weapons of mass destruction. Earlier in the year the Canadian Prime Minister 
had put forward a non-proliferation initiative aimed at heightening awareness 
of that threat and making trade in conventional arms more transparent. The 
recently concluded Group of Seven economic summit had issued a strong call for 
a greater non-proliferation effort. Recent accessions to the NPT by Zambia, 
Tanzania and South Africa and the announcements by France, China, Zimbabwe and 
Namibia of their intention to join the NPT were very welcome. The 
negotiations on regional safeguards between Argentina and Brazil, in 
co-operation with the Agency, were also very promising. States that had not 
yet acceded to the NPT, particularly those with unsafeguarded nuclear 
facilities, should do so without delay and efforts should be renewed to 
prevent the kind of breach in the system that had recently occurred in the 
case of a party to the NPT subject to an INFCIRC/153-type agreement. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 30 


106. In Canada's view, the existing non-proliferation regime had operated 
very effectively within the parameters defined for it. However, it seemed 
likely that the Agency would have to broaden its activities in some as yet 
undefined ways as part of an improved non-proliferation regime. In that 
context, he welcomed the ideas submitted by the Agency's Secretariat on an 
extended safeguards regime for the Middle East, on special inspections and on 
safeguards in nuclear-weapon States. The Secretariat had also indicated the 
necessary priorities and resource requirements. 
107. With reference to the Middle East, Canada had always favoured 
universality in the application of safeguards. The best solution would be if 
safeguards measures adopted to strengthen the non-proliferation regime as a 
whole were also acceptable to Middle Eastern countries and could provide 
credible mutual and international reassurance. Of course, any region could 
also request the application of additional safeguards measures in view of 
special circumstances. Any system that strengthened safeguards, improved 
confidence and security, and enjoyed regional support could be wholeheartedly 
endorsed by Canada. 
108. With reference to special inspections, a careful distinction had to be 
made between the three different contexts within which that term had been 
used. Prior to the developments in Iraq the term had been contained in 
bilateral agreements of Member States as a means of assisting the Agency to 
safeguard declared nuclear material in circumstances where it was unable to do 
so effectively for various reasons. Security Council resolution 687(1991) had 
then provided a new application. Finally, the Agency's Secretariat study 
suggested yet another interpretation whereby a third country could initiate a 
special inspection within the framework of existing bilateral agreements. 
109. His delegation had already suggested a number of subjects for priority 
consideration in the Medium-Term Plan, one of those being a review of the 
safeguards system. That suggestion had originally been prompted by a concern 
for the financing of safeguards and the seemingly inevitable increase in 
resources which would be required to support an expanding safeguards 
programme. The aftermath of the Gulf War and the revelation of Iraq's covert 
nuclear activities only added greater urgency to the need for such a review. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 31 


110. His delegation was pleased to see that the important question of 
nuclear power and the environment was an issue which was also addressed in the 
Agency's draft Medium-Term Plan. Since issues of energy and the environment 
were inextricably linked there was no alternative to an inter-agency 
intergovernmental approach. His delegation accordingly welcomed the results 
of the Symposium on Electricity and the Environment held in Helsinki in May by 
the Agency and a number of other international organizations. The Helsinki 
symposium had recognized that nuclear power had the potential to make a 
significant contribution towards a reduction in carbon emissions. If the 
whole fuel cycle was taken into account, nuclear power would be seen to be 
cost-competitive, environmentally benign and low-risk in terms of public 
health and occupational hazards. At the same time, as the report of the 
Helsinki symposium acknowledged, public acceptance of nuclear power remained a 
problem. It was therefore important that all energy sources were compared on 
an equal footing. His Government agreed with the conclusion of the Helsinki 
report that in order for policy-makers to come to balanced, sound decisions on 
those important questions, there was a need to establish a comprehensive 
internationally co-ordinated database on the health and environmental impacts 
of different energy sources. Canada therefore supported the proposal for the 
establishment of formalized liaison mechanisms among various international 
organizations with an interest or role to play in the health, environment and 
energy sectors. He hoped that the present session of the General Conference 
would be able to endorse such a conclusion, since it was of the utmost 
significance in preparing for the 1992 United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development. 
111. One of the necessary ways of building and maintaining public confidence 
was to have a global record of safe and reliable operation of all existing and 
planned nuclear facilities, particularly nuclear power plants. The Agency had 
played and continued to play a valuable role in the promotion of nuclear 
safety worldwide and Agency programmes which were designed to promote and 
enhance nuclear power plant safety would continue to receive his country's 
full support. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 32 


112. Mr. ZELAZNY (Poland) said that, despite the serious disturbances 
witnessed during the year, the speeding up of the processes leading to a new 
and better world order had continued. Poland hoped that nations would proceed 
further in that direction, strengthening their co-operation based on 
partnership within the United Nations system. It welcomed the accession to 
the Agency of the three Baltic Republics, which had just become independent, 
and the Republic of Yemen. 
113. One of the symptoms of the new age of co-operation was the 
international solidarity demonstrated in connection with the crisis in the 
Gulf region. The United Nations, and the Security Council in particular, had 
passed a difficult test of effectiveness in action aimed at ensuring respect 
for international law. 
114. It was regrettable that after 20 years of building the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime based on the NPT, it had been discovered, as a result 
of Security Council resolution 687(1991), that a State Party to the Treaty was 
in serious non-compliance with the letter and spirit of the Treaty. The 
Agency was to be commended on its prompt, responsible and competent action. 
115. Poland noted with satisfaction the recent accession to the NPT of 
South Africa, following Zambia and Tanzania; the positive developments towards 
the establishment of a regional non-proliferation regime in Latin America; and 
the declarations by two nuclear-weapon States, France and China, of their 
intention to accede to the Treaty - all of which added up to a major 
turning-point in the efforts to establish an effective non-proliferation 
regime. 
116. Last but not least, the Board of Governors had just authorized the 
Director General to conclude a standard safeguards agreement with the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, in connection with the NPT. 
117. Continuing efforts were needed to strengthen the non-proliferation 
regime and give the NPT a fully universal dimension. The principle of 
full-scope safeguards should be adopted by all nuclear exporters as a 
condition for all transfers of nuclear material, equipment and technology to 
other countries. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 33 


118. The present session and the next three sessions of the General 
Conference should prepare the ground for a successful NPT extension conference 
in 1995. 
119. The three essential areas of the Agency's statutory responsibilities safeguards, 
nuclear safety and the transfer of nuclear technology based mainly 
on technical assistance - guaranteed a stable construction, provided that they 
were all sufficiently solid. The present session of the General Conference 
could have a crucial Influence on making those pillars really strong. 
120. In the first place, Agency safeguards, to be effective and efficient, 
must be fed with new ideas and supported by new arrangements. Poland would be 
one of the sponsors of a resolution on that matter to be submitted to the 
General Conference. Special Inspections, universal reporting and early 
submission of design information, which were closely related, required urgent 
investigation; and it was time States decided to be more open to Agency 
safeguards than in the past. The Secretariat should be given a free hand by 
all Member States in such questions as designation of inspectors and visa 
requirements or safeguards-friendly design of nuclear facilities. 
121. Secondly, regarding safety, the International Safety Conference held 
recently in Vienna had formulated proposals which should be given serious 
attention by the General Conference, and the President, in his opening address 
at the present session, had indicated three primary elements for the future 
nuclear safety strategy. 
122. The first and most important of those elements was the realization of a 
safety partnership by creating an international safety regime, which would 
embody a convention permitting Member States to commit themselves legally to 
observance of the safety fundamentals and safety standards. 
123. The General Conference should request the Director General to prepare 
an outline of the contents of a possible convention on nuclear safety which 
could then be discussed by the Board in February 1992. The convention should 
encompass the entire nuclear fuel cycle, including licensing, construction, 
operation and decommissioning. It would support State regulatory bodies in 
exercising their duties, but would in no way decrease State responsibility for 
ensuring the safety of nuclear installations on their territories or under 
their jurisdiction. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 34 


124. The problem of nuclear waste, which remained the focus of public 
opinion, would have to be adequately tackled in conjunction with the 
international nuclear safety regime. An international consensus on the safety 
management and disposal of radioactive waste was essential for the future of 
nuclear power. The problem was already being given growing attention in the 
Agency's deliberations and programmes. 
125. With regard to the third area of the Agency's reponsibility, the 
technology transfer in non-power as well as power applications of nuclear 
energy was no less important than the first two and was also an indispensable 
element of the nuclear order. The Agency's achievements in non-power 
applications, which were decisive for increasing the quality of life, were 
unquestionable and should be continued with all necessary support and 
resources. 
126. No Member States should be denied Agency technical assistance provided 
it was delivered in compliance with the Statute. Poland was grateful for the 
technical assistance received from the Agency in 1990, which had been used 
with great effect. 
127. The transfer of technology should incorporate assistance to countries 
on the basis of their engagement in nuclear power. It was necessary, 
therefore, to develop mechanisms for sponsoring nuclear power where it was 
economically and ecologically superior to other energy options. Such 
sponsoring should include, but not be limited to, favourable loan conditions, 
evaluation of conditions for private capital participation and development of 
practical investment insurance schemes. The entire complex of practical 
problems and requirements related to the introduction of nuclear power should 
be dealt with at special seminars for senior officers designated by interested 
countries. 
128. The Agency was often described as an example of a well-conducted 
international organization within the United Nations system. Poland 
recognized its achievements, resulting among other things from the good 
climate of co-operation within its policy-making organs and from the creative 
efforts of its Director General and the entire Secretariat. In Poland's 
opinion, there were four factors that were of extreme importance for the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 35 


continuation and perfecting of the Agency's high performance, namely: 
concentration of the work of policy-making organs on matters of substance; 
continuity of a competent, sectoral approach in advice given to the Director 
General; active co-operation with other organizations, based on shared 
responsibilities; and provision of necessary resources on a regular, 
foreseeable basis. 


129. Poland noted with appreciation the effects of the Agency's increasing 
co-operation with other international and intergovernmental organizations, 
which was particularly important in the context of sustainable development. 
His delegation had decided to join others in sponsoring a draft resolution 
entitled "The Agency's contribution to sustainable development". 
130. Poland was interested in a number of matters, such as the project 
concerning the safety of WWER-440/230 reactors, and the use of nuclear 
reactors for the production of potable water, to solve water shortage problems 
faced by some Member States. Poland also had its own problem of pollution of 
its two biggest rivers by salt water from deep coal mines. It was estimated 
that about 1.9 million tonnes of salt originating from deep coal mines were 
discharged annually, and since that occurred in a region with high air 
pollution, nuclear energy could be the best method for desalination of the 
waters. 
131. The Polish delegation was ready to accept and support the Secretariat's 
annual documents GC(XXXV)/952-955, together with the annexed draft 
resolutions. Those documents were evidence of the Agency's responsiveness to 
new demands placed upon it by its Member States. In that regard, the Agency's 
technical assistance programme implementation deserved special mention. 
132. In conclusion, he renewed his country's assurance that it would 
continue, within the limits of its capabilities, both intellectually and 
financially, to contribute to the success of the Agency's undertakings in its 
service to its Member States and to the nuclear world order. 
Mr. Santana Carvalho (Brazil) resumed the Chair. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 36 


133. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium), after remarking on the major changes 
which had taken place in the international environment in the preceding two 
years, with both important and positive implications for international 
institutions, and the Agency in particular, emphasized his country's 
conviction that current developments showed that there was a greater need than 
ever for a system of safeguards which was dynamic, effective and credible in 
the face of the nuclear proliferation threat. Such a system was a vital 
element in maintaining international order and world security. The sudden 
disappearance of two-power control, based on a reciprocal nuclear deterrent, 
and the inherent discipline thereby imposed on the other members of the 
international community, brought new threats. Some States could embrace a 
policy of nuclear intimidation or even of threat, as had been dramatically 
demonstrated in the case of Iraq. 
134. It was therefore very timely that the Agency was investigating various 
ways of improving the efficiency of its safeguards system and that the Board 
of Governors was to meet the following February to examine concrete priority 
measures which could be adopted. His country believed that the role of the 
Agency in international security was becoming more important, and that it was 
the responsibility of its Members to ensure that it was equipped to fulfil 
that function. Belgium remained convinced that the universal application of 
full-scope safeguards was the ultimate aim, and noted with pleasure all 
progress in that direction. It commended the immense step forward achieved by 
the accession of South Africa to the NPT, immediately followed by the signing 
and implementation of a safeguards agreement. It also considered that the 
much-delayed conclusion of a safeguards agreement by the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea was a positive development, but wanted to stress that only a 
swift and unconditional implementation of that agreement would show that that 
country was finally fulfilling its international obligations. 
135. His delegation strongly supported concentrated efforts to eliminate the 
nuclear threat in certain regions, which could help to solve major conflicts 
in those areas. It welcomed and fully supported efforts to establish a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, and thought that the overall 
acceptance of Agency safeguards by all the countries in that region would be a 
very appropriate way of achieving that aim. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 37 


136. Nuclear power contributed more than 60% of Belgium's electricity 
production. His country therefore considered nuclear safety to be very 
important. Nuclear power plants were complex installations subjected to a 
large number of safety regulations in order to safeguard the security and 
health of the staff and of the population at all times. Advances in know-how, 
technology and population protection standards made regular revision and 
updating of installations a necessity. 
137. From the regulatory point of view, in Belgium there was an obligatory 
detailed examination of the design, construction and operating rules of an 
existing plant in the tenth, twentieth and thirtieth year of operation of a 
nuclear unit. Current rules in the United States and in Member States of the 
European Community should serve as the guidelines for that detailed 
examination. 
138. Belgium's first three nuclear power units had been reassessed in 1985. 
Re-evaluations for the four later units were planned for the period from 1992 
to 1995. The extent of the work needed by those reassessments could be 
illustrated by two figures: 
The three completed units had required 1 600 000 engineering 
hours, the equivalent of more than 1000 specialized personnel for 
one year; 


The cost of modifications for the three units came to 
6950 million Belgian francs, approximately $200 million. 


In view of those figures, it was essential to consider the Agency's 


responsibility with regard to 0SART mission reports and others. Those 
missions were useful on condition that their range of application was 


carefully defined, but it was questionable, as had been emphasized in 
June 1990, whether the public was aware of that situation. It was vital that 


the Agency never appear to give the impression of generally guaranteeing the 
safety of a plant based on the useful, but limited, results of those 
missions. He noted that his country had considerable accumulated experience 
which it would like to put to good effect through active international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear safety and radiological protection. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 38 


139. In the framework of programmes established by the European Community 
for Central and Eastern European countries, Belgium had made senior experts, 
supported by their respective institutions, available to those countries. 
Belgium was also giving financial support to some projects in those countries, 
including taking part in the analysis of tenders for a new nuclear unit in 
Czechoslovakia. 
140. New developments implemented by Belgium had been contained in a report 
distributed during the International Safety Conference, held in Vienna from 
2 to 6 September, which Belgium valued for its high standard and for the 
relevance of its final recommendations. He noted that Belgium was in favour 
of the Agency and its Member States proceeding to a joint evaluation of the 
merits and possible terms of an International convention on safety. Belgium 
was a recognized authority in the field and was willing to play an active role. 
141. The International Safety Conference had considered all aspects of 
nuclear safety, including the safety objectives for radioactive waste. 
Belgium was particularly active in the field of radioactive waste management, 
as shown by the construction of new installations for the storage of vitrified 
and other wastes from reprocessing of Belgian irradiated fuels, and of a 
facility called CILVA (Central Infrastructure for Low-Level Waste), due to 
become operational in 1994, for reprocessing and conditioning of low-level 
waste. 
142. In addition, Belgium was continuing its programme for final storage of 
highly radioactive waste in an argillaceous formation in the northeast of the 
country. Operation of a 200 metre deep underground laboratory in that 
argillaceous formation meant that investigations into real operational 
conditions could be carried out. With the help of the CEC, the underground 
installations would be expanded to test for the safe installation of large 
plants embedded in the layer of clay. Nationals from various countries had 
been Invited to come and study the problems of radioactive waste final storage 
and its possible effects on the environment. 
143. Finally, he reported that his country was taking part in a project in 
Czechoslovakia to examine a storage site for low- and medium-level radioactive 
waste. Those various undertakings thus showed the importance Belgium attached 
to continuing improvement in nuclear safety levels and in international 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 39 


co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. That position was also supported 
by the joint declaration made at the beginning of that year by Belgium, 
France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. Belgium was fully prepared to lend 
its expertise to the Agency and to Member States interested in fruitful 
co-operation. 


144. Mr. USHEWOKUNZE (Zimbabwe) commended the Agency for its 
considerable successes in helping to curb the proliferation of nuclear 
armaments and to promote nuclear safety and the peaceful uses of nuclear 
technology. 
145. He was pleased that the Administrative and Budgetary Committee had 
discussed the issue of payments in non-convertible currencies and welcomed the 
idea of transferring unutilized amounts from the Administrative Fund to 
the TACF, a solution which he felt to be most imaginative. 
146. The Annual Report for 1990 indicated a gratifyingly large number of 
RABAT and wAMAP missions undertaken in the course of the year. Zimbabwe had 
derived great benefits from such missions, especially with respect to 
regulatory provisions for the handling, use and disposal of spent radiation 
sources. Inadequate regulations, monitoring and enforcement in developing 
countries meant that they were at great risk, a fact often unappreciated by 
the public, which tended to associate the risk of accidental radiation with 
reactors only. On the basis of advice from Agency experts, Zimbabwe had 
substantially revised its regulations to include radiation sources within 
their scope. 
147. Still on the subject of the Agency's commendable progress in promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including the campaign to eradicate the 
New World screwworm from North Africa, he announced that Zimbabwe was in the 
process of acceding to the NPT and would shortly be depositing the duly signed 
instruments of accession with the Agency in the hope that the Africa region 
would gradually move towards becoming a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
148. The Regional Workshop on Project Design, Management and Evaluation held 
in Ghana that year demonstrated the Agency's active interest in the proper 
management of projects in the region. More African experts should be used on 
Agency missions in Africa because of their familiarity with the local 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 40 


situation, and technical manpower should be given high priority in the 
organization of projects, especially with regard to equipment maintenance. 
Wherever possible, local manufacturing capacity should be encouraged to 
produce the necessary spare parts. 


149. Despite the valid arguments, based mainly on considerations of safety, 
for shifting emphasis away from the nuclear option, it should be remembered 
that other options also implied problems, for the environment in particular. 
The developing countries needed safer and simpler reactors as a long-term 
alternative to fossil fuels, of which there was not an inexhaustible supply. 
150. In order to engender public confidence in nuclear technology, its 
advantages and disadvantages should be publicized in a thoughtful and 
unsecretive manner. In the case of food irradiation, for example, the public 
needed to be convinced of the safety and benefits of the process without being 
placed under pressure. Otherwise, consumer resistance would prevent the 
expansion of international trade in irradiated foods. 
151. He welcomed the signing by the major Powers of various treaties to 
limit or ban certain categories of nuclear weapons and urged that efforts to 
rid the world of the threat represented by such weapons should not be allowed 
to slacken. The massive amounts of money spent on defence could be far more 
profitably used to alleviate the suffering caused by the present highly 
inequitable distribution of wealth in the world. 
152. Noting that, pursuant to resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/545, the issue of 
South Africa's nuclear capabilities was once again on the agenda of the 
General Conference, he appealed to the international community to maintain its 
pressure on that country to take further steps towards eliminating apartheid 
in all its forms. The end to armed conflict in Angola and the encouraging 
signs of an end to the conflict in Mozambique were bringing relief and hope to 
the region. Continued progress towards peace would require an atmosphere of 
trust and tranquillity. 
153. Finally, in the environmental sphere, he stressed the need for ever 
greater vigilance in the face of unscrupulous organizations with no 
compunction about flouting environmental regulations. As the world's 
population grew, so did the pressure on the environment. Hence the need to 
manage it with intelligence and care. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 41 


154. Mr. HAMMER (Commission of the European Communities), after joining 
others in welcoming the new Member States recently admitted to the Agency, 
recalled that a statement on behalf of the European Community and its Member 
States had already been made earlier in the meeting by the delegate of the 
Netherlands. The Commission naturally associated itself fully with that 
statement. 
155. The main aim of the European Community was to move closer towards 
European integration, not only in economic, but also in political terms. The 
creation in Europe of a single market was a fundamental part of that process. 
With a view to progress towards an integrated energy market, the Community's 
Council of Ministers had recently adopted directives on the transit of 
electricity and gas within the major Community grids. Completion of the 
Community's internal energy market also had to be seen in the broader 
perspective of allowing energy co-operation to take place in geographical 
Europe as a whole. That was why Community Member States had reacted 
favourably to the idea of establishing a pan-European energy organization 
which would bring together the Eastern and Western European countries. 
156. The concept of a European Energy Charter had been discussed which would 
take the form of a code of conduct. A number of specific agreements or 
protocols would have to be drawn up in order to implement the principles laid 
down in the Charter for individual energy sectors. The draft protocol on 
nuclear power, which at present accounted for 35% of the electricity generated 
within the Community, was expected to place particular stress on plant 
safety. It was expected that the Charter would be signed by the end of the 
year. 
157. With more specific reference to relations between the Community and the 
Soviet Union, the assistance agreed upon at the European summit meeting in 
Rome in December 1990 had already begun. In June, the Council of Ministers 
had approved ECU 400 million to help finance technical assistance to the 
Soviet Union. More than a third of that assistance would be devoted to energy 
and be divided among five specific areas, among which energy saving and 
nuclear safety were priorities. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 42 


158. Meanwhile, co-operation with the Chernobyl Centre for International 
Research had been established and would provide for scientific contacts with 
the relevant research institutes. In addition, in July 1991 the European 
Community had begun negotiations with the Soviet Union aimed at concluding 
three nuclear co-operation agreements intended to cover controlled nuclear 
fusion, nuclear safety and trade in nuclear materials. 
159. In June, the Commission had adopted the nuclear safety objectives to be 
pursued in the context of its assistance to the Soviet Union and to Central 
and Eastern Europe. Recent application of those principles had enabled an 
urgent technical assistance programme to be launched for the nuclear power 
plants at Kozloduy in Bulgaria. 
160. The conclusions of the recent International Safety Conference held in 
Vienna represented a milestone in the process of consolidation of the 
international nuclear safety regime. The Commission noted with satisfaction 
that the Conference had requested the Agency to organize the preparation of a 
proposal on the necessary elements of a formalized international approach and 
the Commission was ready to continue its close co-operation with the Agency in 
that area of special interest for the European Community. 
161. The harmonious expansion of civil nuclear power had to be backed by a 
reliable and strong non-proliferation regime, founded on effective 
international safeguards. The European Council, at its meeting in Luxembourg 
in June, had issued a statement of clear support by the Community and its 
Member States for strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime and 
called for universal accession to the NPT. The decisions recently taken by 
several countries to accede to the NPT were therefore welcomed as a major step 
towards the achievement of that objective. The keystone of an effective 
non-proliferation regime was undoubtedly the Agency's safeguards system. 
162. As the delegate of the Netherlands had already announced, the 
instruments of ratification of the International Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material had been simultaneously deposited by the Member 
States of the European Community and by the Community itself in Vienna on 
6 September. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.336 
page 43 


163. Finally, although his statement had centred on the pan-European 
dimension in the energy field, with special emphasis on nuclear safety which 
remained a priority concern, he wished to stress that the Community was very 
ready to co-operate fully with non-member countries in relevant areas of 
activity. 
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
17 June 1992 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 18 September 1991, at 10.10 a.m. 
President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of the 
following States and organizations: 


Malaysia 1 


Holy See 10 


Thailand 18 


I I i I i i I I I I 1 l l 
l 


9 


17 


22 
37 
52 


62 


80 


86 


100 


114 


132 


148 


157 


171 


Philippines 23 
Chile 


38 


Finland 


53 


France 63 


Viet Nam 81 


Switzerland 87 


Greece 101 


Czechoslovakia 115 


Bulgaria 133 


Ireland 149 


Norway 158 


Trade Unions International of Workers 
in Energy 172  175 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America 176 183 


[*] GC(XXXV)/982. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 


91-4645 (9928e/900e) 



GC(KKKV)/OR.337 
page 2 


ARCAL 


ASSET 
CEC 
1NES 
INSAG 


IRS 
ITER 
MW 
NPT 
NUSS 
OPANAL 


OSART 
PWR 
RCA 


TACF 
TUIWE 
WANO 
World Bank (IBRD) 
WWER 


Abbreviations used in this record 


Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of 
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Commission of the European Communities 
International Nuclear Event Scale 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group 
Incident Reporting System 
International Themonuclear Experimental Reactor 
Megawatt 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Nuclear Safety Standards 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Pressurized water reactor 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 


(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy 
World Association of Nuclear Operators 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor (Soviet Union) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) (continued) 


1. Mr. SAN (Malaysia) said that the past year and recent months, in 
particular, had seen rapid political changes in Europe, bringing new members 
to the Agency in unprecedented numbers. He congratulated Latvia, Lithuania 
and Estonia on their admission to the Agency as independent sovereign States, 
and also welcomed Yemen. He was confident that they would contribute 
constructively to the Agency's activities. He also welcomed the accession by 
additional countries to the NPT and the fact that others had expressed their 
intention of doing likewise. He urged the new parties to the Treaty to sign 
and implement a safeguards agreement as soon as possible. 
2. Malaysia, as one of the first countries to sign the NPT and join the 
Agency, had always believed in the importance of the role of International 
organizations such as the Agency in striving to fulfil the aspirations of 
mankind and that they should be guided by those aspirations in expressing the 
common will. They should never impinge upon national sovereignty, whether at 
the instigation of one or more of their members or on their own initiative. 
No Member State should be made to feel that another member wished to impose 
upon it liabilities or bonds that clearly exceeded its obligations under an 
agreement. The Agency should endeavour to ensure at all costs that its 
impartiality was not only respected but also seen to be respected, otherwise 
the confidence Member States had in it could be jeopardized. If the Agency 
was to achieve that, it was essential for all Member States to refrain from 
seeking to impose, through the Agency, their sectoral values or interests on 
other members. It was the duty of all to ensure that the universality and 
impartiality of the Agency was strictly observed, as only then could 
Member States be expected to contribute constructively to its work. 


3. His country attached considerable importance to the Agency's safeguards 
system. It had noted, however, the efforts being made by some to improvise 
and add further measures to the well-established safeguards system, without 
due regard for the sanctity of treaties. That might well erode faith in 
international nuclear co-operation and even create a sense of Insecurity among 
certain members, thus sapping their confidence in the Agency. Any renegotiation 
should pay due heed to the interests of all the parties involved and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 4 


be motivated by a desire to share both the obligations and the advantages of 
nuclear power. States must not selfishly block any collective effort to 
develop policies designed to bring the benefits of nuclear science to mankind, 
for it was just as important to foster the constructive applications of 
nuclear science as to safeguard against its abuse. 


4. Similarly, any review of the Agency's Statute should be comprehensive 
and should take into account the changes that had taken place in the 
application of Member States' nuclear policies and their relevance to the work 
of the Agency. In that connection, any revision of Article VI of the Statute 
should give comprehensive consideration to the changes that had taken place 
and the present configuration of interests of Member States. 
5. As to its own nuclear activities, Malaysia was striving to exploit the 
positive aspects of nuclear science for national development. It was 
currently identifying the sectors of its national development plan where 
nuclear energy could best be used to enhance productivity and the quality of 
its economic and social development. The implementation of the Agency's first 
biennial technical co-operation programme in 1990 had been of immense benefit 
to his country, which was of the view that the open transfer of technology to 
accelerate progress in developing countries would further augment the prestige 
and support enjoyed by the Agency. 
6. He welcomed the initiative taken by the Secretariat in preparing the 
Agency's Medium-Term Plan for the period 1993-98. His country attached great 
importance to the Agency's future activities and firmly believed in the 
necessity of maintaining a judicious balance between its regulatory and 
promotional functions, a balance that must also be reflected in its principal 
strategies and in the distribution of its manpower and financial resources. 
7. It was with that consideration in mind that his delegation proposed 
that the recommendations of the recent International Conference on the Safety 
of Nuclear Power be implemented from extrabudgetary contributions. The Conference's 
recommendations were far from global in nature and appeared to focus 
on the problems of a particular region. That situation ought to be corrected 
in the light of the Agency's global mandate. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 5 


8. The Agency's technical co-operation programme had demonstrated the 
viability of developing countries' pooling their resources, knowledge and 
technology. Such co-operation between developing countries - on a bilateral, 
regional or multilateral basis - could be further improved and would 
complement the existing co-operation between industrialized and developing 
countries. The use of ionizing radiation and isotopes in industry was a case 
in point. The techniques involved were already fully established in most 
industrialized nations and could be extended to other countries through 
international co-operation based on a regional arrangement such as the RCA. 
His country participated actively in the RCA programme and wished to express 
its gratitude to donor countries for their contributions to it. 
9. However, the Agency's success in encouraging the transfer of technology 
to developing countries had not been matched by the results of the United 
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy in 1987. The regrettable failure of that 
Confererence had deprived many Third World countries of access to nuclear 
power and had left the international community in a state of despondency. If 
the world valued a common destiny in which mankind would share the benefits of 
nuclear technology, it should not allow such a situation to happen again. 
10. Mr. SOUICCIARINI (Holy See) said that the General Conference was 
meeting under circumstances quite different from those of previous years. 
Nuclear energy, its dangers and its inherent possibilities, the necessity for 
it as well as the need to find substitutes for it, appeared in a new light. 
11. The threat posed by nuclear weapons and the danger of their spreading 
throughout the world had led, almost twenty-five years previously, to the 
elaboration of the NPT, to which many nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon 
States had become parties. The Agency had an important role to play in 
connection with safeguards agreements concluded pursuant to that Treaty. 
12. Unfortunately, accession to the NPT did not always guarantee that the 
country concerned intended to abstain de facto from acquiring nuclear 
weapons. Furthermore, it seemed that safeguards agreements could not always 
prevent fissionable material from being used to produce nuclear weapons. It 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 6 


was disappointing to find that States were capable of conducting a clandestine 
programme aimed at producing nuclear weapons despite the safeguards agreements 
they had concluded with the Agency and the latter's inspections. 


13. Under such circumstances, the question might be asked whether the NPT 
did not rely too much on information provided by national authorities and 
whether, by trusting in the good faith of the State concerned, the Agency was 
discharging its responsibilities properly in carrying out the necessary 
checks. It appeared that the information provided was not always complete and 
that the plans disclosed were not always correct. If that were so, then it 
must be acknowledged that the goodwill which might have been created between 
the Agency and the particular State was insignificant in relation to the 
goodwill lost by the Agency in respect of those States which must surely feel 
that they had been let down in their efforts to abide by the obligations they 
had undertaken in order to make the world safer. 
14. Moreover, if the international community were to come to the conclusion 
that an illegal and clandestine nuclear-weapons programme in a particular 
State made it imperative to take countermeasures, the question arose as to 
whether the use of force was the only way to respond and to uphold 
Article III.A.5 of the Agency's Statute. The consequences for all concerned 
were far more serious than those that might ensue from insisting at the outset 
on strict inspections. The conflict in the Persian Gulf had clearly demonstrated 
the disastrous consequences that even a limited war could have in 
modern times. Apart from the human suffering inflicted, it had also resulted 
in one of the greatest ecological disasters caused by man. Almost all the oil 
wells in Kuwait had been set on fire, not only destroying precious energy 
resources but also having an impact on the environment that could only be 
compared with, perhaps, the consequences of the Chernobyl accident. 
15. Central and Eastern Europe also faced serious energy problems with 
severe environmental impacts. It would be impossible for the countries of 
that region to meet their energy needs without continuing to use, at least for 
a number of years, outdated nuclear power plants whose safety was 
problematic. Alternatives were not available, at least not in the States of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 7 


Central and Eastern Europe, which were also facing grave ecological problems 
because of the excessive use of fossil fuels, and especially soft coal. 


16. Under such circumstances, all initiatives - and particularly research 
into clean energy sources - that were aimed at improving the energy situation 
were welcome. In that connection, he wished to recall the plan for ensuring 
Europe's energy supply which had been submitted by the Prime Minister of the 
Netherlands, Mr. Lubbers, at the Conference of Ministers of the European 
Community Countries held the previous year in Dublin. That plan, which dealt 
also with the reconstruction of the energy economy of the new Central and 
Eastern European democracies and with the development of the huge energy 
resources of the Soviet Union, had since received a positive response both 
from European Community countries and from other States. The next step ought 
to be the adoption of a European Energy Charter, an initiative that already 
enjoyed the support of 25 European countries. He welcomed that initiative and 
all plans aimed at extending the application of such an Instrument to other 
regions, including not only the United States and Japan, but also countries in 
North Africa and the Middle East. 
17. Energy, and in particular nuclear energy, was obviously not an end in 
itself but merely a means for advancing the development of mankind. If global 
resources were used in such a way as not to deplete them within one generation, 
energy policy would be moving in the right direction. 
18. Mr. SANGIAMBUT (Thailand), after welcoming the four new members of 
the Agency, namely Republic of Yemen, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, said that 
significant progress had been made in the past year in the prevention of nuclear 
proliferation. He welcomed the accession of South Africa to the NPT and 
its conclusion of a safeguards agreement with the Agency. He was also pleased 
to note the expressions of intent of France and China to accede to the NPT and 
the fact that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had agreed to conclude 
a safeguards agreement. 
19. Like most developing countries, Thailand derived considerable benefit 
from the Agency's promotional activities and from its technical co-operation 
programme in particular. The assistance provided to his country under that 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 8 


programme had contributed significantly to its development efforts in the 
important areas of agriculture, industry, health care and medicine. His 
country had participated actively in the training courses, seminars and 
research and development activities organized by the Agency and had also 
benefited greatly from the RCA programme. Its active participation in all 
those activities had yielded highly satisfactory results. Furthermore, 
Thailand expected that it would need more and more nuclear technology for its 
future development. 


20. In order to strengthen the technical assistance programme, his country 
had already pledged, for the current year, a voluntary contribution of 
US $52 500 to the TACF. His delegation wished to express its appreciation to 
those Member States which had contributed to that much needed Fund. 
21. His delegation was very concerned about the doubts that were emerging 
with regard to the reliability and effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards 
system. In common with most Member States, his country felt there was an 
urgent need to find ways of improving and strengthening the safeguards system 
as a whole. For that reason, it welcomed the Medium-Term Plan for 1993-98, 
which rightly proposed to strengthen activities in the areas of nuclear 
safety, radiation protection, radioactive waste management, safeguards and the 
transfer of technology. 
22. The Agency's resources were very limited and could not meet all the 
demands placed on it. He therefore hoped that in implementing its Medium-Term 
Plan the Agency would maintain a balance between safeguards and non-safeguards 
activities - in other words, ensure that the budget for technical assistance 
was not less than that for safeguards. He was confident that the Secretariat, 
under the strong leadership of the Director General, would be able to achieve 
such a balance. 
23. Mr. LAVI&A (Philippines) said that his delegation continued to be 
aware of the Agency's crucial role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and other nuclear explosive devices through its safeguards system, it 
therefore welcomed the initiatives taken by the Agency to strengthen that 
system and increase the level of assurance and confidence it provided. In 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 9 


meetings of the Board and in his statement at the beginning of the session, 


the Director General had submitted various recommendations on the matter, the 
most important and far-reaching of which was the proposal for special 


inspections. While he fully appreciated the intention behind that proposal, 
certain clarifications would be required before such an activity could be 
undertaken. His understanding was that, pursuant to the relevant provisions 
of the Agency's Statute and document INFCIRC/153 (corrected), special 


inspections would be carried out only after consultation with, or with the 


agreement of, the parties concerned. The suggestion to undertake unannounced 
inspections, for example, would have serious implications for the Statute and 
would infringe national sovereignty. Nevertheless, his delegation was looking 
forward to receiving further details concerning the mechanisms and procedures 
for implementing special inspections and to discussing the matter in depth in 


future meetings of the Board. 


24. The measures proposed by the Director General should, of course, be 
given consideration, but in addition his delegation, like others, proposed 
that the review and evaluation of the overall effectiveness of present 
safeguards approaches be given high priority in the Medium-Term Plan. The 
results of such a review would have a decisive bearing on the various proposals 
to strengthen the safeguards programme and on discussions concerning 
its financing. 
25. His delegation welcomed the conclusion of safeguards agreements between 
the Agency and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and South Africa. It 
also supported the measures being taken to establish a nuclear-weapons-free 
zone in the Middle East. Those developments were a further step towards the 
achievment of a nuclear non-proliferation regime and international peace and 
security. 
26. Two weeks previously the Agency had hosted the very important International 
Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power, which had discussed past 
and current measures taken at the international level in the area of nuclear 
safety and had drawn up an international strategy for the future. The 
findings of the Conference merited the closest scrutiny, particularly by those 
Member States which had been unable to send experts to participate. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 10 


27. His delegation was especially interested in the proposal for steps to 
be taken towards creating a formalized international approach to all aspects 
of nuclear safety, including radioactive waste management and disposal, since 
that would constitute a truly significant contribution towards creation of a 
favourable environment for sustainable development for the generations to 
come. His delegation also welcomed the statement that safety should be 
enforced primarily at the national level, as the concept of safety was 
relative and differed from one country to another depending on how it was 
perceived and on the particular circumstances prevailing. 
28. The International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power had focused 
mainly on nuclear power plants. At present, fewer than 30 countries had 
nuclear power programmes and/or operating nuclear power plants. While he 
appreciated the value of strengthening the Agency's nuclear safety programme, 
that should not be done at the expense of other equally important programmes. 
It was well known that the majority of the Agency's members either did not 
have or else had only limited nuclear power programmes. Non-power applications, 
which were of higher priority to those countries, should therefore be 
accorded equal attention. 
29. His delegation was gratified to note the wide range of the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities, which had enabled nuclear technology to be 
transferred to developing countries. It therefore welcomed the fact that the 
implementation rate for all technical co-operation funds in 1990 had reached a 
record level despite some difficulties encountered by the Secretariat. It 
noted, however, that the share of the Asia and the Pacific region in 
the 1990 programme had decreased to 26.6%, and expressed the hope that that 
was not the start of a downward trend and that the situation would be remedied 
in the future. 
30. For its part, the Philippines continued to pursue a national programme 
to exploit nuclear applications in agriculture, biology, medicine, industry 
and research. The 620 MW PWR project planned for the Bataan Peninsula 
remained mothballed. Present activities were consistent with the strategies 
set out in the national master plan on science and technology, whose target 
was to make the Philippines a newly industrialized country by the turn of the 
century. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 11 


31. Nuclear power for large scale electricity production had not been ruled 
out by his country. Recent developments had indicated the need to maintain a 
body of specialists in the field who would keep abreast of technological 
developments and could be called upon if the country decided to revive its 
nuclear power programme. 
32. As to radiation protection, his country was fully aware that the 
options offered by nuclear techniques were viable only if their safe use was 
assured. The level of radiation protection provided had to keep pace with the 
expanding use of ionizing radiation. 
33. The Philippines continued to participate actively in the RCA programme 
and fully supported the extension of that agreement for another five-year 
period beginning in 1992. The RCA had established a well-developed network 
for fostering international co-operation and promoting nuclear energy in the 
region and had shown what could be achieved in that area of technical 
co-operation. It was becoming evident that the Member States of each region 
would have to depend more and more on each other, since resources from outside 
might not be able to keep pace with what was desired. The use of experts from 
developing countries, especially for assignments in their own region, should 
be encouraged. 
34. In the working group on the financing of safeguards, his delegation had 
proposed that the group consider the fundamental principle that those countries 
which owned, possessed or operated nuclear power plants were responsible 
for safeguarding them and for the financing thereof. The moral and legal 
basis of that truism could hardly be disputed. His delegation had, in fact, 
recommended that that cardinal principle be acknowledged before accepting the 
secondary proposed principle that Member States had the right and the duty to 
contribute to the financing of safeguards. 
35. His delegation had also emphasized that, as the Agency's Statute prescribed 
two equally important responsibilities, namely safeguards and 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Board should tackle the 
question of the financing of safeguards together with other longstanding 
issues such as the financing of technical assistance. The Agency's safeguards 
programme was being financed from the Regular Budget, while technical 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 12 


co-operation, which was concerned with the implementation of promotional 
activities, remained subject to the vagaries of voluntary funding. The time 
had come to find a solution which complied fully with resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/388 and which would ensure that technical assistance was funded 
from the Agency's Regular Budget or through other comparably predictable and 
assured resources. 


36. In that connection, his delegation had proposed to the Board that the 
twin Issues of the financing of safeguards and of technical assistance be 
linked realistically to other vital and outstanding questions, such as the 
enlargement of the membership of the Board of Governors. Without such linkage, 
all those issues would remain unresolved indefinitely. 
37. Finally, he recalled that, at its thirty-fourth session, the General 
Conference had adopted, by consensus, resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/544 submitted 
by the Group of 77 and entitled "Rule and Policy on the Appointment of the 
Director General" in which the Board had been requested to adopt an appropriate 
policy and procedures to govern the appointment of the Director 
General. The Board had recently approved the informal guidelines proposed by 
its Chairman on the procedure for selecting the Director General. They were 
informal because they had not been incorporated in the Board's existing Rules 
of Procedure and did not amend them in any way, but that was probably better 
than having no guidelines at all. However, they contained no proposal 
regarding the Director General's tenure of office. Further consideration 
should be given to that matter with a view to affording qualified candidates 
from other, particularly developing, regions the opportunity to run for the 
post. Such a proposal had been made by the Group of 77 in three resolutions 
adopted by the General Conference during the past 12 years. Rotation was an 
accepted practice within the United Nations system, and he saw no good reason 
why the Agency should be an exception. 
38. Mr. BOBADILLA (Chile) said that the Annual Report showed that, as 
in previous years, the Agency had made an important contribution to peace, 
health and prosperity in the world in 1990. In particular, the Standing 
Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage had made rapid progress in an area 
which was of major importance for the use of nuclear energy. A conceptual 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 13 


design for ITER, which had been carried out under the Agency's auspices, had 


been completed, providing further proof that the pooling of efforts in the 


interests of a common aim could yield good results. It was to be hoped that 


the future activities of that project would be equally successful. He also 
welcomed the approval of the Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste. Member States should continue to 
work on their national standards in the light of that code in order to 
facilitate its application, particularly with respect to prior notification 
and the granting of consent of exporting States, importing States and transit 
States. The examples he had mentioned indicated that the Agency's work was 
having concrete results. 


39. Chile welcomed the efforts which the Secretariat had made in the area 
of technical co-operation. The significant increase in the project implementation 
rate and the better balance of project components were the result of an 
improvement in the structure of the support systems and implementation mechanisms 
of the Department of Technical Co-operation and - a highly important 
point - the establishment of efficient communication systems. Chile also 
appreciated the efforts which various countries had made to halt the alarming 
decline over recent years in the percentage of the TACF target which was 
actually pledged and paid. He appealed to Member States to continue their 
efforts to reach and surpass the percentages achieved before 1982, as he was 
convinced that that would help increase the productivity of the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities. 
40. The technical assistance provided by the Agency in Chile had made a 
major contribution to the general development of the country by strengthening 
applications of nuclear technology in various important areas. Chile's 
nuclear development programme involved all of the scientific and technical 
capacity of the country, and the Agency's technical assistance had thus 
benefited all specialized establishments. Apart from the development of 
technologies related to reactors and the nuclear fuel cycle, Chile had been 
carrying out activities in the fields of health, industry, mining, agriculture 
and studies of natural resources and the environment. 
41. In the health sector, an attempt had been made to reduce the cost of 
imaging methods and to improve them by modernizing equipment, adopting computer 
techniques, and using more specific radiopharmaceuticals. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 14 


42. The production and availability of food were a priority for any 
country. Chile had therefore set up various inter-institutional groups for 
the application of isotopes and radiation in agricultural production. Nuclear 
techniques were being introduced to study the use of fertilizers and to 
improve plants of economic importance. In the stock-breeding area, efforts 
had focused on improving animal productivity using radioimmunoassay and 
related techniques to diagnose disease. 
43. The mining industry was particularly important in Chile and nuclear 
techniques were currently being used to control, optimize, and help with the 
design of processes. Nuclear techniques were also being used to study water 
resources, particularly in areas where a lack of water was restricting 
development. 
44. Considerable effort had been put into improving the environment, and 
nuclear techniques were playing a major role in the study of pollution of the 
atmosphere, water, food, marine resources, and areas damaged by human activities. 
45. The safety of nuclear installations and radiation protection of all 
people directly or indirectly involved in nuclear activities were thus issues 
of major importance for Chile. 
46. The Agency would soon be evaluating the technical assistance provided 
to Chile during the 1980s. He felt sure that the expert group which would be 
performing that evaluation would find that the joint efforts of the Agency and 
counterpart institutions had not been in vain and that the technologies transferred 
and the equipment supplied had been used rationally, were contributing 
to the achievement of the objectives set for each project, and had given a 
great boost to development in various areas. 
47. At the regional level, ARCAL had promoted both technical co-operation 
between countries with a similar level of development and collaboration to 
respond to common needs. The resources available had thus been used in a more 
rational manner, better results had been obtained, and dependence on other 
regions with different interests had been reduced. The first phase of the 
ARCAL programme had demonstrated that it was an excellent mechanism for stimulating 
regional co-operation. However, future results would depend on the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 15 


efforts made within the region to achieve the level of self-sufficiency which 
had been fixed as a target at the beginning of the programme. Chile would 
continue to support the ARCAL programme. 


48. The draft Medium-Term Plan which had been submitted by the Secretariat 
should be flexible and subject to revision. It should strike an adequate 
balance between all the Agency's activities, and in particular between 
safeguards activities and promotional activities in view of the importance of 
the latter for developing countries. The strengthening of safeguards provided 
for in the Plan should be accompanied by an improvement in their efficiency 
and a rationalization of costs. A revision of inspection criteria and 
procedures might help achieve that goal while maintaining the reliability of 
the system. 
49. The transfer of technology by the Agency to developing countries should 
be strengthened in order to promote progress in those countries. It was, of 
course, essential that the technical co-operation programme respond to the 
needs identified by Member States and to their requests. 
50. His delegation could go along with an increase in the Working Capital 
Fund to finance unforeseen expenses, on the condition that it did not involve 
an increase in Member States' contributions. 
51. Chile had successfully implemented a comprehensive training programme 
in various aspects of nuclear energy and hoped that training would figure 
among the objectives of the Medium-Term Plan. 
52. It was impossible to remain indifferent to the major changes which were 
taking place in the world and were resulting in a rapprochement between 
nations. That situation would no doubt foster mutual trust between Member 
States and have positive repercussions on the Agency's safeguards system. 
53. Mr. AALTO (Finland), after welcoming Finland's three Baltic 
neighbours - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania - and the Republic of Yemen to the 
Agency, said that the constantly rising demand for electricity in developed 
countries, despite extensive efforts to save energy, together with increasingly 
stringent standards for the reduction of carbon dioxide and other 
emissions, could not but strengthen the case for the nuclear option, even if 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 16 


it was not accepted everywhere as a safe form of energy. His delegation 
shared the Director General's view that the international community should 
continue its efforts to demonstrate that nuclear power worked well and to 
ensure that it was seen to do so. The main focus of the Agency's activities 
should be on safety and non-proliferation in order to restore public confidence, 
since that was a sine qua non for the future of nuclear power. 


54. The Agency had done valuable work in the nuclear safety area, drawing 
up codes, guidelines and recommendations which had become widely accepted. 
His Government was prepared to take an active part in efforts to establish a 
more clearly defined and transparent safety regime. The Agency should coordinate 
the elaboration of safety objectives in the form of goals accompanied 
by fundamental principles based mainly on Safety Series document No. 75-INSAG-3. 
His delegation was in favour of establishing a framework convention on nuclear 
safety that would incorporate binding commitments, since a measure of that 
kind was essential for the continued use of nuclear power. 
55. The enhancement of nuclear power plant safety in Central and Eastern 
Europe was a challenge for international co-operation. Since nuclear power 
played an essential role in electricity production in those countries and 
would continue to do so for some time, his Government was supporting the 
efforts being undertaken to provide them with technological and financial aid 
in the nuclear safety area. Finland had taken part in the Agency's extrabudgetary 
project on WWER-440/230 plants, which had produced a large number of 
recommendations for improving safety. Finnish nuclear utilities had taken 
part in similar activities with a view to evaluating the priority of 
backfitting measures. 
56. Halting the spread of nuclear weapons was the main task of the parties 
to the NPT and was a common endeavour of the Agency's Members. The Fourth 
NPT Review Conference had reached a number of unanimous conclusions regarding 
measures which might improve the situation. Tightening of export controls had 
been seen as the most useful instrument in that respect, and the Conference 
had urged all nuclear suppliers to make any future shipments subject to internationally 
legally binding non-proliferation commitments and the acceptance of 
full-scope safeguards. In that context, work related to the export of 
dual-use equipment and materials should be continued. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 17 


57. As a strong supporter of the NPT, Finland was pleased to note that a 
number of countries had made moves to become parties to the Treaty. He welcomed 
the accession of Mozambique, South Africa, Tanzania and Zambia, and 
looked forward to the prospect of China, France and Zimbabwe also acceding to 
the Treaty. He urged all countries which had not yet done so to sign the NPT 
in order to make that instrument of non-proliferation truly universal. 
Approximately 50 countries had failed to conclude safeguards agreements within 
the prescribed time limit. Those agreements were not a mere formality, and it 
would be appropriate for the Agency to offer practical assistance in that 
respect and for the countries concerned to make use of it. 
58. The Director General had on several occasions expressed his conviction 
that the current safeguards system should be reviewed. The suggestions he had 
made at the meeting of the Board of Governors in July 1991 would fundamentally 
change the present safeguards system and deserved careful examination. 
59. The Agency's inspections in Iraq pursuant to Security Council resolution 
687 had revealed a situation that Member States had wanted to believe 
was unthinkable. The reports so far told of clandestine or "unreported" 
activities for which, as the Director General had said, no plausible peaceful 
objective could be identified. In the light of those events, the Finnish 
Government shared the concern which had been expressed regarding the validity 
of the Agency's safeguards inspection system and was ready to participate 
actively in all efforts that might be necessary to reshape the present system. 
60. Though the Agency's work programme had always been of high quality and 
had always been executed in a professional manner, in recent years it had been 
suggested, partly owing to the constraints imposed by zero real growth, that 
it should be reviewed and its priorities redefined with a view to reducing or 
phasing out certain obsolescent components and incorporating new and more 
relevant activities. That was a difficult but indispensable task if the 
funding needed for new priorities was to be made available. 
61. The work on the drawing up of the Medium-Term Plan was an Important 
step in the right direction. That Plan should define the broad objectives of 
Agency activities and a strategy for the elaboration of dynamic and relevant 
future programmes. Co-ordination with other relevant organizations was 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 18 


essential. The Senior Expert Symposium on Electricity and the Environment 
held in Helsinki the previous May had been a good example of such coordination. 


62. Safety and safeguards, complemented by appropriate technical assistance, 
would remain the cornerstones of the Agency's activities. In view of 
the financial constraints and increasing demands the Agency was facing, the 
immediate focus had to be on improved quality and efficiency, and Finland was 
prepared to contribute to those endeavours. 
63. Mr. ROUVILLOIS (France) recalled that the previous year he had 
expressed both his satisfaction at the positive developments in Central and 
Eastern Europe and the genuine detente in East-West relations, and his concern 
over a regional crisis of unprecedented scale in the Persian Gulf. One year 
later, developments in Eastern Europe and recent events in the USSR had 
confirmed that something irreversible had taken place in that part of the 
world. That was a matter of great rejoicing for everyone, but perhaps those 
who lived on the European continent and had a sense of a common history and 
destiny had even greater cause for joy. His delegation therefore extended a 
special welcome to the three Baltic Republics which were taking part in the 
General Conference for the first time. 
64. By contrast, the Gulf war had bequeathed the General Conference some 
difficult and pressing problems. The Conference's thoughts and efforts were 
focused, of course, on the conclusions to be drawn from the discovery that, 
for the first time in the history of the Agency, a Member State had been found 
to be in clear violation of its obligations to the Agency. In conducting a 
clandestine and large-scale nuclear programme enabling it to accumulate 
nuclear materials which should have been subject to international safeguards, 
Iraq had violated its obligations as a party both to the NPT and to the agreement 
it had signed with the Agency in 1972. Moreover, it had reneged on its 
obligations under Security Council resolution 687, since it was the on-thespot 
inspections which had made it possible to uncover and gradually piece 
together the various elements of the clandestine programme. 
65. He wished to pay tribute to the Agency's inspectors and the experts who 
had worked with them, since it was thanks to the work they had done since May, 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 19 


under often tricky and always stressful conditions, that a picture was now 
available of the major elements of the Iraqi programme. Without them and 
their expertise, the implementation of Security Council resolution 687 would 
have been problematic. Since the previous session of the General Conference, 
the Board of Governors had considered the new situation on five occasions. At 
its meeting in July 1991, it had adopted a resolution which would mark an 
epoch in the history of the Agency: for the first time, it had formally 
reported and condemned a Member State's non-compliance with its commitments. 


His delegation did not share the view of those who claimed that Iraq's noncompliance 
did not constitute a serious violation of the agreements it had 
entered into. On the contrary, such arguments were dangerous and could 
imperil the future and the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The presence in Iraq of large quantities of clandestine nuclear 


materials was, in fact, a major breach of its written undertakings. 


66. The discovery of about 20 nuclear sites, when inspectors had previously 
been aware only of the Tuwaitha Centre, and even then only a small part of it, 
was clear proof that the main part of the Iraqi nuclear programme had been 
developed secretly. The least that could be said was that the aim of the 
secret programme was not clear: for what purpose was a country which owned no 
nuclear power plants installing equipment capable of producing hundreds of 
kilograms of enriched uranium which, if it did have nuclear power plants, it 
could procure much more cheaply on the market? 
67. International opinion, aware of the uneconomic nature of that programme 
and concerned by the fact that all the activities necessary for the production 
of a nuclear weapon were present in Iraq, was now convinced of the military 
aim of the programme and expected measures to be taken which would prevent the 
repetition of that situation either in Iraq or elsewhere. Strict measures 
must therefore be taken immediately to prevent the activities forbidden to 
Iraq from being carried out on its territory. More specifically, the time had 
come to apply Security Council resolution 687 to the letter, removing from 
Iraq or neutralizing or destroying not only the material but also the facilities 
and equipment which could contribute to the manufacture of a nuclear 
weapon by Iraq; no time should be lost in doing so. It was also most 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 20 


important to adopt a plan which would provide sufficient assurances of postdestruction 
verification. That plan should include activities which did not 
necessarily form a part of the Agency's traditional tasks and for which the 
assistance of external experts would be necessary. 


68. It was in that context that substantial proposals were expected from 
the Agency - in other words Member States - in the safeguards area. As long 
ago as February, the Director General had made it plain that that was essential. 
Seven months later, it was time to define precise objectives for the 
future. A package of measures to improve the present safeguards system should 
be put together by the end of the year. 
69. With that in mind, the European Community had proposed the following 
measures to the Board of Governors, which the latter had accepted: the establishment 
of a compulsory procedure whereby a facility must be declared to the 
Agency as soon as the decision was taken to construct it; the obligation 
under INFCIRC/153-type agreements to declare all nuclear materials from the 
concentrate stage onwards; the effective application of the existing provisions 
for special inspections and their extension to permit the inspection 
of undeclared facilities if an anomaly was found; the application of 
safeguards to nuclear equipment; and, finally, the establishment of a 
universal register of transfers of such equipment. In effect, Member States 
must either show that they were able to heed the sharp reminder they had been 
given or else compromise the credibility of the Agency and jeopardize international 
nuclear trade through a lack of confidence in the effectiveness of 
safeguards. It was for that reason that the French Government had also 
actively supported the plan to establish a zone free of weapons of mass 
destruction in the Middle East. That would require safeguards and verification 
procedures agreed to by all the parties involved. 
70. In other areas of the world, there had been positive developments. 
Argentina and Brazil had signed a bilateral agreement on the use of nuclear 
energy for exclusively peaceful purposes on 18 July 1991. The two countries 
were engaged in negotiations with the Agency with a view to signing a bilateral 
safeguards agreement covering all their nuclear facilities in the near 
future. South Africa had deposited an instrument of accession to the NPT in 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 21 


Washington on 10 July 1991 and had signed a safeguards agreement with the 


Agency. In June 1991, France had declared its intention to accede to 


the NPT. Even though, as everyone knew, France had in fact been applying the 
provisions of the Treaty for many years, the decision to formalize that policy 
and to give it legal force was a demonstration of the importance which France 
attached to nuclear non-proliferation and the role it intended to play in the 
formulation and implementation of the measures required today. France's 
accession would strengthen European unity which had already been demonstrated 
on pre- vious occasions, notably at the Dublin summit and for several years at 
the General Conference. Finally, in August 1991, China had declared that it 
intended to sign the Treaty, a step which would greatly strengthen that 
international instrument: all five nuclear-weapon States would then be 
parties to it. 


71. Nuclear safety was another important issue. In that area, too, there 
was a growing conviction that safety was not only a determining factor in the 
development of nuclear energy throughout the world, but also that the demand 
for higher safety levels for all countries and all types of technology implied 
a need for solidarity with those countries where the safety level was judged 
to be insufficient. 
72. The International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power which had 
just been held in Vienna at the Agency's initiative, had provided an opportunity 
for a broadly based discussion between decision-makers, officals from 
safety authorities, operators and technicians from Member States. Objectives 
and criteria had been identified for improving the safety of operating 
facilities, whatever the technologies employed. Consideration had been given 
to concepts for optimizing the safety of future reactors and to the safety of 
radioactive waste disposal facilities. The conclusions and recommendations of 
the Conference were an important step towards the achievement of a broad 
consensus concerning safety within the international nuclear community and 
might serve as the basis for a discussion of the orientation of the Agency's 
future programmes. 
73. Among the important activities undertaken in the safety area, the 
completion of the International Chernobyl Project and the presentation of its 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 22 


findings at an international conference in Vienna in May 1991 deserved to be 
singled out. That project highlighted the role the Agency could play as a 
catalyst of large-scale international co-operation on a problem of major 
interest. There was no need to stress the importance of that evaluation of 
the radiological consequences of the Chernobyl accident on health and the 
environment in the USSR; however, it would be advisable to publish the 
results as widely as possible in order to avoid the dissemination of poorly 
substantiated information by the media. 


74. Through the project on WWER-440/230 plants and by sending teams of 
experts to plant sites, the Agency was also making an important contribution 
to international efforts to improve facilities which had been constructed and 
were being operated in accordance with old standards. The complementary 
nature of the Agency's activities and those of other national or international 
technical and financial institutions should, in the case of the Bulgarian 
Kozloduy reactors in particular, help achieve a level of safety compatible 
with internationally accepted criteria without causing immediate danger to the 
economy of a State which depended heavily on such facilities for its electricity. 
That emergency programme should not, however, divert attention from 
the medium- and long-term objective of replacing such plants by other energy 
sources such as modern and safe reactors. 
75. Finally, research and achievements in the field of safety should be 
universal in nature, and no one should hold back information on progress made 
in that area. Only the joint efforts of all the countries involved would 
ensure progress. 
76. One of the main responsibilities of the current generation was to 
ensure that safe, reliable, low-cost and environmentally friendly energy 
supplies were available at the beginning of the next century. That was a 
difficult task which required a high level of international co-operation. 
Nuclear power had a role to play in satisfying those energy requirements. It 
would do so all the better if the risks of proliferation were averted and 
safety requirements fulfilled. 
77. In line with the tradition that delegates should give a brief account 
of the nuclear power programmes in their own countries at the General 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 23 


Conference, he observed that the direction of France's work in the safety area 
was towards ever more Intensive international co-operation. He had already 


stressed the high priority France gave to that issue. The joint declaration 
of Germany, the United Kingdom, France and Belgium of 25 March 1991 had 
confirmed the determination of those countries to work together in that area 
and had affirmed the common responsibilities which the large number of nuclear 
power plants they possessed imposed on them. 


78. In view of its major Investments in nuclear power, France was actively 
preparing for the future with respect both to reactors, where it was working 
on designs for the year 2000 and where it welcomed the progress made by 
Nuclear Power International, and to the fuel cycle, where mixed oxide fuel was 
gradually being introduced in French facilities, research was being conducted 
into new uranium enrichment procedures, and new reprocessing facilities were 
being commissioned at La Hague. 
79. Another important question for the future was the priority to be given 
to radioactive waste disposal. France had done a lot of work on that subject 
and had made major progress. A draft law on radioactive waste management was 
currently being considered by the French parliament and should be adopted in 
the near future. 
80. In conclusion, he noted once again that the Agency had faced important 
challenges in the past year. All Member States hoped that the Agency would be 
able to meet those challenges in the future and would help it in that task. 
The questions to be resolved were clear, and the Agency already had at its 
disposal a range of responses. Member States thus felt justified in looking 
forward to some important developments during the months ahead. 
81. Mr. TA NGUYEN (Viet Nam), after welcoming the Republics of Yemen, 
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia as new Member States, said that in the 34 years 
of its existence the Agency had made a great contribution to the development 
of atomic energy for peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. His 
delegation highly appreciated the Agency's many and invariably effective 
efforts in carrying out its safeguards and techical co-operation activities 
and in enhancing international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 24 


82. His delegation also appreciated the special role played by the Director 
General in expanding the Agency and in increasing its influence. At the 
invitation of the Vietnamese Government, the Director General had visited 
Viet Nam in April 1991 where, after a warm welcome from the Chairman and 
Vice-chairman of the Council of Ministers, he had visited the Da Lat Nuclear 
Research Institute and other nuclear science and technology Institutions and 
had attended a working meeting with the Vietnamese National Atomic Energy 
Commission. During the visit he had stated that Viet Nam was making very 
effective use of Agency assistance, which would continue to be provided to the 
extent that the Agency's resources permitted. 
83. In March 1991, Viet Nam had also had the honour of hosting the 
thirteenth RCA Working Group Meeting, in Ho Chi Minh City, which had been 
attended by representatives of 11 countries participating in RCA activities 
and by the Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation. His country 
took an active part in RCA activities and would welcome further co-operation 
in the field of nuclear science and technology with interested countries in 
the region. 
84. His country had made significant progress in the nuclear field in the 
past year. The gamma irradiation facility supplied by the Agency as part of 
technical co-operation project VIE/8/004 had been installed on the outskirts 
of Hanoi and put into operation at the end of July. That project was a very 
important step in the promotion of food irradiation and radiation technology 
in Viet Nam. The facility would be used for irradiating food and sterilizing 
medical supplies, and his delegation wished to convey its sincere gratitude to 
the Agency for its assistance with that project. 
85. Following the signing of the safeguards agreement for the Da Lat 
nuclear research reactor, Viet Nam had signed a safeguards agreement in 
connection with the NPT in 1990. At the beginning of 1991, a team of Agency 
inspectors had visited Viet Nam for the first time under the new agreement, 
and the results indicated that his country was complying with its obligations 
to the Agency. 
86. During the Director General's visit, the Vietnamese Government had 
assured him of its full support for the development of nuclear science and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 25 


technology and had reaffirmed its policy of using atomic energy exclusively 
for peaceful purposes. Nuclear technology was in its infancy in Viet Nam, 
which was why the results to date had been rather modest. However, there was 
no doubt that, with the assistance and co-operation of the Agency and the 
international community, the development of nuclear science and technology 
would proceed apace in the years to come. 


87. Mr. VETTOVAGLIA (Switzerland) said that the events of the past 
year had had and would continue to have a direct impact on the Agency. The 
profound political and military changes which had taken place in the Soviet 
Union affected the Agency in various ways, but he would limit himself to 
congratulating Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, which had just regained their 
independence, as well as Yemen on joining the Agency. 
88. With regard to the strengthening of the non-proliferation system, the 
nuclear danger had not disappeared with the end of the Soviet threat: in the 
future, the real danger would lie in proliferation. Universal adherence to 
the NPT was essential to ensure that the system was effective. The decision 
in principle of France and China to sign the Treaty demonstrated that nonproliferation 
had become a universal standard, and the accession of other new 
States offered further proof. The accession of South Africa and other African 
States was especially welcome as it would contribute to the goal of achieving 
an Africa free of nuclear weapons. In the future, South Africa should be able 
to play a full part in international organizations, including the Agency. 
89. The formal decision by Argentina and Brazil to renounce the acquisition 
and manufacture of nuclear weapons and their willingness to submit all their 
nuclear facilities to a mutual inspection regime under the aegis of the Agency 
indicated the usefulness of a regional approach to non-proliferation. His 
delegation supported the search for new methods within a regional approach and 
believed that the Agency could play an important role in that connection and 
that special inspections were one of the methods which could be employed in 
connection with such arrangements. 
90. The non-compliance of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with 
its obligation under the NPT to conclude a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency, while continuing to build sensitive nuclear facilities, had been a 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 26 


cause of concern to the international community for too long. The signing of 
an agreement, followed by its ratification and rapid and scrupulous implementation, 
was the only way to dispel the doubts which had arisen concerning the 
nature of that country's nuclear programme. 


91. The Swiss authorities had been dismayed to learn of the Iraqi Government's 
violations of its obligations under its safeguards agreement with the 
Agency. The scale of Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme proved that it was 
not Intended exclusively for peaceful purposes. By concealing part of its 
nuclear programme, Iraq was in breach of the NPT and its safeguards agreement 
with the Agency. The Board of Governors, of which Switzerland was not a 
member, had quite rightly condemned that unprecedented behaviour in unequivocal 
terms. 
92. His country commended the Agency for the prominent role it had played 
in implementing Security Council resolution 687. It thanked the Director 
General and his dedicated staff for their efforts to carry out that difficult 
task and offered its support in that regard. It noted with regret the obstacles 
that the Iraqi Government had placed and was still placing in their 
path. 
93. It was extremely disappointing that a country had been able to develop 
a clandestine programme despite regular Agency inspections. Iraq's action 
called into question the credibility of both safeguards as applied until now 
and the non-proliferation system. Yet there was no indication that the 
Agency's Secretariat, and more specifically the Department of Safeguards, had 
been negligent in their duties. It was up to the Agency's Member States to 
take action to remedy that situation. 
94. Some suggestions had already been made for strengthening the present 
system. In December 1991 and in February 1992, the Board of Governors would 
have to consider immediate measures, including special inspections, to improve 
the effectiveness and credibility of safeguards within the framework provided 
by document INFCIRC/153. His Government was looking forward to those discussions 
and was willing to give the Agency every assistance in improving the 
system. Judging from discussions in the Board of Governors and from the 
Director General's statements, there was clearly a strong desire to move 
forward and act without delay. However, two factors seemed to indicate that 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 27 


great perseverance would be required to define a new safeguards and nonproliferation 
system to replace the present one, which was twenty years old 
and reflected a balance of power that no longer obtained. 


95. The first was that simply reactivating document INFCIRC/15 would not 
produce a new system - although it would certainly be a start. However, a 
re-evaluation of the whole question of the effectiveness and efficiency of 
safeguards and a reappraisal of the general functioning of the Department of 
Safeguards, after twenty years of good and loyal service, seemed both indispensable 
and inevitable. The new safeguards system should form a coherent 
whole, and such a highly complex exercise could not be hurried. 
96. The second vital factor was the financing of safeguards. How were 
Member States to meet the additional expenses incurred by the Department of 
Safeguards as a result of new safeguards agreements such as the one concluded 
with South Africa or of the commissioning of new plants? No sound and evolutionary 
formula had yet been devised to finance the Agency's safeguards activities 
from 1993 onwards. The responsibilities involved were immense and the 
Agency must not miss its appointment with history. 
97. It was important in every instance that the additional costs associated 
with new measures should not be out of proportion to the benefits expected in 
terms of non-proliferation. The introduction of full-scope safeguards in 
nuclear-weapon States would not satisfy that condition. 
98. With regard to nuclear safety, it was clear that the majority of 
countries had not yet succeeded in substantially improving the public perception 
of nuclear power. That was certainly so in Switzerland, despite the 
fact that it had nuclear facilities which had been running safely and normally 
for years. Accidents, failures and deficiencies at some reactors in other 
countries had inspired in large sections of the population fears that were 
virtually impossible to allay. Nuclear safety had therefore rightly been one 
of the Agency's priorities since the Chernobyl accident. The prevention of 
such accidents in the future was the main objective of all the Agency's 
efforts. Accordingly, his country strongly supported the work undertaken in 
Eastern Europe, which must continue. With so many States and organizations 
active in Eastern Europe, care should be taken to ensure the proper coordination 
of the work being done. The Agency's assistance should above all 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 28 


aim at supporting and strengthening the authorities responsible for nuclear 
safety in Eastern Europe. 


99. His Government was very pleased with the outcome of the International 
Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power held recently in Vienna. Its final 
document was an important step towards a consensus on the principles that 
should govern international co-operation in that field. He wished to make 
three points on the subject of safety. First of all, primary responsibility 
for nuclear safety rested with the State. That responsibility was twofold, 
since the State must ensure the safety not only of its own citizens but also 
of the citizens of neighbouring countries. Secondly, he welcomed the idea of 
an integrated approach to all aspects of nuclear safety and, in that connection, 
recognized the value of a step-by-step approach to a framework convention. 
However, the first step - and indeed a prerequisite for drawing up a 
convention - must be to define the areas which should constitute the basis of 
the convention and on which it would be possible to reach consensus. His 
country supported the procedure suggested by the Board. Thirdly, it supported 
the International Conference's recommendation that a small group of experts be 
established to define safety criteria for the design of future reactors. 
Switzerland was willing to participate in the work of that group. 
100. Swiss energy policy in general was governed by the referendum held in 
September 1990, in which 53% of the votes cast and the majority of cantons had 
been against abandoning nuclear power completely. On the other hand, a similar 
percentage had supported the idea of a ten-year moratorium on the 
licensing of new nuclear plants. The moratorium had therefore become part of 
the Swiss constitution, and a 10% increase in the power of existing nuclear 
plants was now planned. The Swiss Government was therefore prepared to keep 
the nuclear option open. 
101. Mr. TSOUNIS (Greece) said that his Government strongly supported 
the work of the Agency and wished to congratulate the Director General on his 
effective leadership. It had no difficulty in endorsing the Annual Report 
for 1990 and in agreeing to its submission to the United Nations General 
Assembly. His delegation associated itself fully with the statement made by 
the delegate speaking on behalf of the European Community. Also, it wished to 
congratulate Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and Yemen on becoming Members of the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 29 


Agency. In the past year, and in particular during the last few months, a 
number of serious events and political developments had taken place which had 
a direct Impact on the Agency's work. He wished to make a few general 
observations and suggestions in that connection. 


102. Stressing his country's interest in Agency activities regarding the 
safety of older reactors, he recalled that in 1990 the General Conference had 
endorsed, in resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/529, a project for international assistance 
in assessing the safety of nuclear reactors in Eastern Europe and the 
Soviet Union. The Kozloduy nuclear complex in Bulgaria was a good example to 
take. He very much appreciated the active manner in which the Agency and 
the CEC were co-operating in the field of nuclear safety, a subject of great 
concern because of the potential risks to neighbouring countries. It was 
gratifying to note that the CEC, the European Community countries and others 
had responded immediately with steps to strengthen the safe operation of the 
Kozloduy plant. The Agency's action in offering its services and bringing 
together the interested parties had been very useful and the early initiative 
taken by Greece to obtain Community help for Bulgaria had already yielded 
results: the Community and several of its Member States had, like the Agency 
and WANO, decided to offer immediate assistance. 
103. However, a sustained effort would undoubtedly be required to help 
Bulgaria overcome its present problems and bring its nuclear plants up to the 
safety standards required by the international community. The nuclear 
industry should be called upon to supply both the expertise and the funds 
needed to support the nuclear power programme in Bulgaria. Greece was 
prepared, within its capabilities, to grant all possible assistance to its 
neighbour, Bulgaria. A spirit of friendly co-operation existed between the 
two countries not only in the nuclear field, but also in other important 
areas. Since the previous session of the General Conference, Greece had 
signed the second, technical, part of a bilateral agreement with Bulgaria, 
which provided for early notification in the case of nuclear accidents, the 
exchange of information on the nuclear activities of the two countries, and 
scientific co-operation. 
104. The Agency was to be congratulated on the energetic way in which it had 
performed, and was continuing to perform, the tasks entrusted to it by the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 30 


Security Council in resolution 687. The inspections in Iraq had brought to 


light a great deal of information and had proved that Iraq had been engaged in 


clandestine activities whose purpose was non-peaceful and was outside the 
scope of the MPT, to which it was party. He strongly supported the efforts 
being made by the Agency with regard to long-term inspection planning. He 
deplored Iraq's non-compliance with its safeguards agreement with the Agency 
and observed that it was the first instance of such non-compliance in the 
history of the Agency. 


105. The inspections performed by the Agency had lent a new dimension to its 
activities and had given fresh impetus to the idea that, in order to achieve 
higher verification goals and to increase the credibility and effectiveness of 
safeguards, the safeguards system would have to be reassessed. The time had 
come to find ways of increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the 
system, and to that end the Board's views and approval should be sought as 
soon as possible. He urged the Board to act quickly on that issue. The 
inspection regime should include, among other things, special inspections, and 
their scope ought to be extended to undeclared nuclear facilities. Consequently, 
his delegation strongly supported the Director General's proposals 
for the strengthening of the safeguards system. 
106. He also endorsed the proposals on that subject put forward by the 
delegate of the Netherlands in the joint statement he had made on behalf of 
the European Community. The present uncertain world needed a solid system on 
which to build hopes for peace and stability. Greece was willing to work with 
the Agency towards the early achievement of those objectives and proposed that 
a small working group of experts be established which, with the assistance of 
the Secretariat, would prepare a document for discussion as soon as possible. 
107. Greece was firmly committed to non-proliferation. It had been among 
the early signatories of the NPT and had concluded a safeguards agreement with 
the Agency in a timely manner. It therefore welcomed the recently approved 
safeguards agreements with South Africa and the Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea as well as South Africa's early conclusion of a safeguards agreement. 
As for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, it was to be hoped 
that the safeguards agreement would soon be implemented. His country was also 
gratified by the remarkable progress made by Argentina and Brazil towards the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 31 


conclusion of a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency. Finally, 
the non-proliferation declarations made by France and China were of great 
significance. 


108. Agency safeguards were of paramount Importance for the security of the 
world and the experience gained by the Agency through the verification of the 
non-proliferation commitments of States was extremely valuable. Clearly, 
universal accession to the NPT would contribute to the confidence-building 
measures needed by the world at present. 
109. Non-proliferation objectives could also be served through regional 
approaches. He therefore welcomed the Egyptian initiative concerning the 
application of Agency safeguards and the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the Middle East. Given the situation prevailing in the region, 
that initiative deserved careful consideration. The safeguards regime should 
take into account the specific requirements of the region and include measures 
to meet local conditions. It should incorporate the basic provisions of a 
regional arrangement and should allow the Agency to apply stricter safeguards 
than at present, whether comprehensive or not. All nations in the region had 
a right to exist and peace was a necessary element of coexistence. The 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime would lay an additional stone in 
the foundations of a more lasting world peace. 
110. Non-proliferation objectives could not, however, be achieved through 
the verification of political commitments alone. Member States should 
increase their national control of nuclear exports and prevent them from being 
diverted for unauthorized purposes. He therefore endorsed the relevant 
proposals contained in the statement made on behalf of the European Community. 
111. There was no doubt that the use of nuclear energy for electricity production 
continued to face a number of problems of varying degrees of 
severity. Public perception of nuclear energy and political factors had 
caused many delays and in a number of cases had resulted in a reduction in the 
nuclear contribution to energy production. Although nuclear energy was not 
part of Greece's energy programme at present, the Greek Government was very 
carefully following efforts to improve the safety of nuclear reactors and 
research into useful renewable energy sources. It gave high priority to 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 32 


protection of the environment. Nuclear accidents and climatic changes due to 
the greenhouse effect were the main risks associated with nuclear and thermal 
power plants, respectively. 


112. No cost should be spared in trying to reduce further the risk of 
nuclear accidents. Phenomena associated with the greenhouse effect should be 
studied more extensively, in which connection international co-operation under 
the sponsorship of the Agency and other international organizations was of 
paramount importance. The Agency was to be commended for having organized, in 
the spring of 1991, the Helsinki Symposium, which had considered the world's 
growing demand for electricity and the need to protect the environment. 
Greece's attitude to nuclear power would be based on a careful examination of 
the potentially harmful effects of both nuclear and thermal electricity 
generation techniques on the environment. 
113. As both a donor and recipient of technical assistance, Greece appreciated 
the efforts that the Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation 
and his staff had made to meet all requests within the present budgetary 
constraints. There was a need to further extend the scientific applications 
of nuclear techniques in developing countries, and Greece welcomed all 
initiatives taken by the Director General to that end. 
114. In conclusion, he was pleased to announce that the Greek Government 
would continue, as in previous years, to make its voluntary contribution to 
the TACF. It recognized the important role that the Agency played in promoting 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and in bringing peace and security 
to the world, and fully supported its activities. 
115. Mr. WAGNER (Czechoslovakia) said he wished first to join other 
delegates in welcoming the new Members of the Agency: Estonia, Latvia, 
Lithuania and Yemen. 
116. The changes in Europe and other parts of the world were imposing extraordinary 
demands and a heavy workload on the Agency - for example, assistance 
to Czechoslovakia and other countries to improve the safety of WWER-type 
reactors, the study of the Chernobyl accident in the Soviet Union, the 
inspections carried out by the Agency in Iraq, and the organization of the 
very successful International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 33 


117. The results of the Agency's activities in 1990, which had been 
described in the Annual Report and the Director General's opening statement, 
showed that the Agency had coped with its tasks more than satisfactorily. The 
joint efforts made by Member States within the framework of the Agency to 
ensure the safe and peaceful use of nuclear energy had reached a point where 
Member States must carefully and responsibly examine ways of fulfilling the 
very topical statutory objectives of the Agency in both the near and more 
distant future. It was no exaggeration to say that expansion of the Agency 
had reached its limits, especially under zero-real-growth budget conditions. 
His delegation therefore believed that the Medium-Term Plan for 1993-98, now 
in its final stages, would be an effective instrument for restructuring and 
rationalizing the Agency's activities. 
118. Environmental problems in general and the impact of energy production 
on the environment in particular were assuming increasing importance. The 
conclusions of the Helsinki Symposium on Electricity and the Environment held 
in May 1991 seemed to confirm that the urgent need to improve the status of 
the environment would lead to increased interest in the nuclear option. It 
was thus essential to evaluate, without any ideological or political 
prejudices, the advantages and disadvantages of that source of power and to 
compare it with other energy sources. 
119. His Government intended to conduct an important reassessment of the 
role of nuclear power in Czechoslovakia when drawing up an overall economic 
plan for the country. Nuclear power, which had recently been the target of 
both justified and unjustified criticism, would not play as dominant a role in 
the primary energy mix as in France. It was nevertheless clear that no 
progress would be possible on the economic or especially the environmental 
front unless nuclear power occupied a steadily increasing share of electricity 
production. 
120. Czechoslovakia's eight WWER-440 units, located on two sites, were 
operating in a stable and reliable way. With a total power of 3500 MW(e), 
they represented almost 30% of the country's installed capacity and accounted 
for 30% of annual electricity production. The construction of four WWER-440 
units at Mochovce and two WWER-1000 units at Temelin would roughly double the 
present installed nuclear capacity and make it possible to shut down a large 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 34 


number of the most obsolete coal-fired power plants that produced almost half 
the present emissions from electricity generation. 


121. The decision to reduce the number of 1000 MW units at the Temelin 
nuclear power plant from four to two had been taken because it had been 
recognized that the safety level of the WWER-1000 reactors, even after upgrading 
with a simple containment, did not meet present, and certainly not 
future, requirements. The top world producers of nuclear power plants were at 
present preparing bids for the construction of - probably two - further 
1000 MW units at a site still to be determined. 
122. The operating organization and the regulatory authorities were maintaining 
a very careful watch on the operational safety of all nuclear power 
plants. Safe operation was the crucial issue not only in the national but 
also in the international context. That applied particularly to the two 
WWER-440/230-type units at the Bohunice plant, which were among those receiving 
assistance under an Agency extrabudgetary project aimed at improving 
the operational safety of older reactors. 
123. In January 1991 the State Supervisory Body for Nuclear Safety of the 
Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Commission had issued a decree which changed the 
operating licence issued for the full design lifetime of the V-l nuclear power 
plant into a temporary one, renewable each year subject to certain conditions. 
In addition, approximately 80 significant modifications would have 
to be made in 1991 and 1992. The continued operation of the V-l nuclear power 
plant after 1995 was conditional on a major upgrading being completed by that 
date. He was very grateful for the assistance provided to his country by the 
Agency, which had arranged a number of expert missions to that nuclear power 
plant and others in Czechoslovakia. 
124. Although Czechoslovakia had always proceeded from the principle that 
national bodies held fundamental responsibility for the safe operation of a 
country's nuclear facilities, further progress in the technical and regulatory 
aspects of nuclear safety could not be achieved without effective international 
co-operation. The Agency would continue to have a specific and 
crucial role to play in that area. 
125. As a result of positive changes in the world and the Agency's efforts, 
the past year, and particularly the last few months, had seen some progress in 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 35 


expanding and strengthening the non-proliferation regime. He wished to join 
other delegations in welcoming the accession of Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia 
and South Africa to the NPT and welcomed the commitment made by France, China 
and Zimbabwe to sign the Treaty. The accession of France and China to the MPT 
would be a milestone in the development of the non-proliferation system since 
all nuclear-weapon States would then be parties to the NPT. 


126. He also welcomed South Africa's rapid action in signing a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency and was pleased that the safeguards agreement with 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had been approved by the Board the 
previous week. He looked forward to the early conclusion of comprehensive 
safeguards agreements with Argentina and Brazil. 
127. The steps taken by South Africa, its accession to the NPT, its prompt 
signing of a safeguards agreement with the Agency and its determination to 
Implement the agreement fully and without delay had very positive implications 
for the situation in Africa and rendered unnecessary the further examination 
of the South African nuclear programme as a special item on the agenda of the 
Agency's governing bodies. 
128. With respect to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the resolution 
approved the previous week by the Board of Governors expressed the hope 
that the agreement would be signed, ratified and fully implemented in a timely 
fashion. He urged those States which were Party to the NPT but had not yet 
concluded a safeguards agreement with the Agency to do so. 
129. He wished to thank the Director General, members of the special 
inspection teams and the entire staff of the Agency for the way in which they 
had fulfilled the tasks associated with the implementation of Security Council 
resolution 687 on Iraq's nuclear programme. The Agency should continue those 
activities until all the objectives set in the relevant parts of the resolution 
had been met in full. No State party to a safeguards agreement should 
be exempted from the obligations that agreement imposed on it. 
130. The case of Iraq clearly demonstrated the need to strengthen Agency 
safeguards. Czechoslovakia was closely following the steps being taken to 
make Agency safeguards more efficient and was ready to contribute actively to 
the strengthening of safeguards whether within existing agreements or outside 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 36 


that framework. The implementation of Security Council resolution 687 had 
proved that the Agency had enough experience with safeguards to carry out 
tasks which went beyond the present standard inspections. A careful evaluation 
should be made of that experience and of certain new elements such as 
special ad hoc inspections and the use of satellite information. There was no 
doubt that present circumstances required a strengthening of the safeguards 
system. His delegation had in the past suggested examining some options under 
the overall title of "a system of selective safeguards". Czechoslovak experts 
were ready to help develop an effective and reliable system of safeguards 
which corresponded to the needs of the age and was better able to fulfil its 
preventive function. 


131. Czechoslovakia had always supported, and would continue to support, 
Agency technical assistance to developing countries, which it considered to be 
one of the Agency's most important activities. The proposal to set the level 
of voluntary contributions to the TACF for 1992 at $52.5 million was acceptable, 
and his Government had decided to make its contribution to the TACF in 
full in Czechoslovak crowns. 
132. In conclusion, he could approve the budget proposed for 1992. At a 
time of zero real growth in the budget, it represented a difficult, but wellbalanced 
compromise between the so-called promotional and the regulatory 
activities of the Agency. He believed that the Agency's programme and budget 
for 1993 and 1994, which was to be based on the Medium-Term Plan, would strike 
an appropriate balance between programme priorities and financial resources. 
133. Mr. YANEV (Bulgaria) welcomed the three Baltic republics and the 
Republic of Yemen as new members of the Agency. 
134. The previous year had been one of complications and contradictions for 
Bulgaria's nuclear power programme. The lack of alternative energy resources 
and the low quality of lignites, the country's other main energy source, had 
made Bulgaria dependent on nuclear power. With the commissioning a few days 
previously of Unit 6 (a WWER-1000 reactor) of the Kozloduy plant, nuclear 
power was providing over 40% of the country's total energy production. 
135. The state of old WWER-440/230 units had - with good reason - become a 
cause of serious concern for the public and experts in Europe and elsewhere. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 37 


It was well known that the design parameters of those old units did not meet 
modern safety standards. In addition, the OSART mission conducted in 
June 1991 as part of the Agency's extrabudgetary project on old reactors in 
Eastern Europe had found a number of additional technical, organizational and 
material deficiencies which, although not posing an immediate threat of a 
nuclear accident, were unacceptable from the point of view of the prevention, 
management and mitigation of the consequences of an accident. 


136. The Bulgarian Government had accepted the conclusions and recommendations 
of the mission and had taken immediate action to eliminate the 
shortcomings despite the serious impact of those measures on the economy. 
Units 1, 3 and 4 had been shut down and Unit 2 was about to be shut down. 
The repair and renovation work carried out on Unit 4 had remedied the problems 
of immediate concern identified by the mission. The unit had been returned 
to service after a detailed survey by the national regulatory body in the 
presence of Agency representatives, who had confirmed the quality of the work 
carried out. The same procedure would be followed before restarting the other 
three reactors. The work had been possible as a result of the assistance 
which had been so rapidly provided by the European Community, WANO, and the 
Governments of countries such as Germany, the United States of America and 
Japan, with the Agency serving as intermediary. His country wished to 
express its deep gratitude for that support which, it hoped, would be extended 
to cover the whole range of problems associated with the upgrading of old 
reactors. 
137. The design parameters of the Kozloduy WWER-1000 reactors were close to 
international safety standards. The reactors had been examined by a number of 
Agency missions and had been found to be in good condition and well managed. 
Nevertheless, a programme for the further upgrading of those reactors had been 
drawn up, with the emphasis on improving instrumentation and control. His 
country hoped to implement the programme with the assistance of the World Bank. 
138. His delegation was fully aware of the importance for Bulgaria and the 
entire nuclear community of the measures being taken to improve the safety of 
the Kozloduy plant. Improving nuclear safety and public confidence would have 
a broad international impact. International co-operation therefore not only 
had economic, scientific and technical value but was also politically and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 38 


socially important. For those reasons, the Bulgarian Government had adopted 
and was strictly following a policy of openness in the nuclear sphere and was 
keeping the public informed of any problems encountered. Bulgaria had joined 


the NUCNET information system of the European Nuclear Society. It was a 
member of the IRS and was using the INES to evaluate incidents. Two ASSET 
missions had been carried out in Bulgaria in the past year and another would 
be taking place soon at Kozloduy. A consortium of regulatory bodies from some 
Member States of the European Community would be providing assistance to the 
Bulgarian regulatory body - the Committee on the Use of Atomic Energy for 
Peaceful Purposes - and also to the Kozloduy plant in order to improve control 
and enforcement procedures and to increase the reliability of safetysignificant 
systems. 


139. A complete evaluation of the plant site, and particularly its seismic 
characteristics and the seismic resistance of equipment, was under way as part 
of a national technical assistance project. An on-site review had been 
conducted in May of the current year. Additional measures had been recommended, 
particularly for some auxiliary installations, and they would be 
carried out. 
140. A major effort would be made to update Bulgarian nuclear and radiation 
safety standards and to bring them into line with the Agency's NUSS documents. 
Bulgaria hoped to obtain advice and technical assistance for that 
purpose from the Agency and from the regulatory bodies of countries which had 
reached a high level of development in the nuclear energy field. 
141. A number of other conditions must also be met to ensure the safe use of 
nuclear energy: the physical protection of nuclear material, the prohibition 
of armed attacks on peaceful nuclear installations, and monitoring of its 
peaceful use. His country attached great importance to those questions and 
was contributing actively to efforts to resolve them. As a party to the NPT, 
it supported the Agency's safeguards system. Safeguards goals had been fully 
attained at Bulgarian nuclear facilities. His country was complying with the 
guidelines on the export of nuclear material, equipment and technology and was 
participating in the work aimed at solving the problems posed by the export of 
dual-use items. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 39 


142. Bulgaria was deeply concerned at the fact that Iraq had not observed 
the obligations resulting from its safeguards agreement with the Agency and 
supported the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors on that matter. 
143. His delegation approved the Annual Report for 1990, which covered a 
wide range of very useful activities in all areas of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. During the past year, the Agency's role as a recognized centre 
for international co-operation in those fields had continued to grow. His 
delegation particularly appreciated the work carried out by the Department of 
Nuclear Energy and Safety and its active co-operation with Eastern European 
countries. It also wished to thank the Department of Technical Co-operation 
for its work and the Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation and 
his staff for their exceptional understanding of the economic difficulties 
which had affected Bulgaria the previous year and for their valuable assistance 
which had enabled Bulgaria to participate fully in the Agency's activities. 
Despite those difficulties, Bulgaria would continue to support the 
Agency's vitally important technical assistance programme. It accepted 
specialists from other countries for training courses and was willing to 
expand that activity and to make available its experts. It hoped that the 
Agency would continue to provide assistance regarding metrology in nuclear and 
radiation safety, manpower training and other applications of nuclear energy. 
144. Bulgaria could approve the Agency's budget for 1992 and would fulfil 
its budgetary obligations. It also approved the Agency's accounts for 1990. 
Its well-known position concerning the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
and the amendment of Article VI as a whole and of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute remained unchanged. 
145. Bulgaria made voluntary contributions to the financing of technical 
assistance in national currency in accordance with the Indicative Planning 
Figures. His delegation reiterated its view that the 8% charge for assessed 
programme costs in respect of technical assistance provided had lost its 
original significance and should be abolished. 
146. With regard to the financing of safeguards, his country could accept 
the increase in contributions from "shielded" countries. The decrease in the 
percentage of the safeguards component of the Regular Budget paid by 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 40 


"shielded" Member States was to be expected in view of the very nature of 
"shielding". Further consultations would be necessary in order to reach a 
mutually acceptable decision on that subject. 


147. The work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage was 
of great importance for international co-operation in the nuclear field. His 
country was following that work closely and was participating in it as far as 
possible. The Committee had made a useful contribution the previous year by 
clarifying the positions of Member States and by formulating proposals to 
improve existing international instruments. However, those proposals 
contained certain shortcomings with regard to the assessment of the economic 
status of countries in connection with the establishment of a mechanism for 
compensating for nuclear damage. It might be difficult to secure universal 
adherence to an international convention on liability for nuclear damage which 
only dealt with the technical aspects of the issue and neglected social and 
economic aspects. 
148. In conclusion, his delegation reaffirmed its full support for the 
Agency's efforts to expand international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
Bulgaria would continue to co-operate with the Agency and other Member States 
to help the Agency achieve its noble objectives and to strengthen its role and 
authority. 
149. Mr. CONNOLLY (Ireland), after welcoming the four new members of 
the Agency, associated himself fully with the statement made the previous day 
by the delegate from the Netherlands on behalf of the 12 members of the 
European Community. His comments would focus on three issues, namely 
safeguards, safety and liability. 
150. Since the previous session of the General Conference, some major 
developments had taken place in the field of nuclear non-proliferation. He 
was particularly gratified by the decisions by France and China to accede to 
the NPT. It was clear that the full support and participation of all nuclearweapon 
States would strengthen the Treaty and make it the most effective arms 
control agreement to date. In addition, he welcomed the accession of 
Tanzania, Zimbabwe and South Africa to the Treaty, and hoped that that augured 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 41 


well for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa in the near 
future. 


151. The mutual trust created through the Agency's safeguards system was a 
key element in the international non-proliferation regime. His delegation 
therefore welcomed the new safeguards agreements recently concluded with the 
Agency and looked forward to their full and early implementation. It was also 
following with great interest the current moves to further strengthen and 
update the safeguards system and hoped that specific and constructive proposals 
to that effect would emerge from the work being carried out by the 
Secretariat under the guidance of the Board of Governors. 
152. Unfortunately, not all of the new developments in the past year had 
been positive. Ireland shared the concern of many States at Iraq's violation 
of its obligations under its safeguards agreement with the Agency. It commended 
the Agency for the crucial role it had played in implementing Security 
Council resolution 687 and urged the Iraqi Government to respect fully its 
safeguards commitments and, in particular, to place no further obstacles in 
the path of the Agency's inspection teams. 
153. Ireland had consistently supported the Agency's activities in the field 
of nuclear safety and had been closely involved in the preparations for the 
International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power held recently in 
Vienna. The many important issues debated at that Conference would have 
considerable significance for the future of nuclear power. Although in some 
respects its conclusions had not met expectations, the Conference had 
nevertheless identified areas where further action could be taken. His 
delegation had noted with satisfaction the participants' intention conscientiously 
to apply appropriate principles and practices and to improve the 
safety level of sub-standard plants. It shared the growing concern about the 
safety of reactors in operation in Eastern Europe and endorsed the Agency's 
role in mobilizing and co-ordinating efforts to resolve that serious problem. 
It welcomed the Conference's invitation to the Agency to "develop a more 
vigorous overview process" not only through existing services to operating 
plants but also by "promoting the achievement of sufficient national 
regulatory oversight". The Irish authorities had frequently emphasized that 
theme in the past, both in the Board of Governors and at previous sessions of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 42 


the General Conference. The key to safety lay in regulatory control, and his 
delegation supported an enhanced role for the Agency in that area, which it 
believed had previously been neglected. Specifically, a start should be made 
by introducing an arrangement - based on the OSART model - whereby regulatory 
authorities could voluntarily invite a review of each other's practices and 
procedures. That relatively small step forward would have enormous advantages 
and would help strengthen national safety regimes. 


154. One of the most important proposals made by the International Conference 
on the Safety of Nuclear Power concerned the establishment of an 
international convention which would commit Member States to adopting internationally 
accepted safety standards for all applications of nuclear energy. 
In the context of trends towards closer international co-operation in other 
related areas such as non-proliferation and arms control, it would be timely 
to promote and consolidate nuclear safety by means of a convention. His delegation 
hoped that the General Conference would give the Agency a clear and 
unambiguous mandate to pursue that important proposal. 
155. The risk of a nuclear accident could never be entirely eliminated, and 
there was general acknowledgement of the need to reconsider the questions of 
liability and compensation. He welcomed the report submitted by the Board of 
Governors concerning the issue of liability for nuclear damage and paid 
tribute to the work done by the outgoing Chairman of the Standing Committee on 
that subject, Mr. van Gorkom of the Netherlands, and by the Secretariat. 
Considerable progress had been made in producing specific proposals to improve 
the international regime for compensating the victims of a nuclear accident. 
156. Ireland was participating actively in the work of the Standing Committee. 
As a non-nuclear country, it believed that the Chernobyl accident had 
demonstrated the need for a comprehensive liability regime to protect the 
innocent victims of a nuclear accident, wherever they might be. His delegation 
supported many of the proposals and concepts which had been formulated 
by the Standing Committee and which would extend the scope of the liability 
convention both geographically and environmentally. A number of other very 
important amendments had been proposed, all of which should contribute to a 
revised convention that adequately reflected the risks of the present nuclear 
industry. It was difficult to understand the attitude of some nuclear States 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 43 


to that issue: while they stressed the high level of safety in their own 
industries, they seemed reluctant to accept a wide-ranging liability 
convention. 


157. The adoption by all countries of effective conventions on safety and 
liability would not only help improve international relations but also enhance 
public acceptability of the nuclear industry and its future development. His 
Government was firmly convinced that the large scale development of nuclear 
power should take place only when the utmost priority was accorded to safety 
and where a system of independent verification was applied. With regard to 
liability, the international dimension of risk and damage should be fully 
accepted by countries with nuclear facilities. His delegation hoped that, 
with the Agency providing a forum, rapid progress could be made in all those 
areas. 
158. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) welcomed the three Baltic States (Estonia, 
Lithuania and Latvia) and the Republic of Yemen as new Members of the Agency. 
He congratulated the Baltic States on the speed with which they had applied 
for membership of the Agency and looked forward to co-operating closely with 
them, particularly in the field of nuclear safety. 
159. He was pleased to annouce that, subject to approval by the Norwegian 
parliament of Norway's contribution to the Agency's budget, his delegation 
could accept the Regular Budget for 1992. His country also supported the 
target of $52.5 million for voluntary contributions to the TACF for 1992. 
Subject to parliamentary approval, Norway would contribute its assessed share 
of that Fund. 
160. He also supported the Board's proposal to increase the level of the 
Working Capital Fund by $2 million in 1992 in order to ensure the contin- uous 
and efficient operation of the Agency. An increase in the Working Capital 
Fund should not however be regarded as a solution to the problems created by 
the late payment by Member States of their contributions to the Regular 
Budget. His delegation was aware that in some cases those delays were due to 
the economic difficulties faced by the countries concerned. However, the 
Agency's financial problems stemmed largely from arrears owed by Member States 
which were not facing such difficulties. He therefore fully supported 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 44 


the repeated appeals to Member States made by the Director General during the 
past few years for timely and full payment of assessed contributions. 


161. The last few years had seen a substantial increase in the resources 
available for technical assistance: the target set for the TACF for 1992 was 
$52.5 million, which represented an increase of more than 54% over the figure 
of $34 million set for 1987. In view of the great importance which it 
attached to the Agency's technical co-operation programme, his delegation 
welcomed that increase, which demonstrated the effectiveness of the existing 
system of Indicative Planning Figures and voluntary contributions. There was 
therefore no need at present to adopt a different method of financing. 
162. Nuclear safety and radiation protection must remain one of the Agency's 
main fields of activity. The various Agency missions to Member States, the 
assessment of the radiological consequences of the Chernobyl accident and the 
activities carried out to improve the safety of older power reactors were of 
particular importance. The Agency had a vital role to play in helping to 
solve problems common to various countries and in providing an international 
forum for the discussion of safety issues. In the long term, the extensive 
use of nuclear energy would be accepted only if operating nuclear facilities 
in all countries could meet the strictest standards of safety and environmental 
protection. 
163. It was satisfying to note that the number of Member States which had 
ratified or acceded to the Early Notification and Emergency Assistance 
Conventions had Increased considerably in 1990. However, the handling and 
disposal of radioactive wastes continued to be a matter of great concern in 
Norway. His delegation had on several occasions expressed its concern about 
the dumping of radioactive waste at sea and expected dumping sites to be 
monitored. It therefore welcomed the adoption by the General Conference the 
previous year of the Code of Practice on the International Transboundary 
Movement of Radioactive Waste. 
164. The handling of high-level radioactive waste and Irradiated fuel in one 
country could also be of concern to neighbouring countries. He would therefore 
be in favour of basic international undertakings concerning the safe 
handling of such materials. He also supported the conclusions of the recent 
International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power and looked forward to 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 45 


the establishment of a framework convention on nuclear safety, which should 
also cover the handling and disposal of radioactive wastes. His delegation 
expected the Director General to initiate the necessary preparations without 
delay. 


165. On the subject of safeguards, he welcomed the fact that in 1990, as in 
previous years, the Secretariat had not detected any anomaly which would 
indicate the diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material 
or misuse of facilities or equipment subject to safeguards. 
166. His delegation welcomed the accession of Albania and Mozambique to 
the NPT. It also noted with satisfaction the entry into force of the safeguards 
agreements concluded pursuant to the NPT with Kiribati, Malta, 
Saint Lucia, Tunisia and Viet Nam and the unilateral submission agreement with 
Algeria covering a research reactor. 
167. It was regrettable, however, that at the end of 1990 51 non-nuclearweapon 
States party to the NPT had not concluded safeguards agreements with 
the Agency within the prescribed period of 18 months after ratification or 
accession to the Treaty. That was the same number as at the end of 1989. 
Although only two of those States had significant nuclear activities, it was 
very disappointing that such a large number of States had not fulfilled their 
obligations under the NPT. 
168. The year 1991 appeared to have been a particularly important one for 
the NPT. His delegation was deeply satisfied at South Africa's accession to 
the Treaty and at the fact that its safeguards agreement with the Agency had 
already entered into force. His delegation was also pleased to note that 
Tanzania and Zambia had signed the NPT. It attached particular importance to 
France's decision to accede to the NPT and to the fact that China had announced 
its intention to do likewise. Norway also welcomed the fact that a 
safeguards agreement pursuant to the NPT had been negotiated between the 
Agency and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. It expected that agreement 
to be signed, ratified and implemented at an early date. 
169. Norway had been very concerned to learn that Iraq had been engaged for 
a considerable period of time in an extensive clandestine uranium enrichment 
programme in clear violation of its obligations under the NPT and its 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 46 


safeguards agreement with the Agency. Norway condemned Iraq's non-compliance 
with its safeguards obligations and called on the Iraqi Government to cooperate 
with the Agency and disclose fully its clandestine activities. Norway 
fully supported the Agency's strong and decisive reaction to that situation. 


170. That first case of non-compliance in the history of non-proliferation 
threatened to undermine worldwide confidence in the Agency's safeguards 
system. There was thus an urgent need to strengthen the system and to confer 
wider inspection rights on the Agency. The time had come to improve the 
system. The target should be the application of Agency safeguards to all 
peaceful nuclear activities. His delegation therefore supported the gradual 
extension of the application of safeguards in nuclear-weapon States. Those 
States should make a complete separation between their peaceful and military 
nuclear activities and begin to report to the Agency all the nuclear material 
used in their peaceful nuclear activities. 
171. Despite a steady increase in the quantities of nuclear material and in 
the number and complexity of new facilities subject to safeguards, the 
Department of Safeguards had experienced serious budgetary constraints for a 
number of years. In the light of that situation and recent experience with 
Iraq and its likely repercussions on the safeguards system, the safeguards 
budget would obviously have to be increased in real terms after 1992 in order 
to maintain a reliable system. 
172. Mr. MIELNICKI (Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy 
(TUIWE)), after thanking the Agency for inviting him to attend as an observer at 
the thirty-fifth session of the General Conference, said that his organization 
highly appreciated the Agency's activities and followed with great interest its 
work in the important area of nuclear energy and safety. One of the main tasks 
of the TUIWE, laid down in its statutes and in the policy and action platform 
drawn up at its second international conference in December 1990 in Paris, was 
to provide constructive assistance to the Agency and to draw on the Agency's 
work, experience and views. Nuclear safety was one of the TUIWE's main 
concerns; the central tenet of its programme was the development of energy 
accessible to all, and its priorities were energy policy, safety, prevention of 
accidents, working and living conditions and co-operation with all organizations 
concerned with energy. One of the TUIWE's primary objectives was to promote 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 47 


international co-operation in radioactive waste disposal, since such waste posed 
an increasing threat to mankind and was a problem which could only be resolved 
at the international level. 


173. He wished to thank the representative of the Agency for the active part 
he had played at a seminar which had been sponsored by the Agency in Moscow on 
the fifth anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster and in which several organizations 
from the energy sector and scientific organizations from the whole 
world had participated. Since the Chernobyl accident, the operation of 
nuclear power plants had provoked considerable discussion, and public reaction 
was often passionate. From the outset, nuclear power had been overshadowed by 
events such as the Hiroshima drama, nuclear tests threatening the future of 
mankind, and the Chernobyl accident. As a result, nuclear power tended to be 
identified with its destructive potential rather than its peaceful applications 
in medicine, agriculture, science and technology. The conclusions of 
the Moscow seminar had confirmed that nuclear power was the most promising 
form of energy for the future development of mankind. However, the seminar 
had also underlined the inherent unreliability of man and control systems, 
even in traditional technologies, and his organization was therefore alarmed 
at the technical state of certain nuclear power plants and, in particular, at 
the negligence of governments and operators. Three years previously, delegates 
to the conference of energy experts from Balkan States had been informed 
during a visit to the Kozloduy nuclear power plant that it represented stateof-
the-art nuclear technology, whereas the Agency had recently reported that 
it was in a lamentable condition. 
174. The TUIWE attached great importance to international co-operation 
between the Agency's Member States and wished to see it expanded to all 
countries without exception. Through such co-operation an effective system of 
management, control and security in the peaceful use of nuclear energy could 
be established and the highest possible level of safety in all power plants 
and the maximum level of environmental protection could be achieved. The 
socio-economic changes currently taking place in the world had created fertile 
conditions for the enhancement of such international co-operation and for the 
creation of a system ensuring nuclear safety. Now that the hostilities which 
had soured East-West relations were no more, mankind seemed to be moving 
towards a more balanced and peaceful world. 

GC(KKXV)/OR.337 
page 48 


175. In conclusion, he wished to reiterate TUIWE's support for the expansion 
of nuclear power, which it regarded as a clean source of energy for the 
future, and its belief that the prerogative of States and regions to choose 
freely the energy best suited to their situation should be respected. 
176. Mr. STEMPEL PARIS (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL)) said that, at the twelfth regular 
session of the General Conference of OPANAL in Mexico in May 1991, important 
statements made by representatives of certain States in the region had opened 
up the prospect of the rapid establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free zone 
provided for in Article 4 of the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
177. Furthermore, as a follow-up to the Foz do Iguacu joint declaration on 
common nuclear policy signed by the Presidents of Argentina and Brazil in 
November 1990, the representatives of those two countries had reiterated their 
Government's desire to conclude with the Agency a safeguards agreement which 
would provide the assurance that they would use nuclear energy for exclusively 
peaceful purposes and to take the necessary steps for the Tlatelolco Treaty to 
become fully applicable to them. 
178. The representative of Chile had stated, at the twelfth session of the 
OPANAL General Conference, that his country had decided to accede fully to the 
Tlatelolco Treaty and hoped to make an active contribution to its implementation. 
The President of Cuba had requested observer status for his country 
at OPANAL. The French Government had welcomed all moves which could help 
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, especially in Latin America, and had 
stated that it was aware of the importance that certain countries in the 
region attached to the ratification by France of Additional Protocol I of the 
Tlatelolco Treaty. France, however, preferred to wait and see how the 
situation in the region developed before taking a decision on the matter. 
179. From the views expressed it could be seen that there was a common 
desire to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the whole of Latin America 
and the Caribbean as soon as possible. 
180. In its resolution 278 (XII), the General Conference of OPANAL had taken 
note of the OPANAL Council's report on the prevention of radioactive contamination 
of the marine environment within the framework of the Tlatelolco Treaty 

GC(XXXV)/OR.337 
page 49 


and the annex thereto had requested those Member States that were a party to 
Additional Protocols I and II to give their views on how the scope of the 
Treaty could be extended in that direction. The annex in question was an 
update which took due account of the observations made by various specialized 
agencies, including the Agency. 


181. The General Conference of OPANAL had decided, in its resolution 280 (XII), 
to request the Agency and the members of ARCAL to support OPAMAL's application 
to participate as an observer in the co-ordination and planning meetings of 
the ARCAL programme. 
182. Finally, by resolution 275 (XII) the General Secretary of OPANAL had 
been requested to continue to co-operate with the Member States which had 
signed the Tlatelolco Treaty with a view to concluding, as soon as possible 
and in co-ordination with the Agency, the agreements provided for in 
Article 13 of the Treaty. That resolution also urged States party to the 
Treaty and to Additional Protocol I which had not yet done so to sign such 
agreements. 
183. In conclusion, he thanked the Agency once again for its valuable 
support in the service of peace, disarmament and world security. 
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
13 November 1991 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Wednesday, 18 September 1991, at 3.5 p.m. 


President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 
later: Mr. LOOSCH (Germany) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


a&enda* 


General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (continued) 1 - 141 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Egypt 1 -19 
Iraq 20 -36 
Turkey 37 -46 
Sweden 47 -59 
Democratic People's Republic 


of Korea 60 -71 
Indonesia 72 -83 
Morocco 84 -97 
Syrian Arab Republic 98 -110 
Ecuador 111 -119 
Mongolia 120 -130 
Sudan 131 -141 


[*] GC(XXXV)/982. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 


91-04734 
9003e/0845e 



(XXXV)/OR.338 
2 


Abbreviations used in this record 


AFRA African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 


Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 


Technology 
ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of 


Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
INIS International Nuclear Information System 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferatlon of Nuclear Weapons 
RAPAT Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
RBMK High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 


and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 


(for Asia and the Pacific) 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 
WHO World Health Organization 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor (Soviet Union) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) (continued) 


1. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) said that the current session of the General 
Conference was taking place during a period of international rapprochement and 
harmony which gave rise to the hope that co-operation and mutual understanding 
would replace conflict and that construction of arsenals of weapons and 
nuclear deterrents would give way to developmental activities and the utilization 
of science for the well-being of mankind. Nuclear energy had a vital 
role to play in creating the prosperity to which the peoples of the world 
aspired and in solving developmental problems. The new international 
atmosphere would, she trusted, do away with the military uses of atomic energy 
and invalidate the theory of nuclear deterrence or terror. 
2. The Agency had played an effective part in fostering the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, and she hoped that it would expand that role in future to 
meet the increasing needs of Member States in various fields. The Agency's 
achievements in promoting nuclear safety and radiological protection after the 
Chernobyl accident bore witness to what it could do. However, its success in 
assuming a greater role in that area would depend much on Member States' 
financial support. 
3. Safeguards was one of the main activities of the Agency and a principal 
prop of the non-proliferation regime. Recent events had borne out the need 
to strengthen the effectiveness of the safeguards system, which had also been 
stressed by the Fourth NPT Review Conference. She welcomed the studies that 
the Agency had initiated on a number of aspects with a view to strengthening 
the safeguards regime. 
4. The Agency's role in implementing Security Council resolution 687 had 
confirmed the importance of supporting the safeguards system and giving the 
Agency the means of ensuring that nuclear energy was not misused for nonpeaceful 
purposes. Egypt considered that, in strengthening the safeguards 
regime, the following principles must be adhered to: 
(1) Safeguards should be applied to all equally, uniformly and 
comprehensively and should not be used as a means of 
discrimination between one State and another. 
(2) 
They should not serve as a means of concealing nuclear activities 
in violation of the obligations assumed by States; 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 4 


(3) Safeguards should not be utilized to impede States' right of 
access to nuclear technology and to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
5. Egypt had therefore supported the resolution adopted by the Board of 
Governors condemning Iraq for its violation of its safeguards agreement. 
6. The Egyptian delegation urged the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
to sign its safeguards agreement and to implement it as soon as possible, and 
called upon the Government of South Africa to declare all its nuclear activities, 
to provide information on its installations and to place them under 
safeguards in accordance with the agreement which it had signed with the 
Agency. Morever, it appealed to all States which had not yet acceded to 
the NPT to do so and to conclude a safeguards agreement, and in particular to 
Israel, as a first step, to place its nuclear installations under safeguards 
without delay and thus to demonstrate its good intentions and sincerity about 
establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 
7. It must at last be recognized that the concept of nuclear deterrence 
was untenable and that the resources expended thereon had been wasted, since 
international political criteria did not permit the use of such weapons of 
mass destruction. 
8. Her Government was optimistic about the positive developments in the 
area of arms control and disarmament, which marked historic changes in 
International relations. It welcomed the measures adopted in that 
connection, including the agreement between the Superpowers on the reduction 
of strategic weapons, the recent proposals about arms control and disarmament 
and the steps taken by a number of States to accede to the NPT and to sign 
safeguards agreements with the Agency. Those developments would have a 
positive impact both at the international and the regional level, especially 
in regions of tension and conflict. Egypt was pleased to note the intention 
of France and China to accede to the NPT and the accession to it by South 
Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. 
9. Egypt had been among the first to demand arms control and disarmament 
at the international and regional levels, and in particular in the Middle 
East, because an arms race involving nuclear and other weapons of mass 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 5 


destruction would not only jeopardize peace efforts in the region but also 
threaten peace and security in the region and in the world as a whole. 


10. For more than 15 years Egypt had been advocating positive international 
steps towards arms control and the banning of nuclear weapons in the Middle 
East. In 1974 at the United Nations, it had called for the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region, and its appeal had enjoyed the support 
of the world community for more than a decade. In April 1990 
President Moubarak of Egypt had announced his support for declaring the Middle 
East a region free from weapons of mass destruction of all kinds. His 
initiative had been based on three principles: 
(1) 
Banning of all weapons of mass destruction, with no exceptions, 
including nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, from the 
Middle East; 
(2) Equal and mutual commitment in that regard on the part of all 
States in the region, with no exceptions; 
(3) 
Establishment of verification and inspection procedures and models 
to make sure of compliance by all the States in the region, 
without exception, with their obligations under the total ban. 
11. In connection with the United Nations General Assembly resolution on 
the subject, Egypt had submitted specific proposals to the Secretary-General 
including the following points: 
(1) 
The States in the region which had not done so should accede to 
the NPT and place all their nuclear installations under Agency 
safeguards, concluding with it a full-scope safeguards agreement; 
(2) 
Until those steps were completed, the States in the region should 
submit Individual declarations to the Security Council, supporting 
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East 
and stating that they would not manufacture or acquire nuclear 
weapons or any nuclear explosive devices; 
(3) 
The States in the region should submit to the Secretary-General 
lists of their nuclear facilities and place them under Agency 
safeguards; 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 6 


(4) 
States outside the region exporting nuclear material and equipment 
to States in the region should submit lists thereof to the 
Secretary-General. 
12. In July 1991, during a discussion on the subject, the Egyptian Foreign 
Minister had made the following specific proposals: 
(1) 
The main weapon exporters, especially the Permanent Members of the 
Security Council, should deposit with the Security Council in 
writing statements expressing their clear and unconditional 
support for declaring the Middle East a zone free from weapons of 
mass destruction and indicating that they would do nothing which 
might Impede the realization of that objective; 
(2) 
The States in the Middle East which had not yet done so should 
undertake: (a) not to use nuclear, biological or chemical 
weapons; (b) not to manufacture or acquire any nuclear weapons; 
(c) not to manufacture or acquire any nuclear material that could 
be used for military purposes; (d) to accept international 
inspection of all their nuclear facilities by the IAEA. 
13. The recent events in the Middle East had underlined the importance of 
the Agency's inspection and verification activities. Its work in implementing 
Security Council resolution 687 had demonstrated its capacity to 
assume a wider role in the context of creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
In that connection, Egypt urged the Agency to take appropriate steps with a 
view to the early application of safeguards, bearing in mind the standpoints 
of the States concerned and the conditions prevailing in the Middle East. 
14. She had considered it necessary to comment in detail on safeguards 
because that was a vital issue in the Middle East region. However, Egypt did 
not attach any less importance to the other activities of the IAEA, and hoped 
that an appropriate balance would be established between those activities and 
safeguards. 
15. The Agency's work in the area of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection was an essential part of building confidence in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, and had contributed much since 1986 to overcoming the 
crisis of confidence in the aftermath of the Chernobyl accident. The recent 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 7 


International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power had constituted 


another positive step towards formulation of a strategy for the future which, 


in Egypt's opinion, should include: establishment of international nuclear 
safety standards applicable to the stages of planning, construction and 
operation; apart from safe reactor designs, provision of the necessary means 
of protection of the environment and health and protection against the effects 
of radioactive releases; provision of assistance to developing countries to 
enable them to produce equipment and devices needed to attain accepted 
international safety standards; attention to the issue of radioactive waste 


(on that subject the Agency had done laudable work by preparing a code of 
practice for the transport of waste, which could be elaborated into an 
internationally binding document for waste transport and disposal); and 
lastly, due attention to understanding and participation by the public and 
decision-makers where problems of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were 
concerned. 


16. Egypt considered that the Agency's technical assistance and promotional 
programmes were among its most important activities. They represented the 
other aspect of its role, apart from safeguards. She wished to reiterate her 
country's view that those activities should be assured of optimum financing. 
17. African States' experience with AFRA demonstrated how the Agency could 
assist developing countries. That regional agreement had been in existence 
for two years and the implementation of a number of projects under it had 
started. Egypt wished to express its appreciation of the French Government's 
financial contribution to one of the projects, and appealed to all donor 
countries to assist in the attainment of AFRA's objectives. It hoped that 
the Agency, too, would devote adequate resources to AFRA activities. 
18. The Egyptian delegation attached importance to the exchange of views 
between the Agency and Member States during the planning of its programmes of 
scientific meetings, the purpose of which was to promote development in 
nuclear technology and to give a better idea of what that technology could 
offer. The report which the Secretariat had started preparing on the subject 
would be of great help in that regard. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 8 


19. In conclusion, she hoped that the present session would mark the 
beginning of a new era in international relations and in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
20. Mr. ALKITAL (Iraq) said that the Director General and a number of 
delegates had referred in their statements to what they called Iraq's noncompliance 
with its safeguards agreement with the Agency. All those statements 
had been inspired by known political motives, were unjust, lacked 
objectivity, and totally disregarded the facts. He wished therefore to review 
briefly the sequence of events since the adoption of Security Council 
resolution 687(1991). 
21. First, on 18 April 1991 the Foreign Minister of Iraq had informed the 
Director General that there was no material intended for non-peaceful purposes 
in his country and that all nuclear material there had been under the 
safeguards of, and was thus known to, the Agency. Nevertheless, the Agency 
had asked Iraq to send a fresh list of that material, which Iraq had done 
on 27 April 1991. 
22. Second, the first inspection team, which had arrived in Iraq 
on 14 May 1991, had inspected all nuclear material and the installations 
located at the nuclear research centre and those 10 kilometres away from 
there. In addition, they had inspected another site designated by the United 
Nations Special Commission. The head of the team had reported that the 
presence of nuclear material under Agency safeguards had been verified and 
that there had been no loss or diversion of any part thereof for other uses. 
23. Third, the second team had begun its inspection in Iraq on 22 June 1991 
and had again inspected the Installations at the Tuwaitha site and those 
10 kilometres away, as well as a site designated by the Special Commission. 
That visit had coincided with the Feast of Great Bairam, one of the most 
important Islamic holidays, and some problems had arisen because most of the 
responsible officials had been absent and especially because the team had 
wanted to enter military sites without the prior agreement of the military 
authorities. The matter had been greatly exaggerated in spite of the fact 
that the Foreign Minister of Iraq had personally received the inspection team 
and tried to explain the situation. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 9 


24. Fourth, immediately after the visit of the high-level mission, 
including the Agency's Director General, on 29 June 1991, orders had been 
issued to all Iraqi military and civilian authorities asking them to 
co-operate fully with the inspection teams and to facilitate their entry into 
all sites which they wished to inspect without prior notice. 
25. Fifth, the third team had begun its inspection in Iraq on 7 July 1991 
and had encountered no difficulty in entering all the installations and sites 
it wanted to inspect. An assurance to that effect had been contained in the 
Foreign Minister's letter of 7 July 1991 to the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, which had supplied a full list of all nuclear installations 
and material and indicated progress made in the uranium enrichment programme. 
The latter programme had been in the stage of research and development and had 
not reached that of production, as the Director General had reported to the 
Conference on 16 September. 
26. In its report the third inspection team had noted that it had met with 
full co-operation from the Iraqi authorities, who had provided all the 
information requested and had replied to all queries. He wished to stress 
that the information had been provided by Iraq voluntarily in compliance with 
resolution 687(1991) and had not been uncovered by the inspection teams, as 
had been claimed. 
27. Sixth, starting 27 July 1991, the fourth team had inspected the same 
sites which had been visited by the third team and put the same questions to 
the Iraqi authorities. It had submitted another report containing theories, 
surmises and speculations of a predominantly political character and drawing 
conclusions lacking any scientific or technical basis. In that connection, it 
was worth recalling the fourth team's statement that it had found no 
conclusive evidence as to the existence of weaponization activities. That 
finding totally contradicted what the Director General had said on the subject 
in his statement to the Conference. 
28. Indulging in conjecture was inconsistent with the task assigned to the 
Agency by the Security Council in its resolution 687(1991), which had clearly 
requested the Agency to carry out on-site inspection of installations declared 
by Iraq and those designated by the Special Commission. Instead of speculating, 
the teams should have adhered to the limits set by the Security 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 10 


Council and requested access to any site which they considered necessary to 
enter in order to accomplish the given stage of their work. If inspections 
were to be based on false expectations, the operation would go on for ever. 


29. It must not be forgotten that the inspection activities had been 
carried out under difficult conditions created by the bombing of Iraq by the 
Allied forces, in the course of which more explosives and bombs had been used 
than throughout the Second World War. A large part of that bombing had been 
directed at nuclear installations in Iraq, resulting in the complete 
destruction of the installations, including those under Agency safeguards. 
Those who pretended to defend safeguards were the very people who had acted to 
undermine the foundation of the system and to discredit it. 
30. On the basis of the information which Iraq had provided voluntarily, 
the Director General had convened a special meeting of the Board of Governors 
on 18 July 1991 and reported to it on what he had called non-compliance by 
Iraq with its obligations under the safeguards agreement - because it had 
produced half a kilogram of 4%-enriched uranium. On that occasion, Iraq had 
made the following points: 
(1) The quantity of uranium in question was of no significance and 
should not cause any concern whatever from the practical point of view; 
(2) The uranium enrichment facilities were still incomplete. 
Mr. Zifferero, the Agency's Action Team Leader, had estimated that 
those facilities would have taken at least 18 months to reach the 
production stage. Neither the NPT nor the safeguards agreement 
required Iraq to inform the Agency of the construction of any nuclear 
installation. All that was required under the safeguards agreement was 
to provide design information at least six months - and not 18 months before 
nuclear material was introduced into a new facility; 
(3) In applying safeguards the criteria followed must be the same for 
all States. 
In that connection, he wished to cite two examples showing how 
different and discriminatory criteria had been applied to different 
cases. Security Council resolution 487(1981), which had been adopted 
unanimously and which had called upon Israel to place all its 



GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 11 


installations under safeguards, had been left on the shelf without ever 
being complied with. But the United States or other delegations had 
made no mention of that, whereas they had devoted so much time to 
Iraq. Nor had the Director General in his report referred to Israel, 
although the Conference's agenda contained an item on that country's 
nuclear capabilities. 


In 1985 the Agency had discovered that Luxembourg had exported 41 tons 
of depleted uranium to Israel without notifying the Agency, in clear 
contravention of the safeguards agreement under which Luxembourg had 
been obliged to do so in order that the Agency could apply safeguards 
to that material in Israel, regardless of whether the latter was or was 
not a party to the NPT. He wondered why in that case of clear 
violation no steps had been taken by the Board. Some delegations might 
have been unaware of the incident, since it had not been publicized in 
the same way as the case against Iraq was being spotlighted at 
present. He wondered where all those tons of uranium had gone. Were 
they under Agency control or were they regarded as safe as long as they 
were in Israeli hands? 


(4) Iraq's declaration of the enrichment plant and handing over of half 
a kilogram of low-enriched uranium was a sufficient corrective step, 
and it had asked the Agency to regard it as such. But under political 
pressure with hostile designs against the people of Iraq, the Board had 
adopted a resolution against Iraq, which was now before the Conference. 
31. With reference to the production of three grams of plutonium, he 
considered that the issue should not have been dealt with in the manner in 
which it had been treated at the Board's meeting the preceding week, since the 
relevant information had been contained in the Iraqi Foreign Minister's letter 
of 7 July 1991 to the United Nations Secretary-General and had therefore been 
known before the Board's meeting on 18 July. Iraq's declaration of that 
production had been an expression of its sincere commitment to comply with the 
Board's resolution of 18 July 1991. Why should that be held against Iraq 
rather than being regarded as something in its favour? 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 12 


32. He considered it important that the real intentions behind the 
manoeuvres against Iraq should be exposed. The Director General had reported 
to the Security Council the so-called non-compliance by Iraq with its obligations 
under the safeguards agreement even before the special meeting of the 
Board on 18 July 1991. The resolution adopted by the Board had also been 
transmitted to the Security Council, which had then adopted measures on the 
subject. That being so, he failed to see any need to bring the matter before 
the General Conference again. The Board was the only body competent to deal 
with non-compliance with safeguards obligations, not the General Conference. 
It might be asked why the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia or 
other Western countries were overzealous about passing a new resolution on the 
same topic. There was clearly a political purpose, namely to find excuses in 
the Security Council to put obstacles in the way of any attempts to lift the 
blockade against the people of Iraq. He strongly objected to the Agency being 
used for such inhumane political purposes. That was incompatible with the 
Agency's functions, which were to make atomic energy serve mankind and 
contribute to its prosperity. 
33. Iraq was conscious of its responsibilities as a Member of the Agency 
and therefore could not but feel concerned to see that the organization was 
deviating increasingly from the objectives enshrined in its Statute and that 
it was progressively becoming an agency for armament control rather than one 
seeking to accelerate and enlarge the peaceful uses of atomic energy for the 
benefit of mankind, as had been conceived by President Eisenhower in the Atoms 
for Peace programme of 1953. 
34. The real purpose behind the United States' campaign against Iraq was 
not what President Bush had indicated in his message to the General Conference 
but to safeguard the security of Israel, as General Schwarzkopf had made clear. 
35. Nevertheless, his country persisted in its hope that Member States 
would ensure that the Agency carried out the functions for which it had been 
established - by concentrating on its technical co-operation and nuclear 
safety programmes and thereby strengthening confidence in the role of atomic 
energy in meeting the energy needs of States. 
36. In conclusion, he welcomed the new members of the Agency and in 
particular the sister Republic of Yemen. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 13 


37. Mr. ALP (Turkey) reaffirmed his country's commitment to the 
Agency's Statute and to strengthening the Agency's important role in 
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and in promoting international 
co-operation in the field of peaceful nuclear technologies. The Agency had 
proved that it was one of the most vital international organizations, and 
could adapt itself to rapid technological changes and the requirements of the 
new international environment. 
38. Since the previous session of the General Conference, the world had 
witnessed rapid and dramatic changes in East-West relations, which had 
contributed to the winding down of the arms race in general and to nuclear 
disarmament in particular. However, the war in the Gulf region had posed new 
dangers to peace and stability, and the importance of Agency safeguards had 
once again been highlighted. The Agency, as expected, had risen to the 
occasion and effectively fulfilled its role. 
39. His Government strongly supported the safeguards regime and believed it 
should be implemented in an even more effective and productive manner in the 
coming years. The Department of Safeguards should continue its studies 
concerning possible improvement of the present regime, particularly in view of 
the growing number of facilities subject to safeguards inspection. It was 
also vital that the nuclear supplier States should require full safeguards on 
their new supply arrangements. 
40. Turkey attached great importance to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which 
over a twenty-year period had proved a strong and effective barrier to the 
spread of nuclear weapons. Hoping that those countries with significant 
nuclear facilities which had not yet done so would join the Treaty as soon as 
possible, his Government welcomed the accession of France to the NPT, the 
decision of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to conclude a safeguards 
agreement, and the signing of an agreement by South Africa. It urged the 
other non-nuclear-weapon States which had not yet done so to make a legally 
binding commitment not to acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive 
devices, and to accept Agency safeguards on all their nuclear activities. 
Should any doubt arise about the commitment of any State Party to the NPT, the 
Agency should not hesitate to take all the necessary international action. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 14 


His Government would welcome a study by the Agency of a special inspection 
procedure for such cases, as already proposed by many other States Parties. 


41. With regard to the chronic problem of unjustified non-accreditation of 
safeguards inspectors, he said that that unacceptable practice was continuing 
despite repeated appeals to correct the situation. For example, in view of 
the negative attitude of at least one Member State, Turkish nationals were not 
granted accreditation to the Agency's list of safeguards inspectors for 
non-nuclear-weapon States Members of the European Community. He regretted 
that political decisions, taken by some Member States individually or as a 
block, should thus hamper the Agency's activities. Turkey was left with no 
alternative but to retaliate by refusing accreditation to inspectors from the 
States concerned, as the only available means of drawing attention to such 
discriminatory practices. 
42. The Agency had performed remarkably well in placing increased emphasis 
on nuclear safety matters on the basis of lessons learned from the Chernobyl 
disaster. However, the Agency's role in nuclear safety and radiological 
protection was still limited and it was the responsibility of individual 
Governments to ensure full and strict implementation of the Agency's rules and 
guidelines. 
43. Turkey, like many other States, was deeply concerned about the poor 
condition of some of the older nuclear reactors in its region and welcomed the 
Agency's activities for the assessment and improvement of the safety of 
WWER-type reactors, particularly those at Kozloduy and Bohunice. Although a 
complete shutdown of those reactors would create serious energy crises for 
Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia, an accident could have dire consequences for all 
States. Turkey fully supported international co-operation on the safety 
aspects of nuclear energy, which was a vital component of global energy 
policy. It also welcomed the recent Agency initiatives to implement a 
programme for reviewing the operational safety of other older reactor types. 
44. In view of increasing energy consumption worldwide and the high level 
of public awareness of ecological issues, including the impact of energy 
production on the environment, nuclear energy,had to be considered in the 
context of future policies regarding energy supply and environmental 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 15 


protection. Nuclear power was certainly a potential source of problems, 


including the possible proliferation of nuclear weapons and the danger of 


radioactive wastes, but the contribution of nuclear energy to the general 


energy picture could not be denied. Efforts on energy conservation and 
development of new energy sources thus remained of primary importance. Some 


of the views put forward largely by non-governmental organizations were 
neither ideal solutions nor even arguments for possible solutions. However, 


increasing energy needs and use should not necessarily result in increased 
pollution. The 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development 


offered the most appropriate forum to discuss overall questions relating to 


environmental and energy issues. All efforts should be directed at finding an 
acceptable balance between the need to produce energy and the ensuing 
environmental effects, despite the difficulties involved. 


45. One important aspect of environmental conservation was the need to 
ensure the highest possible degree of coverage for liability for nuclear 
damage, which should include damage to the environment. Further efforts were 
needed to establish a comprehensive and universal regime in that area. 
46. Turkey appreciated the Agency's provision of technical assistance, 
including its activities to minimize the negative impact of nuclear waste. A 
national programme for the management of low- and intermediate-level 
radioactive wastes had been established in Turkey with Agency support to 
handle wastes from various applications throughout the country. In addition, 
Turkey had hosted several regional training courses, research co-ordination 
meetings and Agency workshops on nuclear electronics, industrial radiation 
sterilization, seismic data for the siting and revalidation of nuclear 
facilities, food irradiation and the management of radioactive wastes from 
hospitals and other nuclear applications. His country would continue, to the 
extent of its capabilities, to contribute to the successful implementation of 
the Agency's activities in the years ahead. 
Mr. Loosch (Germany) took the Chair. 


47. Mr. ALER (Sweden), welcoming the Republics of Estonia, Latvia, 
Lithuania and Yemen as new Member States of the Agency, said that, since the 
previous session of the General Conference, world events had moved at an 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 16 


unprecedented pace potentially influencing the Agency's activities in many 
ways. The ideals of democracy, freedom and human rights had been instrumental 


in bringing about those changes, and the United Nations had proved its ability 
to support peace and development. 


48. There had been remarkable and encouraging progress in global efforts to 
prevent the further proliferation of nuclear weapons: the decisions of France 
and China to adhere to the NPT were particularly welcome, in that as a result, 
all declared nuclear-weapon States would soon be parties to the Treaty, the 
cornerstone of the non-proliferation regime. The accession of Mozambique, 
Tanzania, Zambia and South Africa to the NPT was also welcome since it paved 
the way for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. The 
agreement between Argentina and Brazil was another important contribution to 
non-proliferation, and it was to be hoped that the negotiations on 
comprehensive safeguards conducted by those countries with the Agency would 
reach a speedy conclusion. The prestige and authority of the NPT had been 
strengthened by all those developments, and it seemed that regional agreements 
on nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East and elsewhere might prove to 
be the best way of achieving global coverage of the system. In that context, 
he urged States Parties to the NPT to conclude and implement the required 
safeguards agreements with the Agency without delay if they had not yet done 
so. 
49. Verification was the key element in any arms limitation undertaking, 
and the non-proliferation regime was founded on the Agency's safeguards 
system. He was firmly convinced that a legally binding commitment to the 
exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy was a prerequisite for its 
utilization. Complete transparency for all nuclear activities through Agency 
full-scope safeguards was the best way of verifying that commitment. It was 
logical to make all partners in international co-operation and trade subject 
to full-scope safeguards, and he urged all nuclear suppliers to adopt that 
policy, for the nuclear-weapon States had a special responsibility in that 
respect. That policy had in no way hampered his own country's development and 
use of nuclear energy. 
50. Against that background, Iraq's failure to honour its commitments under 
the NPT and the safeguards agreement with the Agency had been a shock. The 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 17 


Board of Governors had condemned Iraq's non-compliance and, as required by the 
Statute, brought it to the attention of the Security Council, the General 
Assembly and the General Conference. The violation of the agreement was 
particularly serious since it did not appear to have been caused by any 
oversight or administrative error but was the result of a deliberate attempt 
to mislead the Agency's inspectors and pursue clandestine activities 
proscribed by the letter and spirit of the NPT. 


51. To maintain the credibility of Agency safeguards, it was imperative to 
re-examine the implementation of the safeguards agreements and national trade 
regulations in that field. A study on that topic had been initiated after the 
previous NPT Review Conference, and the work had received a fresh impetus from 
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 687 and 707. 
52. Although the scope and frequency of the Agency's inspections might need 
to be changed, focusing particularly upon areas where the risks of diversion 
were greatest, and although new materials, equipment and installations should 
perhaps be included in the interests of a more comprehensive picture of the 
nuclear activities of States, the basis of a more rigorous regime must be a 
willingness to allow full transparency for all peaceful nuclear activities by 
all States. The Statute and the existing safeguards agreements entitled the 
Director General and the Board of Governors to undertake close scrutiny if 
needed, and the Agency could also exercise its right of access to the Security 
Council. 
53. His country, like all others he hoped, was prepared to accept stricter 
regulations. The nuclear-weapon States also should agree to submit their 
peaceful nuclear activities to Agency safeguards, with full reporting to the 
IAEA as a first step. 
54. It was inevitable that greater resources would be required for the 
Agency's future safeguards activities. Although every opportunity for 
simplifying and supporting inspections must be sought through technical 
developments and extended collaboration with regional and national safeguards 
regimes, the Agency had a legally binding obligation to discharge its 
safeguards responsibility^. The reliability of the safeguards system must not 
be left in doubt. While the scope and volume of safeguards might change in 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 18 


ways impossible to predict in the long term, the financing of those activities 
had to be secured. Accordingly, it was disappointing to note that the 
negotiations on a new safeguards financing arrangement had not yet come to 


fruition, though he hoped that all Members would approach the remaining tasks 
with an open mind and determination to achieve results. 


55. The recent International Safety Conference in Vienna had covered an 
area of the Agency's activities which was of increasing significance, and its 
conclusions and recommendations had specified many topics for national and 
international action in the coming years. The recommendation by the Board 
that the Director General should prepare an outline of the contents of a 
possible nuclear safety convention, drawing upon the advice of standing groups 
and other expertise from Member States was particularly welcome. 
56. The Nordic countries had drawn attention to the need for additional 
work on the management of all categories of radioactive waste and spent fuel 
from power and research reactors; there seemed to be a requirement for legally 
binding agreements on the governing principles in that area. It was only 
logical for that work to be carried out under the auspices of the Agency and 
for the results to be included in a framework convention on nuclear safety, 
which might also transform the agreed Code of Practice on the International 
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste into a legally binding instrument. 
57. Technical assistance and co-operation were prominent among the Agency's 
activities, and there was an increasing demand for assistance from developing 
Member States, in particular in non-power applications such as medicine, 
radiological protection, agriculture, environmental protection, hydrology and 
industry. The system of financing those activities needed reassessing in view 
of the uncertainty surrounding pledges and payments to the TACF, a 
particularly disturbing development in areas such as nuclear safety, waste 
management and radiation protection. The Agency's work for developing 
countries should preferably be financed from the Regular Budget. His country, 
for its part, had pledged its full share of the target for the TACF in 1992, 
and owing to its high regard for the competence and efficiency of the Agency's 
technical assistance and co-operation activities, his country was making 
extrabudgetary contributions larger even than that share. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 19 


58. The wider co-operation between the Agency and other United Nations 
specialized agencies, in particular FAO, WHO and UNEP, was welcome. In view 
of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) to be 
held in 1992, the whole United Nations system must be mobilized towards work 
on the "Agenda 21" action plan, and the Agency should re-examine its role with 
regard to sustainable development and environmental protection. 
59. Since the financial restraint currently being exercised by most 
countries made it difficult for the Agency to meet the many demands placed 
upon it, he welcomed the agreement to prepare a Medium-Term Plan for the years 
1993-98, which would help to reassess programmes and thus release resources 
for new, high priority tasks. 
60. Mr. 0 CHANG (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) commended the 
Agency on successfully carrying out its mission to promote the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy for world peace and the welfare of mankind in 1990, and 
endorsed the Agency's Annual Report for that year. 
61. In view of his country's economic progress and the attendant rise in 
production, increased energy supplies were urgently required. Power plants 
using various energy sources, including hydropower stations, thermopower 
plants and nuclear power plants were being built during the third seven-year 
plan (1987-1993) to meet a goal of generating 100 billion kilowatt-hours of 
electricity annually. A project was under way for the construction of a 
nuclear power plant with a capacity of 1.76 million kilowatts, and siting 
problems were reaching the final stage of solution. 
62. Great efforts were also being made to introduce nuclear methods into 
industry, agriculture, public health and other areas of the national economy. 
Many factories and enterprises made extensive use of radioactive isotopes in 
the monitoring and control of production processes, the quality control of 
products and in analysis. Locally-made radioactive flaw detectors, 
densimeters and various kinds of radiation instrument had been introduced to 
assist with the management of production processes. In agriculture, various 
tracers were used to study the effectiveness of fertilizers in order to help 
increase grain yields and the growth of plants. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 20 


63. The national public health system's requirements for various 
radioisotopes used in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases were 
increasing. In order to facilitate the domestic production of Isotopes for 
medical use, a cyclotron was currently under construction with technical 
co-operation from the Agency. 
64. Owing to the extensive use of nuclear methods and isotopes in various 
fields of the national economy, close attention to nuclear safety and 
environmental protection was required, including enhancement of the technical 
abilities of personnel dealing with radioctive materials, the training of 
specialists and the revision of the relevant regulations. 
65. Two training courses, the "National Workshop on State Infrastructure 
for Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection" and the "National Training Course 
on Non-Destructive Testing" had been held in Pyongyang, with technical 
assistance from the Agency. Those courses had made a substantial contribution 
towards increasing the use of nuclear methods and Isotopes and hence 
developing the national economy. 
66. The Korean nation, which, together with the Japanese nation, had 
suffered greatly from the nuclear disaster in August 1945, was categorically 
opposed to nuclear weapons. His Government, in view of its noble desire to 
remove the danger of nuclear war from the Korean Peninsula and contribute to 
durable peace and security in his country, in Asia and in the rest of the 
world, had put forward a proposal to turn the Korean Peninsula into a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
67. According to that proposal, the North and South of Korea should make a 
joint declaration on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone on the 
Korean Peninsula. The United States, the Soviet Union and China should then 
legally guarantee the nuclear-weapon-free status of the Peninsula once a 
declaration had been adopted to that effect. The non-nuclear-weapon States in 
Asia should support and respect the nuclear-weapon-free status of the Korean 
Peninsula and assist in achieving that aim at the earliest possible date. 
68. The nuclear weapons deployed in the Republic of Korea posed a serious 
threat to the existence of his own country and constituted a great danger to 
peace and security in Asia and the world. Prompt withdrawal of nuclear 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 21 


weapons from the south of the Korean Peninsula and the early cessation of all 
military exercises, including provocative nuclear military exercises, were 
urgent tasks requiring Immediate attention in order to turn the Peninsula into 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Achievement of that aim would strengthen the 
non-proliferation system and make a substantial contribution to consolidating 
peace and security in Asia and throughout the world. It would also create 
favourable conditions for establishing a broader nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
North East Asia. All peace-loving countries would surely pay close attention 
to that proposal and extend their full support to his people's struggle to 
prevent the danger of nuclear war. 


69. During the general debate, several delegations had raised the issue of 
safeguards and nuclear activities in his country, although it had already on 
many occasions declared that it had no intention of developing nuclear weapons 
and had no capability to do so. His Government had requested the United 
States of America to facilitate conclusion of a safeguards agreement by 
removing the nuclear threat which endangered his country's right to 
survival. That demand was in no way contradictory to the ideas of the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, yet the United States had not so far taken any 
positive action. If the United States sincerely wished to settle the 
safeguards issue with his country, it should first withdraw nuclear weapons 
from South Korea and make a legally binding commitment not to use nuclear 
weapons. His country was willing to hold official intergovernmental 
negotiations with the United States either in Vienna or in Geneva for that 
purpose. Any attempt to exert international pressure on his country, which 
valued its sovereignty and which consistently endeavoured to implement its 
obligations under the NPT, would not be conducive to resolving the safeguards 
issue but, on the contrary, would only cause difficulties. 
70. The South Korean delegate had referred to the safeguards agreement 
issue in his statement. Yet the south Korean authorities, contrary to the 
desire of all Korean people, had invited foreign nuclear weapons into the 
Korean Peninsula, thereby threatening the very survival of the Democratic 
People's Republic. The South Korean authorities had therefore lost the right 
to discuss the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula and should take full 
responsibility for converting the Republic of Korea into a base for a foreign 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 22 


State's nuclear weapons. The only way in which the South Korean authorities 
could contribute to an early solution of the safeguards problem was by 
demanding the withdrawal of the United States nuclear weapons deployed in 
South Korea and joining the North in its efforts to turn the Korean Peninsula 
into a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 


71. In conclusion, his delegation confirmed that the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea would continue to develop its co-operative relations with 
the Agency and would faithfully carry out its obligations. 
72. Mr. LOUHANAPESSY (Indonesia) said that his Government was pleased 
that France and China had declared their intention to adhere to the NPT and 
wished to welcome Yemen, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as new Members of the 
Agency. 
73. While the present dramatic changes in the world might affect the Agency 
in some ways, it ought not to be seriously hindered in fulfilling its 
statutory functions and should endeavour to contribute to creating an 
atmosphere of reconciliation and mutual understanding in regions where 
conflicts and tension still prevailed. 
74. With regard to nuclear applications, Indonesia had in the past placed 
emphasis on areas such as agriculture, health care and industry, which it 
considered of greatest relevance to human needs as well as significant sources 
of revenue. In its plant-breeding projects, for instance, it had been 
successful in improving varieties of rice, soya bean and mung bean. Progress 
had also been achieved in irradiation technology, both on the research side 
and in terms of public acceptance, the latter thanks to an extensive public 
information campaign. A private company was currently engaged on the 
construction of a commercial irradiator for medical sterilization with a view 
to commissioning early in 1992. 
75. Nuclear techniques were also becoming established in hydrology, where 
radiotracers were being used to study sediment movement, in geothermal 
exploration in the search for renewable energy resources and in the 
re-exploitation of abandoned oil wells. In particular, the use of 
radiotracers in harbour dredging had resulted in a saving of millions of 
dollars. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 23 


76. In the field of nuclear medicine and biology, Indonesian institutes 
were making great progress. He was pleased to announce, in that connection, 
that the Fifth Asia and Oceania Congress of Nuclear Medicine and Biology was 
to be held in Indonesia in October 1992. 
77. Having decided that nuclear power was a viable option, Indonesia had 
recently awarded a contract to a Japanese company to conduct a study with a 
view to the construction of the country's first nuclear power plant. The 
necessary personnel would be drawn from the nuclear industrial complex in 
Serpong, where they had gained considerable experience, particularly with 
respect to the safety aspects of plant operation. In that connection, a 
radiometallurgy and engineering safety laboratory had recently been opened at 
the Serpong complex. In addition, the Serpong facilities had been used in a 
number of international and regional training courses and seminars organized 
in co-operation with the Agency. 
78. Indonesia's national energy plan provided for electricity generation 
based on hydropower, coal and nuclear power, with synthetic fuel and 
electricity being used in industry and microhydropower, gas and solar energy 
being used for household purposes. The nuclear programme was based on a plan 
formulated by the National Atomic Energy Agency and covered a 15-year period 
with provision for annual revisions. The Agency's Medium-Term Plan should be 
similarly flexible to allow for shifts of emphasis in the future. 
79. His Government was aware of the great importance of safety, but wished 
to point out the prohibitive costs for many developing countries of 
introducing new safety features on an excessively large scale. In its 
technical assistance endeavours, the Agency was called upon to help such 
countries to strike a balance between the demands of safety and financial 
constraints. 
80. Still on the subject of technical assistance, he was pleased to note 
that the Agency was making unprecedented progress in that area of its 
activities. It was gratifying that Increasing numbers of experts from 
Indonesia had been entrusted to act as consultants in other developing 
countries. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 24 


81. Indonesia had benefited greatly from RCA activities in the past and 
fully supported the new UNDP project proposal concerning the use of isotopes 
and radiation to strengthen technology and support environmentally sustainable 
development. 
82. As a signatory of the NPT, Indonesia supported full-scope safeguards. 
Recent events had demonstrated that efforts to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the safeguards system would be fully justified. However, 
before any new measures were implemented, the rules and procedures governing 
them should be clearly defined. For its part, Indonesia was hoping to 
contribute towards security in its own region through the establishment of a 
"Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality" based chiefly on the concept of a 
nuclear-weapon-free area. It would welcome the establishment of any other 
such zones throughout the world, the Middle East being an area of particular 
relevance in that regard. 
83. Finally, he stressed the need to protect the Agency from political 
pressures and to allow it to draft a more balanced budget based on a widely 
approved Medium-Term Plan. 
84. Mr. KABBAJ (Morocco) wished, first of all, to greet Yemen, 
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as new Members of the Agency. 
85. He pointed out that the world's growing energy needs, compounded by 
successive crises with serious effects on the international petroleum market, 
made nuclear power one of the most efficient and economic alternative sources 
of energy, apart from its being environmentally the least dangerous. The use 
of nuclear energy for power production had been a major technological success 
during the preceding 30 years, with the result that nuclear power now 
accounted for 17% of the world's electricity output. Aware of its potential, 
many developing countries, and in particular those with no fossil fuel 
resources, had undertaken studies on nuclear power projects with a view to 
gradually reducing their oil imports, which impeded their economic 
development. However, the problems of financing and acquiring the necessary 
technology stood in the way of realizing those projects. In that connection, 
Morocco appreciated the Agency's assistance to developing countries in the 
planning and implementation of their nuclear power programmes and commended 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 25 


the efforts of other international agencies to solve the financial 
difficulties. 


86. For the purpose of mitigating the financial and technological problems, 
and to strengthen co-operation between States, Morocco suggested that a study 
should be carried out on joint nuclear power projects shared by neighbouring 
countries. Such projects would be consistent with regional co-operation 
projects which the Agency had been promoting in recent years and which aimed 
at pooling scientific, technical, industrial and financial resources for joint 
endeavour. 
87. The issue of nuclear safety and radiation protection continued to be a 
major preoccupation for both the public and the authorities to the extent that 
further development of nuclear power had become subject to absolute mastery 
over safety and in particular protection from nuclear hazards. Within the 
framework of international co-operation, which was urgently necessary in that 
area, the Agency had a basic role to play in the matter of exchange of 
information, dissemination of knowledge and creation of a climate for exchange 
of experience. In that connection, he welcomed the results of the 
International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power held recently in 
Vienna. 
88. The Kingdom of Morocco attached great importance to and was keenly 
interested in the Agency's activities and recommendations relating to 
standards and regulations for nuclear safety and radiation protection. Those 
activities of the Agency should have absolute priority so that the 
Member States in need could acquire as speedily as possible the necessary 
human, technical and organizational resources. He considered, therefore, that 
the Agency should continue to satisfy the requirements for services under the 
RAPAT programme, in particular by expanding the scope of assistance in the 
area of radiation protection. 
89. Morocco was at present co-operating with the Agency in the 
establishment of a national radiation protection centre, which would be 
concerned with the health protection of workers, safety of the environment and 
training of radiation protection specialists. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 26 


90. His country supported the Agency's efforts in the area of nuclear waste 
management, especially those relating to the establishment of national 
programmes on the subject. Furthermore, the adoption of the Code of Practice 
on the International Transboundary Movement of Nuclear Waste in 1990 had been 
an important step towards the conclusion of an international convention under 
the Agency's aegis. 
91. As for the effects of nuclear accidents on neighbouring countries, 
Morocco considered it very important that bilateral co-operation agreements be 
concluded between such States, particularly those operating nuclear power 
plants, with a view to exchange of information and creation of mechanisms to 
be utilized in the case of a radiological emergency. 
92. At his country's request the Agency had co-operated in evaluating the 
assistance which it had provided during 1980-90. The evaluation had shown 
that the assistance had generated satisfactory effects, which would certainly 
lead to the development of national scientific and technical capabilities and 
infrastructure. That would also help to identify new approaches to the 
improvement of nuclear techniques and areas where co-operation between Morocco 
and the Agency could be expanded. 
93. With regard to Morocco's nuclear power programme, he announced that 
detailed technical and safety studies in connection with the selection of a 
site for the first nuclear power plant were under way. The feasibility and 
techno-economic studies were also continuing. In that context, a nuclear 
power planning advisory team had visited Morocco the preceding year and made a 
comprehensive evaluation of the capabilities and capacities for a nuclear 
power programme. The results of that mission would be very useful for further 
studies and planning in relation to such a programme. At the same time, work 
was in full swing on the establishment of the National Centre for Nuclear 
Energy, Science and Technology, which would have a 1.5 MW TRIGA Mark II 
research reactor. 
94. His Government noted with satisfaction the important role played by the 
Agency's technical assistance in the promotion of nuclear techniques. Without 
that assistance many countries would hardly have achieved what they had done 
in the nuclear field. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 27 


95. Particular mention should be made of multisectoral uses of nuclear 
techniques in the five continents and the promotion of regional projects under 
the Agency's auspices. He considered that, since it had gained substantial 
experience in that field, the African continent also should benefit from 
similar projects which met its requirements. 
96. Morocco attached particular importance to the implementation of two 
regional projects, one of which was on nuclear desalination of sea water in 
North Africa, while the other came under AFRA. He appealed to all 
Member States to provide the necessary support to those projects, which were 
important for the economic and social development of the peoples of the region. 
97. Lastly, his Government welcomed the change in the position of an 
important group of Member States, some of which had announced their accession 
to and others their willingness to sign the NPT. At the same time, he 
deplored Israel's persistent refusal to sign the Treaty, which revealed its 
motives and clearly indicated the real dimensions of the danger facing the 
region as a whole. 
98. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) joined other delegations in 
congratulating Yemen, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania on their admission to the 
Agency. 
99. He observed that the Syrian nuclear programme, which had started 
in 1979 with the establishment of the Atomic Energy Commission, was a modest 
one and had been developed with the co-operation, advice and guidance of the 
Agency. His Government was grateful to the Agency for the equipment and 
materials, experts' services and training facilities which it had provided in 
that connection. Syria was proud of its achievements in establishing a 
technical infrastructure, and he was especially happy to note that the 
Agency's Secretariat was satisfied that his country's programme and activities 
were devoted to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in medicine, agriculture, 
geology, biology and industry. He hoped that the trust between the Agency and 
the Syrian Atomic Energy Commission would continue to develop even though 
Syria had not signed a full-scope safeguards agreement. 
100. His Government was seriously studying the question of signing such an 
agreement, having regard to the developments in the United Nations and in the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 28 


Agency, the new international trends and the conditions prevailing in the 
region, especially the position of Israel, which had thus far refused to be a 
party to the NPT and to sign a full-scope safeguards agreement. In that 
context, it must be borne in mind that Israel had nuclear weapons and was a 
threat to the security of the region. 


101. His country had been a party to the NPT for more than 22 years, thereby 
demonstrating the importance it attached to the Treaty and its sincerity about 
peace and security. It had declared in the past and wished to do so now that 
it would not hesitate for a second before signing a full-scope safeguards 
agreement as soon as such an agreement had been signed by the countries in the 
region and in particular Israel. Syria had also declared to the Agency that 
it was willing to conclude a partial safeguards agreement in respect of every 
nuclear installation requiring such an agreement which might be built in its 
territory. Since at present there was no nuclear installation in Syria that 
required inspection, conclusion of a partial safeguards agreement would 
virtually put it on a par with a State which had signed a full-scope 
agreement. He hoped, therefore, that the Agency would understand that fact 
and that Syrian projects would be supported by the Agency. 
102. The recent war in the Middle East with its international dimensions had 
proven the truth of what had been pointed out repeatedly over the preceding 
years in justifying the inclusion of the item on Israeli nuclear capabilities 
in the agenda of the General Conference. The Member States should approach 
that issue in the same way as they would approach the nuclear capability of 
any other State in the region. The situation in the Middle East was highly 
explosive and would remain so unless a solution was found to the basic 
problems there, including that of weapons of mass destruction - nuclear, 
chemical and biological. For that reason, Syria appealed once again to the 
General Conference to take a positive decision on the matter so as to put 
pressure on Israel to accept safeguards, recalling that application of 
pressure by the United Nations, the IAEA and the international community had 
ultimately been successful in the case of South Africa. 
103. He regretted that, owing to the events in the region, the Director 
General had been unable to conduct further consultations during the year with 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 29 


a view to arriving at a practical approach in connection with the 
implementation of resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/526 and hoped that the year 1992 
would be more propitious for that purpose. 


104. In his opinion, the Secretariat should concentrate on the simplest 
general model, namely that each country in the region should be a party to 
the NPT and conclude a full-scope safeguards agreement, instead of going into 
various theoretical models, as it had done in document GOV/2511, for such an 
exercise would entail loss of time. That was the conclusion reached by a 
United Nations team of experts which had recently studied the matter on the 
spot. 
105. Referring to what was called the New World Order, which was talked 
about so much in the press, he pointed out that Syria, too, was in favour of 
such an order. While mankind rejoiced at the end of the cold war and at 
detente and supported the international efforts to guarantee human rights and 
to put an end to international terrorism, a world order based on those 
principles alone would be weak and would not satisfy the aspirations of the 
world community as a whole. He therefore considered that a new world order 
should be built on three principles: first, guarantee for the right of 
individuals to a life of freedom, democracy and sufficiency; second, 
guarantee for the right of nations to national sovereignty and independence 
and to development; third, guarantee for the right of mankind to a planet 
free of pollution, and of threats of mass destruction. 
106. He observed that talks about human rights had reached exaggerated 
proportions, even though man was a small and transitory being, while nothing 
was being said about a bigger and permanent entity - the nation. History, 
especially very recent history, had shown that the nation as a living being 
demanded recognition of its nationhood and its independence, regardless of 
whether it had been annexed or occupied or whatever. 
107. If the Great Powers guaranteed those three rights, progress would be 
made towards a human community governed by trust, confidence and co-operation, 
away from hegemony and monopoly. For that purpose, it was necessary to find 
radical and just solutions to problems in the hotbeds of world tension. Only 
then would conditions be created for a new human community with a new lasting 
and living world order. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 30 


108. If the situation in the nuclear area was examined in the context of 
that new international order, as some Member States of the Agency wished, it 
was found that the nuclear regime was short-sighted and unbalanced, marred by 
tensions and lack of trust. The safeguards system was a palliative that 
treated the external symptoms but did not cure. If the Agency concentrated on 
that aspect, it was bound sooner or later to become an agency for inspection 
and control. Such a trend would be a historic mistake for the Agency because 
it would be based on distrust, whereas a permanent and living new 
international order needed trust and the building of that trust required other 
basic treatments. 
109. By focusing on safeguards and by relegating other activities to second 
place, the Agency would be putting the cart before the horse because those 
activities had to be carried out first and every State must exercise its right 
to acquire nuclear science and technology on its own and with the assistance 
and support of developing and developed countries as well as the Agency. He 
hoped that safeguards would not become a means of monopolizing nuclear science 
and technology. A community that contained a monopolist was restless and was 
lacking in trust. And it was trust that was lacking at the international, 
regional and local levels. If trust had existed, there would have been no 
need for safeguards, and the small differences which had required discussion 
for more than ten years at sessions of the General Conference, including the 
issue of amendment of Article VI of the Statute and of the staffing of the 
Secretariat, would have been irrelevant. Therefore, he called upon the 
international community to break new ground in co-operation and to help create 
a new living and lasting international order in which trust would be the basic 
criterion and thereby to lift the Agency from the level of formalities and 
trivialities to become a model of international confidence. 
110. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the advanced countries, which 
boasted about democracy, would themselves practise that democracy in relation 
to nations so that every State could enjoy its right to international 
representation and to science, technology, development, sovereignty and 
independence. Only then would everyone enjoy the benefits of a new living and 
lasting international order. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 31 


111. Mr. PAREJA CUCALON (Ecuador) said that the world-changing events 
of the past few years had revealed the Agency's effectiveness and shown its 
outstanding leadership in the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Nuclear non-proliferation was a matter of singular importance and, in that 
regard, he reaffirmed that Ecuador, in keeping with its pacifist policies, had 
acceded to all the relevant international Instruments. He expressed his 
country's great concern to see safeguards universally accepted and all nuclear 
installations used for peaceful and appropriate purposes. 
112. His delegation was gratified by the agreement reached between Argentina 
and Brazil, which meant that Latin America would soon be protected under the 
Tlatelolco Treaty, and free of the threat of nuclear weapons. In the spirit 
of universal application of safeguards and the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
his delegation wished to welcome Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Yemen to 
membership of the Agency. He also stressed the importance of the 
announcements by France and China that, in principle, they intended to accede 
to the NPT, and said that South Africa's ratification of that Treaty with the 
Agency was of great international significance. 
113. He expressed his delegation's approval of the negotiation of a 
safeguards agreement between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the 
Agency and looked forward to it being speedily concluded and brought into 
force. Likewise, he was confident that full compliance with Security Council 
resolution 687 would soon be achieved. 
114. He noted that, while safeguards agreements were very important, the 
Agency should not forget the terms of Article III of its Statute "to encourage 
and assist research on, and development and practical application of, atomic 
energy for peaceful uses throughout the world". Technical assistance was a 
highly significant field which must not be sacrificed to the sole advantage of 
safeguards activities. It had to be said, also, that despite the 
Secretariat's efforts, the numbers of specialists from developing countries on 
the Agency's staff were still low, particularly in the higher grades. 
115. His country placed special emphasis on conservation of the environment, 
the inheritance of future generations. It had the largest area in the region 
given over to national parks, protected woodland and wildlife, amounting 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 32 


to 38% of its national territory. Ecuador was actively collaborating with 


international organizations to set up an environmental control laboratory in 
the Amazon region and was the pioneer in the region of the use of unleaded 
petrol to reduce air pollution. 


116. His delegation believed that, at both regional and subregional level, 
the work of the ARCAL programme was of great importance in ensuring the free 
flow of technology, and his country would continue to offer its most resolute 
support. 
117. Thanks to the importance accorded by his Government to the activities 
of the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission and the assistance provided by the 
Agency, he was able to announce the opening of the Laboratory for Geochemistry 
and Radiochemical Fractionation and Distribution. Techniques had been 
developed, in partnership with centres of higher education, for exploiting 
deposits of uranium in conjunction with vanadium. In areas of research such 
as ecotoxicology, mutations in barley, assistance in nuclear techniques for 
farmers and ranchers, and technology for archaeological and cultural research, 
important successes had been attained. Demand was growing in his country for 
non-destructive testing, such as the programme for determining underwater 
corrosion and quality control in civil engineering. The Atomic Energy 
Commission had begun to participate in the field of isotope hydrology, in 
close collaboration with the competent authorities, to measure leaks, seepage 
and sedimentation in Ecuador's lakes. 
118. In the field of nuclear medicine, a great deal of effort had been 
Invested at a number of public hospitals, bringing the benefits of modern 
diagnostic and therapeutic techniques to the poorer parts of the population. 
At the same time, the radiological protection programme had been improved 
considerably. The Centre for Nuclear Information had much extended the 
application of nuclear techniques in the fields of - inter alia - induced 
mutations and pest control. 
119. The excellent results obtained by the Atomic Energy Commission 
compelled his delegation to express once more its appreciation to the IAEA and 
to friendly States for their generous and extensive collaboration in the 
various activities, all of which were profoundly humane and social in their 
content. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 33 


120. Mr. DALKHSUREN (Mongolia) said that his delegation welcomed the 
Republics of Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and Yemen to membership of the Agency 
and was ready to collaborate with them in all aspects of the Agency's 
activities. 
121. In the year since the previous session of the General Conference, the 
Agency had made remarkable progress in furthering the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy throughout the world and had accomplished much to help Member States 
develop nuclear power and apply nuclear techniques. 
122. The Agency's work in organizing International co-operation on nuclear 
safety, assisting with research into the disposal and treatment of nuclear 
waste, and strengthening radiation safety had won the widespread approval of 
its Member States. The Agency should be thanked for the measures it had taken 
to increase the effectiveness of its technical co-operation projects, to make 
efficient use of the resources allocated to them, and also to evaluate their 
results. Moreover, the combined efforts of Member States and the Secretariat 
had enabled the Agency to play an effective role in implementing safeguards. 
123. It was becoming more widely realized that the use of organic fuels 
produced a latent effect on the climate and the environment. Nuclear energy 
would be essential in lowering pollution levels in the atmosphere and reducing 
the greenhouse effect. 
124. In that regard, the Agency should continue its comparative research 
into the risks and consequences associated with the use of nuclear energy and 
other forms of energy, so that the community would come to a wider recognition 
of the advantages of nuclear power, based on convincing scientific evidence. 
125. For many developing countries, the Agency's programme of assistance in 
the application of nuclear techniques and the development and uses of nuclear 
power was highly significant. The Agency should take account of their needs 
and allocate an appropriate share of its programme and budget to them. 
126. His delegation was pleased to express its support for the Agency's 
mainstream activities related to safeguards, nuclear and radiological safety, 
nuclear power, technical co-operation, the environment and INIS. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 34 


127. Noting the success of the Agency's activities over the previous year, 
as reflected in the Annual Report for 1990, he endorsed the Board's 
recommendations concerning the Agency's programme and budget and the TACF 
for 1992. 
128. His Government had adopted a programme to build a democratic State 
based on the rule of law, the transition to a market economy, and wide-ranging 
co-operation with all countries. Mongolia was finding international 
understanding for its difficult reforms and was counting on the support and 
help of international organizations, including the IAEA. 
129. Mongolia attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities and had benefited from many projects concerned with 
agriculture, geology, medicine, science, education and environmental 
protection. The fact that the Agency's first Mongolian staff member was 
working as an inspector in the Department of Safeguards was an indication of 
the effectiveness of the Agency's technical assistance programme. Further 
examples of successful co-operation with the Agency during the previous year 
had included the organization of a national course on radiation protection and 
nuclear safety, the taking of samples from the Mount Tsambagarav glacier as 
part of an effort to reconstruct climate changes and to assess radioactivity 
levels and fallout in western Mongolia, and other activities involving Agency 
experts for which his country was grateful. 
130. In conclusion, he gave his country's assurance that it would actively 
support and participate in the Agency's activities and fulfil all its 
obligations. 
Mr. Santana Carvalho (Brazil) resumed the Chair. 


131. Mr. GAILI (Sudan) joined previous speakers in expressing pleasure 
at the Republic of Yemen and the three Baltic Republics becoming members of 
the Agency. 
132. He noted that the current detente in international relations was 
conducive to the objectives of the Agency, which were to promote the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy in various areas of development and to contribute to 
preventing nuclear-weapons proliferation by creating the appropriate climate 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 35 


for encouraging, those uses and by strengthening confidence in the safety of 
nuclear technology and its applications. 


133. Sudan was strongly in favour of establishing areas free from nuclear 
and other weapons of mass destruction, and urged that the Middle East and 
Africa be declared as such areas. He therefore commended South Africa's 
accession to the NPT and its conclusion of a safeguards agreement. In that 
connection, he deeply regretted Israel's persistent rejection of Security 
Council resolutions calling upon it to submit all its nuclear installations to 
the Agency's safeguards system. Its refusal to do so and to sign the NPT 
posed a direct challenge to the peace and security of the region and its 
inhabitants. 
134. One of the main functions of the Agency was to promote the transfer of 
nuclear know-how in the areas of medicine, industry, agriculture, etc. from 
the developed to the developing countries, helping thereby to save human 
lives, improve human health, increase food production, reduce pollution and 
raise the quality of industrial products. 
135. That was why he attached great importance to the technical assistance 
provided to the developing countries, which were now aware of the advantages 
of nuclear techniques in controlling agricultural pests, in plant improvement, 
in medicine, hydrology and so on. They had also realized the importance of 
sustained and sustainable development by seeking technically sound substitutes 
for conventional energy sources. For those reasons, the question of the 
Agency's technical assistance to developing countries should receive serious 
consideration by the Conference. 
136. Despite the laudable efforts of the Department of Technical 
Co-operation, the financial resources made available by Member States for that 
Department were not adequate, based as they were on voluntary contributions 
and donations which fell far short of needs. With reference to the Director 
General's statement that the contributions to the TACF for 1991 did not exceed 
US $19 million, against a target of $49 million, he hoped that the General 
Conference would take necessary measures so as to ensure that technical 
assistance was financed out of the Regular Budget or other predictable and 
assured resources, instead of donations and voluntary contributions. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 36 


137. The African regional arrangement AFRA had made a start with projects in 
the areas of medicine, agriculture, livestock improvement, equipment 
production and maintenance, radiation protection, environmental protection, 
water supply and manpower training. However, the fact that technical 
assistance and specifically AFRA projects could not rely on assured funding, 
together with other problems in the region, made it difficult to implement 
those projects. In that connection, he suggested that: (1) AFRA should be 
given greater support from the Agency's budget; (2) The Agency should, in 
co-ordination with the AFRA countries, seek financial support from more 
developed and richer countries for AFRA projects; (3) The AFRA countries, for 
their part, should co-operate in and support those projects to the best of 
their abilities. 
138. Most African countries, including Sudan, depended on livestock as a 
source of food and wealth. His delegation was therefore pleased to note the 
success of the screwworm eradication project in Libya, to which the Director 
General had referred in his statement. That was one of the domains where the 
Agency should continue its activities. 
139. His country set great store by the Agency's activities in the field of 
nuclear safety and on the establishment of basic safety standards and guides 
relating to nuclear power plants, radiation protection of workers and the 
population, environmental protection, radiation sources and fuel handling 
activities. 
140. In the context of safety, he hoped that the issue of disposal of 
radioactive waste on the territory of developing countries would be settled 
within the framework and policies laid down in the Code of Practice on the 
International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, and that the latter 
would lead to a mechanism for regulation of such movements under the Agency's 
supervision. 
141. In conclusion, he emphasized Sudan's increasing interest in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was developing basic regulations and 
programmes for the application of radioisotopes and radiation sources in 
agriculture, medicine and industry. The co-operation between his country and 
the Agency in those activities, especially in hormone radioimmunoassay, had 

GC(XXXV)/OR.338 
page 37 


been fruitful. He also expressed his appreciation of the advisory services 
and technical assistance which the Agency had provided for the development of 
infrastructure and scientific capabilities in the areas of radiation 
protection, environmental monitoring, food, groundwater studies and the 
establishment of electronics workshops. 


The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
22 June 1992 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Original: 
FRENCH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 19 September 1991, at 11.20 a.m. 
President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
Requests for the restoration of voting 
rights 1 9 
General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (resumed from meeting 338) 10 90 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Italy 10 -27 
New Zealand 28 -45 
Israel 46 -59 
Bangladesh 60 -74 
Qatar 75 -85 
Kuwait 86 -90 

10 
Election of Members to the Board 
of Governors 91 - 106 


[*] GC(XXXV)/982. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 


91-4740 
9984e/919e 



GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 2 


ASSET 
EURATOM 


INES 


IPERS 


IRS 
ITER 
NPT 
OSART 
RAPAT 
RCA 


R&D 
START 


Abbreviations used in this record 


Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
European Atomic Energy Community 
International Nuclear Event Scale 
International Peer Review Service 
Incident Reporting System 
International Themonuclear Experimental Reactor 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Research and development 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic 
Offensive Arms 



GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 3 


REQUESTS FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS (GC(XXXV)/INF/304 and 305) 


1. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had received 
requests from Bolivia and Senegal for the restoration of their voting rights. 
The General Committee recommended that the General Conference accept the 
request made by Senegal and reject the request made by Bolivia. 
2. Mr. PONCE CABALLERO (Bolivia) said that he was amazed at the 
General Committee's recommendation. Eighteen countries had fallen behind with 
the payment of their contributions, but only two of those, Senegal and 
Bolivia, had requested the restoration of their voting rights. In 1991, 
Bolivia had repaid US $240 million of foreign debt, which amounted to about 
60% of its total exports, and it currently faced the very difficult problem of 
deciding which creditor to pay first. It had thus been obliged to delay the 
settlement of its financial obligation to the Agency, which was only $50 000, 
the minimum amount payable being $16 000. His delegation had therefore 
requested that those circumstances be taken into account by the General 
Conference, in accordance with the provisions of Article XIX of the Statute. 
Bolivia had always worked towards the continual strengthening of United 
Nations structures to ensure their greater efficiency and enhanced contribution 
to development. The discrimination directed at his country alone was a 
deep injustice which would oblige it to consider other courses of action in 
the future. 
3. Mr. BOBADILLA (Chile) said that he had listened to the 
recommendation concerning Bolivia with deep concern and some dissatisfaction. 
His delegation supported Bolivia's just desire to be able to vote, 
particularly in view of the arguments put forward by that country. His 
delegation therefore opposed the adoption of the recommendation and reserved 
the right to raise the issue at a special meeting of the Latin American and 
Caribbean Group. It hoped that the General Committee would have the necessary 
objectivity and wisdom to appreciate the possible future consequences of such 
a measure. Bearing in mind the fact that the General Conference usually made 
its decisions by consensus, it was impossible to attach much value to a 
consensus which excluded one Member State at the outset. In short, his 
delegation fully supported the Bolivian statement, opposed acceptance of the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 4 


recommendation and intended to present that point of view in the Latin 
American and Caribbean Group. 


4. Mr. CONSTENLA (Costa Rica) said that his country did not accept 
the General Committee's discriminatory recommendation and joined Chile in 
urging that the recommendation be rejected. 
5. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) fully supported the statements made by the 
previous speakers. Discrimination of that kind against a Member State did not 
conform to the Agency's normal practice, particularly as in the present case 
there were political motives for the decision. He hoped that the General 
Conference would reject the General Committee's recommendation. 
6. The PRESIDENT, noting that there was no opposition, proposed that 
the General Conference restore voting rights to both Bolivia and Senegal. 
7. It was so decided. 
8. Mr. BOBADILLA (Chile) welcomed the decision and said that he was 
confident that it would have positive repercussions on the work of the General 
Conference. 
9. Mr. PONCE CABALLERO (Bolivia) said that he was very touched by the 
solidarity shown by the three countries which had openly expressed their 
support for Bolivia and also thanked all countries which had indirectly 
supported his request. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXKV)/953) (resumed from 
meeting 338) 


10. Mr. TALIANI (Italy) expressed his full support for the 
comprehensive statement made by the delegate of the Netherlands on behalf of 
the member States of the European Community and said that he wished merely to 
add a few remarks on a number of issues of particular interest to the Italian 
Government. 
11. The fact that a number of important States had recently acceded to the 
NPT or had announced their intention to do so was a clear sign that the Treaty 
remained valid and was acquiring a more universal scope, thereby strengthening 
the mutual confidence of Member States in their respective nuclear programmes. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 5 


It was clear that other countries which had not yet decided to accede to the 
NPT also supported the objectives of the non-proliferation regime. In that 
connection, his country hoped that the Agency's negotiations with Argentina 
and Brazil would be completed as soon as possible. 


12. On the other hand, Iraq's non-compliance with its obligations under the 
safeguards agreement concluded with the Agency and the provisions of the NPT 
was a cause of great concern. Although Italy welcomed the approval by the 
Board of Governors of the draft safeguards agreement with the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, it was alarmed at the statements made to the Board 
by that State, which clearly showed that it was still placing conditions on 
the entry into force of the agreement. The statement by the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea to the General Conference was even more worrying. 
It should respect its obligations under the NPT and sign, ratify and implement 
the safeguards agreement immediately. 
13. Italy had for some time been advocating a complete review of the 
Agency's safeguards system. Such a revision was even more urgent in the light 
of the Secretariat's actions in Iraq which had been carried out so competently 
and under such difficult conditions. In that context, his country fully 
approved the proposals made by the Netherlands on behalf of the member States 
of the European Community. No time should be lost and urgent measures should 
be adopted by the Board at its February meeting, if not before. A complete 
review of the entire safeguards system as described in documents INFCIRC/153 
and INFCIRC/66/Rev.2 should be undertaken as soon as possible. The effectiveness 
and efficiency of that system should be improved and no effort should be 
spared to rationalize and to streamline the relevant procedures still 
further. Such a review would show that certain additional costs could be 
offset by economies. For example, the increased and more effective use of 
special inspections might allow a reduction in the number of inspection days 
required. 
14. His Government was convinced that the increased use of special 
inspections, the development of new control procedures and instruments, and 
the possibility of using information obtained from other sources, as the 
Director General had rightly pointed out, would certainly strengthen the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 6 


Agency's safeguards system, while achieving some reductions in the overall 
cost of its implementation. 


15. The Agency's activities in the field of nuclear safety were among those 
to which Italy attached the highest priority. It appreciated the important 
role played by the Agency during the past few years in promoting "safety 
culture" and recognized the soundness of the initiatives taken by the 
Secretariat to provide Member States with a range of services to improve the 
safety of nuclear power plants. It was time to take a major step forward 
towards providing the international community with greater assurances about 
the safety of all operating plants. The Agency would therefore be called upon 
to play a monitoring role, in addition to promoting the establishment and 
application of more adequate and uniform safety standards. 
16. The effects of nuclear accidents went far beyond national boundaries 
and their negative consequences were inevitably much more serious than the 
purely material damage caused. His country was firmly convinced that nuclear 
safety was a common objective of all mankind, which could only be achieved 
through the efforts of all States 
17. His country welcomed the results of the recently held International 
Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power and reiterated its view that work 
should begin as soon as possible on the establishment of an international 
safety regime by means of a convention to be concluded within the framework of 
the Agency. Such a convention, which as many Member States as possible should 
sign, would include binding safety objectives and provisions for an 
independent international monitoring mechanism. Furthermore, such an 
international safety regime should include common waste management 
regulations. Italy approved the major findings of that Conference contained 
in chapter III of its proceedings and the recommendations for future action 
agreed upon by the Board the previous week. 
18. In the meantime, the Agency should help to improve the co-ordination of 
nuclear safety activities in different countries. In order to do so, the 
regulatory and control procedures in different countries should be reviewed 
and any shortcomings or areas requiring rationalization should be identified; 
national procedures should be rationalized, streamlined and harmonized and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 7 


shortcomings eliminated, in particular by developing models for national 
safety regulations; Member States should issue periodic statements confirming 
their compliance with the internationally agreed standards; a mechanism for 
continuous quality assessment of national regimes should be established, based 
essentially on the quality assurance programmes and tailored, if possible, to 
the needs of individual States or groups of States; the Agency should be 
empowered to conduct IPERS, OSART, ASSET and RAPAT missions, not only at a 
country's request, as was the case at present, but also at its own discretion, 
on a systematic basis and whenever specific safety-significant situations 
arose; participation in the IRS should be extended to all nuclear operators 
worldwide, who should provide the Agency with all the relevant information on 
safety-significant events as soon as possible so that it could carefully 
assess those events with the assistance of national experts and other 
competent international organizations and disseminate the results of those 
evaluations among nuclear operators; all events of public interest should be 
reported through the INES within 24 hours for immediate communication to all 
participating countries; and finally, regional and sub-regional safety 
approaches should be examined. 


19. The development of a new generation of reactors with higher safety 
levels was a vital aspect of nuclear safety. The national energy plan 
approved by his Government in August 1989 accordingly provided for the 
launching of a research programme on new, safer reactor designs incorporating 
extensive passive/inherent safety features. The main safety objective was to 
limit the environmental impact and off-site radiological consequences of any 
conceivable accident, in order to avoid the need for a specific evacuation 
plan and the occurrence of any significant long-term land contamination. 
20. The national energy plan specifically recommended the linking of 
Italian research to R&D programmes of the next generation of reactors in other 
countries through co-operation on specific projects and topics related to 
nuclear safety and environmental impact. His Government believed that the 
Agency should have a co-ordinating role, as envisaged in the executive summary 
of the Medium-Term Plan examined by the Board the previous week. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 8 


21. The disposal of radioactive waste, particularly of high-level, 
long-lived wastes, was one of the greatest sources of concern among the 
general public and, increasingly, in political circles. That issue might well 
become a very serious obstacle to the further development of nuclear energy. 
Public opposition was not only a potential obstacle to the use of processes 
currently being studied, but was in fact a serious obstacle to the research 
required for their approval. 
22. In that context, his country attached great importance to the studies 
currently being conducted in several countries on the improvement of methods 
of separating actinides and certain long-lived fission products from 
high-level wastes and subsequently transforming them (through transmutation) 
into stable or shorter-lived isotopes. That was obviously a long-term 
strategy which could not yet be considered as an alternative to current 
strategies, although it did offer the attractive prospect of simplifying the 
problems associated with disposal in geological formations. Owing to the 
great complexity and the interdisciplinary nature of the problems involved, a 
considerable effort in both human and economic terms would be needed in order 
to carry out an in-depth study and balanced assessment of the new strategy. 
Extensive international co-operation was therefore essential and the Agency 
had an important role to play in promoting and co-ordinating such co-operation. 
23. Italy was also grateful to the Agency for its sponsorship of thermonuclear 
fusion studies. It fully supported the ITER project developed under 
the auspices of the Agency by the United States, the USSR, Japan and EURATOM, 
and it welcomed the results of the conceptual design phase which had been 
completed the previous year. It hoped that the current negotiations on the 
next phase (engineering design) would soon be completed. 
24. The study undertaken by Italy on the peaceful use of military nuclear 
material should be considered carefully by all States, as the future of 
nuclear warheads was a matter of general concern. That study, called the 
"Edoardo Amaldi Project", had been presented for the first time in the form of 
a working document, by the Italian delegation to the Fourth NPT Review 
Conference. Since then, its technological and industrial implications had 
been analysed by a group of qualified experts from three leading Italian 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 9 


corporations: Ansaldo, ENEA and ENEL. The sponsors of the Amaldi Project 


intended to submit that study in the near future to an international technical 
meeting for examination and evaluation. An information document on the 
subject had been distributed to the General Conference by his delegation. 


25. The problem of the disposal of nuclear warheads and of their use for 
peaceful purposes had acquired new relevance after the signature of the START 
Treaty and the dramatic acceleration of the nuclear disarmament process. A 
recent study published by the United States National Academy of Sciences 
called for further drastic reductions of strategic and tactical nuclear 
weapons and for the total elimination of strategic nuclear forces. The 
Academy had also requested that any future agreement should include procedures 
for the disposal of nuclear warheads. The issue of the conversion of nuclear 
weapons for peaceful purposes might therefore soon appear on the international 
community's agenda. 
26. His delegation wished to reiterate its dissatisfaction that no progress 
had been made on the revision of Article VI of the Statute. Unless a solution 
was found to that problem, which was of interest to so many Member States, 
tensions would inevitably arise which could adversely affect the effectiveness 
of the Agency as a whole. 
27. Finally, his delegation warmly welcomed the four new Member States of 
the Agency, particularly the three Baltic States, and looked forward to 
constructive co-operation with them. 
28. Mr. BROOKS (New Zealand) said that he doubted whether any of the 
participants at the first General Conference in 1957 could have imagined the 
complex set of tasks which were now facing the Agency. Significant new 
developments concerning the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons had taken 
place over the past year, yet the pace of the Agency's other activities had 
been maintained. Discussions about nuclear trade had continued on the fringes 
of the Agency. A major nuclear safety conference had been held to examine 
ways of improving standards of safety, radiation protection and waste 
management. The Agency had continued its technical co-operation activities, 
which Included a wide range of non-power applications. The membership of the 
Agency had increased, and his country welcomed the new Member States. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 10 


29. The Agency's activities had nevertheless been overshadowed by the 
threat of nuclear proliferation. For the first time in its history, the Board 
of Governors had found that a Member State party to the NPT had not complied 
with the safeguards agreement which it had concluded with the Agency. That 
non-compliance on the part of Iraq raised fundamental questions for the Agency 
and the non-proliferation regime as a whole, which needed to be tackled head 
on. Effective mechanisms were required to prevent a repetition of such 
non-compliance. Safeguards agreements served a vital purpose in verifying the 
commitment of Member States to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
30. Fortunately, 1990 had also witnessed positive trends which were helping 
to strengthen the non-proliferation regime and to promote nuclear trade for 
peaceful purposes. His country welcomed the decision of France and China to 
accede to the NPT, which meant that soon all five declared nuclear powers 
would be party to that Treaty. The Treaty would thus have a degree of support 
which it had never previously enjoyed. 
31. It was to be hoped that all nuclear-weapon States and the other main 
nuclear suppliers would in future impose the adoption of an internationally 
binding commitment to non-proliferation and the acceptance of full-scope 
safeguards by the recipient as a prerequisite for nuclear supply. 
32. The non-proliferation regime had also been strengthened by South 
Africa's accession to the NPT in July 1991 and by its prompt signature of a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. His country welcomed those developments 
and the accession to the NPT of Mozambique and then Tanzania and Zambia. The 
growing support in southern Africa for the idea of making that region a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone had been mentioned on several occasions in Agency 
meetings. 
33. His country hoped that other States with significant nuclear industries 
which had not yet signed the NPT would reconsider their position and show 
their firm support for international mechanisms to prevent the acquisition of 
nuclear weapons. It had also followed with interest the progress made by 
Argentina and Brazil in their nuclear co-operation with the Agency, 
particularly in the area of safeguards. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 11 


34. Although at least one NPT safeguards agreement had recently been 
concluded in a short period of time, it was discouraging to note that other 
countries were taking much longer to do so. His country welcomed the recent 
conclusion of an agreement between the Agency and the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, which had been approved by the Board of Governors the 
previous week. It shared the concern of its neighbours at suggestions that 
that State might be operating unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. It looked 
forward to the early signature of the safeguards agreement and to its entry 
into force as soon as possible in order to alleviate those concerns. 
35. His country was pleased to note that several small countries in the 
south-west Pacific without significant nuclear activities (Tuvalu, Kiribati 
and Solomon Islands) had concluded safeguards agreements and had chosen the 
simplified option of bringing them into force immediately upon signature. 
Some countries in other regions which did not have significant nuclear 
activities had not yet concluded safeguards agreements within the framework of 
the NPT. It might be useful for the Agency to draw their attention to the 
simplified procedures which were applicable in such cases. 
36. Those encouraging developments and the strengthening of the Agency's 
vital role in defence of the non-proliferation regime were in stark contrast 
to the conduct of Iraq. In resolution 687, the Security Council had entrusted 
the Agency with the vital mission of investigating Iraq's nuclear activities. 
Since then, a significant amount of information on that country's nuclear 
programmes had come to light. The Agency had worked in conditions which were 
sometimes difficult, but after almost 1000 inspection days, some progress had 
been achieved in determining the thrust and scope of Iraq's nuclear activities. 
37. The information which had emerged so far concerning Iraq's noncompliance 
with its NPT safeguards agreement was a cause for grave concern. 
New Zealand, as a party to the NPT and a founding Member of the Agency, shared 
the view expressed by the Board of Governors. In its resolution adopted on 
18 July 1991 (GOV/2532), the Board had condemned the Iraqi Government's noncompliance 
with that safeguards agreement and had called upon it to remedy 
that non-compliance forthwith. Since then, the Agency had reported a further 
instance of Iraq's non-compliance with that agreement. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 12 


38. Security Council resolution 707, which condemned Iraq, set out the 
international community's position. For its part, the General Conference 
should reinforce that message. Iraq's nuclear activities had had unfortunate 
repercussions on the international safeguards system. A direct blow had been 
dealt to the NPT and to Agency safeguards, which were vital to the 
non-proliferation regime and consequently to international security. Those 
repercussions should be faced with determination, skill, speed and foresight. 
39. The Director General had identified three means of strengthening the 
existing regime. Firstly, Member States would have to provide information to 
the Agency on undeclared facilities. Secondly, the Agency should be able to 
inspect those facilities and, thirdly, the support of the Security Council was 
required. 
40. A number of other proposals had been made for strengthening the 
safeguards system. New Zealand had co-sponsored a draft resolution initiated 
by Australia which requested the Board of Governors and the Director General 
to take appropriate steps as soon as possible. Some of those measures seemed 
to be plain common sense, particularly suggestions made concerning the early 
provision of design information for new facilities to facilitate satisfactory 
planning of safeguards activities. Proposals to improve the reporting of data 
concerning transfers of nuclear material and equipment also merited further 
attention. Other proposals would clearly require further technical study as 
soon as possible. 
41. The proposals which had emerged from the Fourth NPT Review Conference 
in 1990 should also be borne in mind. He congratulated the Director General 
on the establishment of a special working group to consider some of those 
proposals. A good deal of work had been carried out on special inspections, 
which his country regarded as a way of improving the effectiveness of the 
current safeguards system. The provisions for the use of that mechanism 
already existed Implicitly in safeguards agreements. His country hoped that 
agreement would be reached swiftly on the procedures for and use of special 
inspections. 
42. The safeguards system had also been put to the test in other ways. 
Indeed, the constraints imposed by zero real growth continued to affect the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 13 


safeguards budget. The present system of financing was not well designed to 
respond to the increasing demands made on it. Informal consultations on some 
of those fundamental issues had not led to the progress for which his country 
had hoped. 


43. A curious situation had arisen: New Zealand, for example, had no 
significant nuclear activities and yet its contribution was equivalent to that 
of six "shielded" States operating a total of nearly 30 nuclear power plants. 
As the safeguards system played a crucial role in international security, it 
was all the more necessary to ensure that the financing of safeguards was 
based on an equitable system which could be sustained well into the 
twenty-first century. 
44. Strategies for the future had been the underlying theme of the 
International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power which had been held in 
Vienna two weeks previously. The Conference had acknowledged the Agency's 
constructive contribution to nuclear safety, radiation protection and waste 
management, which were areas of interest to all regions of the world. The 
proposal for a framework convention on nuclear safety and radioactive waste 
disposal was interesting and his country looked forward to assessing the views 
of other Member States on the matter. 
45. The Agency had entered a whole new era, dominated by the historic 
agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union on the reduction of 
strategic nuclear weapons. Decisive changes had taken place in Europe. 
However, the fact that one Member State had attacked another and had blatantly 
violated its safeguards agreement, with all the underlying implications for 
its nuclear activities, was disturbing. The system which had been established 
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons had been attacked and it was 
clear that it was impossible to do without that system. 
46. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said that, in view of the formidable 
challenges confronting the nuclear community and the vast potential of nuclear 
applications in many areas of science and technology, it was most desirable 
that the participants at the General Conference should concentrate their 
deliberations on matters arising from the Agency's mission and functions and 
directly related to its mandate. He had himself originally intended to focus 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 14 


on issues connected with the beneficial applications of nuclear energy, 
ionizing radiation and radioactive materials aimed at improving the quality of 
life on Earth. However, in view of the fact that certain political issues had 
been forced upon the General Conference, he would have to deviate from a 
constructive discussion on technical and scientific matters and devote part of 
his statement to them. 


47. Addressing briefly some important aspects of nuclear energy, he 
emphasized that, according to its Statute, a primary objective of the Agency 
was to "accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world". The question was now how to 
proceed in order to achieve that most commendable objective under the current 
circumstances and constraints. He was therefore pleased to note that 
precisely that question was being addressed by the Secretariat and the Board 
of Governors in the formulations of the 1993-98 Medium-Term Plan. 
48. World public opinion was still extremely wary of any substantial growth 
in nuclear applications. Even the educated public and the media seemed to be 
more strongly concerned by the hazards associated with radioactivity than by 
the danger of disease caused by pathogens in food, not to mention the more 
severe, but still little known and rather theoretical, greenhouse effect. 
49. For that reason, although nuclear power was the only technologically 
and economically sound alternative for electricity production which would not 
add to the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, only a modest, if any, increase 
in the number of nuclear power installations was forecast for the next decade. 
50. The Agency should be commended for its tireless efforts to dispel 
public misconceptions and prejudices. The excellent specialized conferences 
on nuclear reactor safety and accident prevention and management, together wth 
the growing list of titles in the authoritative Safety Series and other 
publications, could serve as an appropriate basis for the current campaign to 
increase public acceptance (or public awareness) of the merits of nuclear 
power. More efforts were needed to communicate the often complex technical 
concepts and data in a form that could be understood by the general public. 
51. He also commended the Agency for its organizational and technical skill 
in planning and implementing the International Chernobyl Project and for the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 15 


clear and careful presentation of the results to the world community. The 


report convincingly dispelled many of the myths about exaggerated effects, 
without trying to minimize the overall severity of the disaster and its 


consequences. Nevertheless, the scepticism with which at least part of the 
public and media regarded the report's conclusions was a good example of the 
difficulty confronting the international community. As far as radiation was 


concerned, people would rather cling to their myths and prejudices than be 


confused by facts. 


52. In his statement the previous year he had drawn attention to the role 
nuclear energy could play in helping solve the grave problem of water shortage 
in arid areas of the world, such as the Middle East. He reiterated his view 
that small power units of about 100 to 150 MW(e), considered very attractive 
in terms of their nuclear safety, were eminently suitable energy sources for 
3


desalination plants with a capacity of about 500 000 m per day. He also 


repeated his offer to make available to the Agency the know-how and expertise 


accumulated by Israel in advanced water desalination technologies. It should 
be remembered that the provision of adequate water supplies was a necessary 


condition for preserving peace and ensuring reasonable living standards in 
many parts of the world. 


53. He believed that another important task should be entrusted to the 
Agency. The environmental and ecological effects of natural and man-made 
catastrophes often transcended the borders of their countries of origin, with 
examples ranging from large volcanic eruptions to the deliberate burning of 
oil wells in Kuwait. To mitigate the consequences of such events there was a 
need for an international network of experts in the atmospheric dispersal of 
pollutants, which could be easily mobilized and which had adequate means of 
communication and precalibrated computer programs to perform risk analysis and 
to evaluate the results. Of all the international organizations, the Agency 
seemed the most suitable to set up and maintain such a network. He therefore 
proposed that steps be taken towards the implementation of a co-ordinated 
programme along those lines. 
54. Cutting short his general comments in order to address some of the 
issues on the agenda, he recalled that in his statement at the previous 
General Conference he had referred to the alarming information that Iraq was 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 16 


pursuing activities aimed at acquiring a nuclear weapon capability, in breach 
of its obligations under the NPT. The delegate of Iraq had replied that he 
did not wish to dwell on the wholly senseless and groundless statement made by 
the delegate of Israel about the Iraqi nuclear programme, which was devoted to 
peaceful purposes and under Agency safeguards (document GC(XXXIV)/OR.327 of 
26 April 1991). 


55. After the Gulf War it had become clear that the Iraqi Government had 
taken steps to develop its nuclear weapon potential and that it had been a 
mistake to disregard Israel's warnings. The Iraqi case demonstrated the grave 
consequences which resulted when a government decided to spurn its international 
obligations. In June 1991, the Board of Governors had declared that 
Iraq had violated its safeguards agreement with the Agency by not submitting 
nuclear material and nuclear installations to Agency inspection. In 
July 1991, the Board had condemned it for concealing its nuclear programme and 
had expressed great concern about the evident deception and obstruction of 
Agency inspectors in their efforts to carry out their tasks. In September 
1991, it had concluded that there was evidence of further non-compliance by 
Iraq with its obligations. 


56. The Iraqi case posed a new and unprecedented challenge to the Agency. 
He believed that all the delegates to the General Conference shared his 
appreciation of the manner in which the Agency, under the leadership of the 
Director General, had risen to meet that challenge and had stayed true to its 
mission under difficult and unusual circumstances. 
57. It was now widely established that as far as threats were concerned, 
the real and immediate threat was Iraq. The Iraqi case, particularly Iraq's 
non-compliance with its Agency safeguards agreement, had once again vindicated 
Israel's long-held view that in the volatile region of the Middle East, mere 
acceptance of full-scope safeguards was not a sufficient barrier to nonproliferation 
if a country decided to renege on its commitments. The concept 
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone as proposed by Israel for the past decade was 
based on the primacy of regional initiatives, direct negotiations among the 
States and verification by mutual inspections. Had Israel's concept 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 17 


of a nuclear-weapon-free zone and its modalities been implemented at the right 
time, the Iraqi nuclear threat could probably have been prevented and a Middle 
East war averted. 


58. Intense negotiations were now under way to strengthen peace in the 
Middle East. The General Conference should refrain from upsetting the 
delicate fabric of agreements which were being negotiated by initiating or 
adopting resolutions which might jeopardize the peace process. The events of 
the preceding year should make Member States reflect on the extent to which 
the confidence which the Agency was supposed to confer not only in the Middle 
East, but everywhere, had been impaired. 
59. It was, therefore, more important than ever to make additional efforts 
to maintain the Agency's legality, integrity and credibility. The future of 
the Agency as a technical organization entrusted with a special mission in the 
nuclear field was at stake. Involving the Agency in extraneous political 
debate would not help to solve the problems it was facing. The Israeli 
delegation therefore asked other delegations to bear those thoughts in mind. 
The formidable challenges facing the Agency demanded that the international 
community exercise foresight and responsibility. 
60. Mr. MANNAN (Bangladesh), after welcoming Yemen, Latvia, Lithuania 
and Estonia, which had recently become Members of the Agency, noted with 
satisfaction that France had decided to accede to the NPT and that China had 
announced its intention to do so. On the other hand, he was dismayed at the 
fact that one of the signatories of the NPT had violated its obligations under 
that Treaty and under the corresponding safeguards agreement. There was 
therefore an urgent need to strengthen safeguards to prevent a recurrence of 
such a situation. 
61. The preceding year, which had marked Bangladesh's transition to 
democracy, had been a very significant one in the history of that country, 
now in the process of restructuring in all development sectors, which would 
lead to more prominence for the private sector in the years to come. 
Scientific and technical objectives would be revised according to the needs of 
different sectors of the national economy. Bangladesh was firmly committed to 
the use of nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposes. The new democratic 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 18 


Government reaffirmed that policy and hoped sincerely that the nuclear threat 
would be eliminated. 


62. For economic and other reasons, it was rather difficult for developing 
countries to use science and technology effectively in their development 
efforts. Developing countries had to continue to import technology and that 
was a handicap for them. In spite of all those difficulties, Bangladesh had, 
over the years, been able to achieve considerable success in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and his country was extemely grateful to the 
Agency for the valuable support and assistance which it had provided in that 
area. 
63. Applied and basic research in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were 
an important part of Bangladesh's overall programme. Programmes in various 
disciplines had been drawn up taking account of national priorities and 
economic constraints. The priority areas of the R&D programmes involving 
nuclear techniques included agricultural production, food preservation, 
sterilization of medical supplies and equipment, medical care and health 
services, quality control and quality assurance, instrumentation and control 
systems, electronics, radiation protection and environmental monitoring. In 
all those areas it had been possible, with varying degrees of success, to put 
the results of research in practice. 
64. The Atomic Energy Commission, in conjunction with a local private 
enterprise and with the Agency's technical and financial assistance, was 
constructing a gamma irradiator for the preservation of food and the 
sterilization of medical products. The irradiator would be operational by the 
end of 1991 and would provide irradiation services on a semi-commercial 
scale. The experience gained on that project would enable the private sector 
to consider the construction of other similar commercial plants in the future. 
Bangladesh was also using nuclear techniques to develop high-yielding, earlymaturing 
and disease-resistant crop varieties. 
65. The application of nuclear and other modern techniques in the diagnosis 
and treatment of diseases, together with other related research in Bangladesh, 
had given encouraging results. Ten nuclear medical centres in Bangladesh were 
already providing such services and more centres were planned in order to 
serve a wider cross-section of the population. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 19 


66. Nuclear methods were being used successfully in conducting various 
types of non-destructive testing. Related services were also being provided 
to different industries and to other production-related sectors. There were 
plans to use the research reactor to provide neutron radiography services in 
the future. In addition, technical personnel from the private sector were 
being trained in the safe use of such techniques. 
67. Nuclear and other techniques were being used in environmental pollution 
studies for elemental analysis to determine the presence of unacceptable 
pollutants. Imported foodstuffs and consumables were also being tested to 
determine their acceptability for consumption from the radiation point of 
view. A number of radioisotopes for medical and other uses were being 
produced at the Savar research reactor. Production was expected to increase 
after the completion of the isotope production laboratory and installation of 
99 m


the Tc generator line, which would substantially reduce dependence on 
imported isotopes. 


68. Other research and development programmes were concerned with 
computational work, including the implementation of various codes in a 
mainframe computer, activation analysis, various experiments with neutrons, 
radiation-induced vulcanization of natural rubber latex, pest control, tissue 
grafting and certain fields of biotechnology. A secondary standard dosimetry 
laboratory had been established with the Agency's assistance to facilitate 
calibration of radiation detectors. 
69. Bangladesh's development programmes should focus on the ecosystem and 
the necessary capability and expertise to understand that ecosystem should be 
acquired so as to benefit from it and mitigate the human suffering caused by 
the natural calamities which befell the country almost every year. It was 
also important to study the effects of global environmental phenomena on the 
local environment. It was feared that the unprecedented flooding which had 
hit Bangladesh at the beginning of 1991 might have been caused by global 
warming due to the greenhouse effect. He hoped that a way of dealing with 
such calamities could be found through international co-operation and he 
called upon the Agency to take the lead in that area, especially since nuclear 
power was identified as an effective way of reducing greenhouse gases in the 
environment. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 20 


70. Deltaic formations featured prominently in the topography of Bangladesh 
and rivers played an essential role in the country's economy. As such, 
relevant aspects of deltaic formations should be studied properly. Bangladesh 
hoped to use nuclear techniques in the future for such research, which would 
include studies of the movement and quantification of surface and ground 
waters and the siltation of harbours and other navigational routes. 
Bangladesh hoped to receive international co-operation for that research. 
71. Bangladesh's primary energy resources were not adequate to meet the 
increasing demand for energy, especially for electricity. Nuclear power was 
regarded as an option that would bridge the ever-increasing gap between 
electricity demand and supply. The need for nuclear power had become more 
acute in view of the environmental degradation caused by fossil fuel power 
plants. However, Bangladesh had not been able to solve the problem of how to 
finance nuclear power plants and there had been no change in the international 
situation in that respect. His delegation appealed again to the Agency to 
exercise its good offices in finding a solution to that problem in order to 
arrange adequate funding for small and medium power reactors in developing 
countries. At the same time, he hoped that it would be possible to 
standardize the design of future reactors in order to make them safer, more 
reliable and more economically competitive. 
72. Bangladesh benefited immensely from the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, without which it would not have been possible to build up its 
technical manpower or to establish various experimental facilities for its 
research and development programmes on the peaceful use of atomic energy. 
The RCA had played an important role in that context, as it offered an 
opportunity to tackle problems common to countries in Asia and the Pacific 
region and to exchange experience among research workers of those countries. 
He sincerely hoped that the different activities carried out under the RCA 
would be strengthened further in the future. 
73. In some areas of nuclear energy application, Bangladesh had attained a 
respectable level of technical competence and was willing to share its 
experience with others. It had recently started receiving trainees through 
the Agency or through bilateral arrangements with other countries. It was 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 21 


also participating in regional co-operation programmes and had taken the 
initiative of organizing international and regional workshops and training 
programmes. It was hoped that those activities would increase in the future. 


74. In conclusion, he thanked the Agency for its continued assistance to 
Bangladesh and urged that it increase the resources allocated to technical 
co-operation activities in order to enhance the transfer of peaceful nuclear 
technology to developing countries. 
75. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) congratulated Yemen, Lithuania, Latvia and 
Estonia on becoming Members of the Agency. He hoped that they would 
contribute effectively to realizing the peaceful aims for which the 
organization had been set up and take part in promoting the adoption of fair 
measures to ensure international peace and security. Furthermore, he 
congratulated the Director General on the Annual Report for 1990 and commended 
the efforts which had been made to improve the Agency's efficiency and to 
carry out its extensive tasks related, on the one hand, to its mission of 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and, on the other hand, to its 
mission of verifying the application of safeguards pursuant to the NPI. 
76. During the previous year, the Middle East had been the scene of grave 
events which had alerted the international community to the vital importance 
of that part of the world and the need to ensure peace and stability there; 
they had also highlighted the major role which the Agency played in monitoring 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in inspecting nuclear facilities 
placed under safeguards. The Agency had played, and continued to play, an 
important role in the Middle East, where it supervised the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and offered countries in the region technical assistance and 
expert services in various fields. During and after the events in the Gulf 
region, the Agency had also been playing an important role in the implementation 
of Security Council resolution 687. 
77. Noting that the latter resolution stressed the need to work towards the 
establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle 
East, he pointed out that that objective could only be achieved by implementing 
all the resolutions of the United Nations and other international bodies 
which condemned the nuclear arms race in the region and called upon all 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 22 


countries in the region, without exception, to place their nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. 


78. Qatar was gravely concerned at the permanent threat caused by Israel's 
growing military capabilities. The Israeli Government, which was responsible 
for starting the arms race in the region, was still developing its arsenal of 
weapons of mass destruction and obstructing the search for a global, just 
settlement, despite the international community's sincere attempts to hold an 
international Middle East peace conference. It was thereby jeopardizing all 
the peace efforts. 
79. Israel's persistent refusal to implement the resolutions of international 
organizations calling on it to accede to the NPT and submit its 
nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards and inspections was extremely 
dangerous and constituted an open challenge to the international community, 
which was trying to find a peaceful and fair solution to the problems in the 
region. 
80. His delegation was pleased that the five permanent members of the 
Security Council had reached an agreement concerning the elimination of 
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and the establishment of a zone 
free from such weapons in the region. It also welcomed enthusiastically the 
call by the major powers for all the nuclear activities of countries in the 
region to be placed under Agency safeguards. That call applied principally to 
Israel. Indeed, any form of disarmament in the region which did not include 
Israel would be incomplete and would only perpetuate the threat of war and 
aggression. 
81. Furthermore, he welcomed the statement which had been made at the end 
of the summit meeting of the seven major industrialized countries. That 
statement had called for a reinforcement of the role which the United Nations 
and related organizations played in the maintenance of international peace, 
control of arms exports, and the prohibition of the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction. 
82. Qatar was convinced of the importance of the nuclear non-proliferation 
regime and thought that States, particularly those in the Middle East, should 
accede to the NPT. He therefore urged Member States of the Agency to give 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 23 


their full support to the Director General so that he could take all the 
necessary measures to intensify consultations with countries in the region, 
especially those with nuclear activities, with a view to achieving global 
application of the safeguards system, without waiting for a political solution 
to the problems of those countries. Indeed, comprehensive application of the 
safeguards system should help to instil confidence in the parties to the 
conflict and pave the way towards a peaceful, lasting and fair solution. 


83. The Agency's Annual Report for 1990 showed that particular emphasis had 
been given to radioactive waste management activities, which were important to 
the industrialized countries. His delegation felt that the Agency should 
allocate more budgetary resources to the financing of programmes on nuclear 
applications, which contributed to the development and improvement of the 
standard of living of countries in the Third World. The implementation of 
plans to produce potable water economically, in particular through the 
desalination of sea water using nuclear techniques, would be extremely 
beneficial not only to arid regions where there was a lack of potable water, 
but also in all other parts of the world affected by pollution and climatic 
changes. 
84. He welcomed the efforts which had been made by the Department of 
Technical Co-operation and noted with satisfaction that the programme 
implementation rate had increased by comparison with the previous year. He 
hoped that that trend would be maintained and stressed the need to improve 
performance where appropriate, to reduce administrative expenses, to improve 
the Agency's efficiency and to make the best possible use of resources and 
capabilities in the field of technical co-operation in order to respond to the 
needs and aspirations of Member States, particularly those of the developing 
countries. 
85. For the Agency to be able to accomplish the noble mission for which it 
had been set up, all Member States had to co-operate on good terms and have 
confidence in the advent of a world of peace and justice. For its part, Qatar 
would continue to support the Agency's activities and wished the General 
Conference every success in its work. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 24 


86. Mr. AL-AWADHI (Kuwait) congratulated Yemen, Lithuania, Estonia and 
Latvia on becoming Members of the Agency and wished them every success. One 
year previously, his delegation had informed the world from the same rostrum 
of the seriousness and scale of the Iraqi aggression against Kuwait. Kuwait, 
which was now liberated from the yoke of occupation, thanked the fraternal and 
friendly countries which had stood by it in time of adversity. His country 
set great store by the Agency's activities and was committed to co-operating 
more closely with it in order to expand the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Indeed, it was common knowledge that Kuwait made major financial contributions 
to technical projects which were being implemented with the Agency's 
collaboration in friendly and fraternal countries and that it co-operated with 
the Agency in the field of nuclear medicine. Thus, before the Iraqi 
occupation, the nuclear medicine centre of Kuwait had welcomed several Agency 
fellowship holders. 
87. Iraq's non-compliance with its safeguards obligations and the 
persistent efforts of the Baghdad regime to acquire nuclear weapons 
constituted a serious threat to international peace and security. Iraq's 
repeated attempts to conceal information from the international inspection 
teams were overwhelming proof that the Iraqi regime was not complying fully 
with the Security Council resolutions which called upon it to declare 
immediately and in full all its nuclear activities and to place its activities 
under Agency safeguards. Member States might be amazed at the devious 
behaviour of one of their number, but Kuwait had been the victim of Iraqi 
aggression and was well acquainted with the circuitous patterns of the Baghdad 
Government, whose catalogue of ruses and stratagems was constantly on the 
increase. Not content with infringing international law, Iraq was compounding 
its frontier violations and refusing to liberate Kuwaiti prisoners. The 
Kuwaiti delegation therefore urged the Agency to oppose firmly and 
determinedly any violation of which Iraq or another Member State might be 
guilty and to ensure that they complied with international law in the 
interests of building a civilized world founded on respect and trust. 
88. The Kuwaiti delegation was also deeply concerned at Israel's refusal to 
submit its nuclear facilities to full-scope Agency safeguards, thereby posing 
a serious threat to the Middle East. Since the strengthening of peace and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 25 


security in the Middle East would contribute greatly to international peace 
and security, his delegation lent its full support to the initiatives aimed at 
making that region a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction. 


89. Pollution caused by increases in gas emissions was a serious problem 
throughout the world. As everyone was aware, the barbarous destruction by 
Iraq of Kuwaiti oil wells had inflicted considerable losses on Kuwait. Those 
acts of destruction constituted an ecological catastrophe for the country and 
also posed an extremely serious threat to the whole planet. The Kuwaiti 
delegation therefore fully supported all initiatives aimed at protecting the 
environment and urged that the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy be accompanied by all the necessary safety measures, since releases of 
radioactivity constituted a threat not only to countries which had nuclear 
activities. 
90. The Kuwaiti delegation attached great importance to the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute, since it felt that the "Africa" and 
"Middle East and South Asia" regions were not fairly represented on the Board 
of Governors. It was time to remedy that lack of balance and Member States 
should therefore focus their attention on that issue which had been under 
discussion for 14 years. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXV)/985) 


91. The PRESIDENT recalled that, in 1989, the General Conference had 
approved a procedure whereby, when there was agreement regarding the candidate 
or candidates from a particular area, no secret ballot would be held; 
balloting would only take place for regions where no candidate had been agreed 
upon. As the previous year had shown, when the elections were conducted 
without a vote, much time was saved. Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference, which provided that elections to the Board should be by 
secret ballot, would be suspended for regions for which no secret ballot was 
to be held. 
92. Under Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure, the presiding officer had to 
indicate to the General Conference those elective places on the Board which 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 26 


had to be filled. He drew delegates' attention to document GC(XXXV)/985 in 
that connection. Paragraph 2 of that document indicated for each geographical 
area the number of Member States which had to be elected so as to ensure that 
the Board would be constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the 
Statute. Paragraph 3 listed the 24 Member States which had been designated by 
the Board of Governors in June for membership of the Board in accordance with 
Article VI.A.1 of the Statute or which had been elected by the General 
Conference in 1990 in accordance with Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and which 
would therefore be serving on the Board during 1991-92. In order to 
facilitate the election, delegates had been provided with an informal note 
showing the results of the consultations among the eight geographical area 
groups regarding their candidates for the vacant seats. Delegates would see 
that agreement had been reached among the members of the following regions: 
Latin America, Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Middle East and South Asia, and 
Far East. No agreement had been reached on the two seats for Africa and the 
so-called "floating" seat and secret ballots would have to be held. 


93. Inviting the General Conference to proceed with the elections along the 
lines which he had indicated, he said that, if there were no objections, he 
would take it that the General Conference wished to elect Ecuador and Mexico 
to the two seats for Latin America. 
94. Ecuador and Mexico were duly elected. 
95. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect Greece and Norway to the 
two seats for Western Europe. 
96. Greece and Norway were duly elected. 
97. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect Bulgaria and Romania to 
the two seats for Eastern Europe. 
98. Bulgaria and Romania were duly elected. 
99. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect Pakistan to the seat for 
the Middle East and South Asia. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.339 
page 27 


100. Pakistan was duly elected. 
101. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect the Republic of Korea to 
the seat for the Far East. 
102. The Republic of Korea was duly elected. 
103. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to proceed with a 
vote by secret ballot for the two seats to be filled by Africa and the 
so-called "floating" seat, which was to be filled on the present occasion by 
the Far East. 
104. A secret ballot was held to fill the two seats for Africa and the 
"floating" seat. 
105. At the suggestion of the President, a member of the Australian 
delegation and a member of the Brazilian delegation were appointed as tellers. 
106. The PRESIDENT, noting that the counting of the votes would take 
some time, suggested that the meeting be adjourned. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
14 November 1991 
International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Thursday, 19 September 1991, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 
later: Mr. AMMAR (Tunisia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


a&enda* 
10 Election of Members to the Board of 
Governors (continued) 
General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (resumed from meeting 339) 6 54 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Lebanon 
Denmark 
Colombia 
Zambia 
United Republic of Tanzania 
6 20 
28 
37 
47 
19 
27 
36 
46 
54 

[*] GC(XXXV)/982. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 


91-4746 
9014e/853e 



GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 2 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


a&enda* 


Report on the Special Scientific 
Programme 55 - 67 


General debate and annual report 
for 1990 (resumed) 68 - 156 


Statements by the delegates of 


Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 68 - 75 
Cuba 76 - 92 
Austria 93 - 98 
Ghana 99 - 108 
Jordan 109 - 126 
Kenya 127 - 133 
Namibia 134 
Peru 135 - 141 
Luxembourg 142 - 146 
Cameroon 147 - 156 


Reply by the delegate of Iraq to the 
statements made by the delegates of 
Kuwait, Israel and Luxembourg 157 - 159 


Reply by the delegate of Kuwait to the 
statement made by the delegate of Iraq 160 - 161 



GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 3 


AFRA 


ASSET 
CEC 
INSAG 
IPEN 
IFF 
LWR 
MESA 
NPT 
BUSS 
OPANAL 


OSART 
RAPAT 
RBMK 
TACF 
WAMAP 
WANO 
WWER 


Abbreviations used in this record 


African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Commission of the European Communities 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group 
Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute 
Indicative Planning Figures 
Light-water reactor 
Middle East and South Asia 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Nuclear Safety Standards 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Waste Management Advisory Programme 
World Association of Nuclear Operators 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor (Soviet Union) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 4 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXV)/956) (continued) 


1. The PRESIDENT Informed the General Conference of the results of 
the voting. 
2. The result of the election of two members from the area of Africa was 
as follows: 
Abstentions: 8 
Valid votes: 156 
Required majority: 40 
Votes obtained: 


Algeria 69 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 28 
Zaire 59 


3. Having obtained the required majority, Algeria and Zaire were elected 
to the Board. 
4. The result of the election of one member from the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific or of the Far East 
(the so-called "floating seat") was as follows: 
Abstentions: 1 
Valid votes: 81 
Required majority: 41 
Votes obtained: 


Philippines 37 


Viet Nam 44 


5. Having obtained the required majority, Viet Nam was elected to the 
Board. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) (resumed from 


meeting 339) 


6. Mr. SALLOUKH (Lebanon), welcoming Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and 
Yemen as new Members of the Agency, observed that the increase in the Agency's 
membership demonstrated the value attached by the international community to 
its activities. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 5 


7. The growth in world population raised the demand for food, consumer 
goods and medical care and hence the need for energy. Nuclear energy had been 
found to be the best and most competitive source of energy, thanks in 
particular to the work of the Agency in the areas of implementation of safety 
procedures, control of production and use of nuclear material and management 
of nuclear waste. Everyone agreed that it was the duty of every State to 
apply internationally accepted safety standards to all stages of use of 
nuclear energy, as that guaranteed the safety of its population and 
territory. Moreover, an advanced stage had been reached in studies on the 
formulation of common principles through a review of the conventions on 
nuclear damage with a view to defining concepts, geographic scope of liability 
and areas of application. That trend was reflected in the recommendations of 
various Agency meetings on nuclear safety standards calling for embodiment of 
those standards in national legislation and for steps towards conclusion of 
appropriate international agreements in the light of the Agency's expertise 
and experience. 
8. He suggested that the Agency should have the authority to carry out 
safety inspections of nuclear facilities, just as it was authorized to perform 
inspections to verify the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. That 
objective was supported by all States since nuclear damage knew no boundaries 
and many States had been affected by nuclear waste. 
9. The Agency could play an important role in formulating principles of 
transfer of nuclear technology, which contributed vitally to human activities 
like agriculture, industry, medicine, animal production, etc. and which was 
therefore urgently needed in the developing countries. 
10. Acute shortage of water, including drinking water, was hindering growth 
and progress in many countries, especially those in the Middle East and in the 
southern Mediterranean area. The Agency should urgently help in finding more 
advanced and less costly methods of water exploration than the conventional 
ones used at present and thus perhaps contribute to maintaining peace, which 
was often broken because of the need for drinking or irrigation water. 
11. The Middle East was one of the world's most troubled and threatened 
regions, where people were living in the hope of justice and durable peace. 
Stability was an essential element of the promised international order, the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 6 


outlines of which was emerging. In that context, establishment of peace 
required that Israel's nuclear facilities be placed under Agency safeguards, 
and the IAEA was highly qualified to fulfil its role in that area. 


12. Many countries in the Middle East, including Lebanon, were convinced of 
the need to declare the region free from weapons of mass destruction and 
especially nuclear weapons. He emphasized therefore that the Director General 
should continue his consultations with a view to implementing the General 
Conference resolutions relating to the nuclear capacity of all countries in 
the region and to tightening and widening the scope of application of 
safeguards. The latter's proposals on the subject formed an appropriate 
basis, and Lebanon and other States were willing to co-operate in the 
application of safeguards in the Middle East in order to pave the way for 
establishing a just and comprehensive peace and for the prosperity and 
development of States in the region, to which endeavour the Agency could make 
an effective contribution. It might not be so difficult to make the Middle 
East weapon-free if the parties concerned and the influential World Powers 
sincerely desired peace. 
13. Referring to the matter of amendment of Article VI of the Statute, he 
pointed out that, although the current consultations had yielded no tangible 
results, they indicated that the political changes in the world, and 
developments in the nuclear field in every region and within every State were 
urging in that direction. Lebanon was concerned at the slow progress of those 
consultations because it was in the Agency's interest to ensure a balance in 
the Board's composition and to correct imbalance whenever it occurred. That 
objective might be attained if technical aspects were given more weight than 
political considerations. 
14. At the same time, the problem of financing of safeguards and technical 
assistance continued to be equally difficult to solve. Mutual understanding 
of the developing countries' need for technical assistance, with their 
increasing populations, and the need on the part of countries with nuclear 
installations to develop the safeguards system was essential for reconciling 
the different points of view. While there was no consensus on linking those 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 7 


two subjects, he considered that if the same criteria were applied to both, an 
agreement could be reached and the Agency's statutory objectives would be 
fulfilled. 


15. He expressed satisfaction at the rate of fulfilment of pledges for 
voluntary contributions for the technical co-operation programme and hoped to 
see the figure rise to 100%, as had been the case early in the decade. He 
also commended the successful conclusion of the first two-year technical 
co-operation programme, and was looking forward to the specific evaluation to 
be made in December. 
16. His Government agreed with the Agency's view that the important 
limiting factor in the expansion of the letter's activities was the amount of 
financial resources made available for technical co-operation and research 
contracts and not the inability of developing countries to assimilate the 
assistance, as was evident from the large number of recommended projects. The 
17.6% fall in the implementation of technical co-operation activities in the 
Middle East, especially if Europe was included, was a matter of concern. 
Perhaps the reason lay in the conditions that had prevailed in the region 
during the year under review. He hoped that the region would be accorded 
priority in the near future since the causes of that decrease had disappeared. 
17. The contained application of the principle of zero-growth budget was 
hanging like a sword of Damocles over the Agency's activities. While the 
target for voluntary contributions had been reached, effective and real growth 
in the Regular Budget would ensure continuation of the Agency's activities and 
provide assurance to States needing assistance. 
18. Lebanon had lived through painful events for 15 years, during which 
period its various development projects had come to naught. Its 
infrastructure for power generation, water supply, hospitals and other 
amenities had been destroyed so that it urgently needed to reconstruct those 
basic facilities now that reconciliation had taken place, peace and security 
established and the authority of its Government extended over much of its 
territory. His country was greatly counting on the assistance which the 
Agency could provide in implementing development projects in its area of 
competence. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 8 


19. While establishment of peace and security had been the immediate aim of 
Lebanon, preservation and strengthening of that situation was the long-term 
objective, in which regard the Agency could play an important part. 
20. Mr. KOCH (Denmark), after welcoming the new Members of the Agency, 
recalled that in March 1985 the Danish Parliament had decided to exclude the 
use of nuclear power in its energy programme. That decision was taken because 
problems of nuclear safety and nuclear waste storage remained unsolved. That 
decision had, of course, been reinforced by the Chernobyl accident in 1986 and 
had also been confirmed in a recent public debate in Denmark. 
21. Denmark had however launched a comprehensive set of measures which make 
a significant contribution to the reduction of carbon dioxide and other 
harmful emissions resulting from energy production and consumption. In 
May 1990, in response to the report of the World Commission on Environment and 
Development, the Danish Parliament had formally approved a plan of action for 
sustainable development. In accordance with the Toronto targets, the agreed 
overall target for the energy sector, including the transport sector, was a 
reduction of CO emissions by 20% in 2005 compared with the 1988 level and a 
further reduction in S0_ and NO emissions. 
2 x 


22. It was estimated that the measures to be taken under the energy action 
plan would result in a reduction of almost 15% in gross energy consumption, a 
reduction of more than 20% in CO emissions, a reduction of 60% in SO 
emissions and a reduction of 50% in NO emissions by the year 2005. The 
Danish Government and Parliament were convinced that ambitious energy and 
environment policies could be implemented at no extra economic cost, without 
resorting to nuclear power. 
23. Like other countries, Denmark was seriously concerned about the reports 
that Iraq had failed to comply with its obligations under its safeguards 
agreement with the Agency and the United Nations Security Council 
resolution 687 which called upon Iraq to declare all its nuclear activities to 
the Agency. There was an obvious need to strengthen the effectiveness of the 
Agency's safeguards system and to improve its efficiency and credibility. As 
a first step, there should be an obligation for States to declare any new 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 9 


facilities to the Agency, at least 180 days before construction work began; an 


obligation to declare all civil nuclear materials to the Agency; and effective 
use by the Agency of special inspections of undeclared nuclear facilities. 


Those initial steps would soon have to be followed by more radical measures. 
There was also a need to tighten export and supply control and full-scope 
safeguards should be made a condition for new nuclear supply. All States 
which had not yet done so should place their nuclear facilities under 
full-scope Agency safeguards. 


24. Denmark was pleased that more States had acceded to the NPT, thereby 
increasing its universality. The obligation for Parties to the NPT to 
conclude a safeguards agreement under Article III of the NPT was unequivocal 
and without qualification. He was therefore concerned to note that some 50 of 
the non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the NPT had not yet concluded 
safeguards agreements in accordance with the Treaty obligations. Although 
none of those States had significant nuclear activities, it was a matter of 
importance for the credibility of the NPT and the safeguards system that 
States should comply with their obligations under Article III. 
25. A number of steps had been taken to expand co-operation in some areas 
of nuclear safety. There was a particularly urgent need to do so, since many 
reactors were of old design and did not meet reasonable safety standards. An 
increasing number of States had acceded to the Convention on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the 
Case of a Nuclear Accident or a Radiological Emergency. The five NUSS safety 
codes and a number of safety guides had been strengthened to serve as guidance 
to Member States in developing their national legislation and regulations. 
Basic safety principles for nuclear power plants reflecting the most advanced 
policies and practices had been developed by INSAG. Furthermore, the 
establishment of stronger and more restrictive safety principles and criteria 
had been supplemented by more frequent use of OSART, RAPAT, WAMAP and ASSET 
missions. However, there was still a long way to go before a comprehensive 
international safety regime could be established. The Conference on Nuclear 
Safety at the beginning of September was a step in the right direction. 
During that Conference, major issues had been evaluated and recommendations 
formulated. Denmark attached particular importance to the proposal to 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 10 


establish a system of legally binding common safety objectives and to 
incorporate them in principles and standards within the context of an 
international safety convention. 


26. His Government felt that it was very important to set up a network of 
bilateral agreements as a supplement to the multilateral agreement concluded 
within the framework of the Agency or in other forums. Those bilateral 
agreements should include a clear and unequivocal commitment to inform 
neighbouring countries about the planning of new installations or about major 
changes in existing nuclear installations in order to provide the neighbouring 
country concerned with an opportunity to express its views before a decision 
was taken. With regard to civil liability for nuclear damage, Denmark 
strongly supported the work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear 
Damage and hoped that its work would be successfully concluded at an early 
date resulting in wide international acceptance of a new regime. 
27. Finally, in view of the importance which it attached to the Agency's 
technical assistance activities, Denmark could accept the target of 
US $52.5 million for 1992 to the TACF and had already pledged its full share 
of that target. 
28. Mr. GOMEZ MENDEZ (Colombia) congratulated the President and 
Vice-Presidents on their election and thanked the Director General for his 
opening statement. As the annual report showed, the Agency was operating well 
under his fine direction and by virtue of the effective collaboration of its 
staff members. 
29. Article II of the Statute stated that the Agency's aim was to 
"accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world", and to ensure that any assistance it 
provided was not "used in such a way as to further any military purpose". 
Recent events, and the role which the Agency had played in those events, had 
underlined the Agency's raison d'etre. His delegation was of the view that a 
balance should exist between the peaceful applications of nuclear technology 
and safeguards. Whilst recognizing the importance of the safeguards system 
(the financing of which should be in direct proportion to the economic 



GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 11 


resources available and the number of nuclear facilities), he felt that the 


other main objectives of the Agency such as technical assistance and nuclear 


applications in industry, agriculture and medicine, should receive equal 


attention. The latter activities were of especial importance to the 
developing countries. Colombia, as a Party to the Tlatelolco Treaty and the 
NPT, attached particular importance to the Agency's safeguards system and the 
nuclear safety activities. Regulatory activities of that kind were an 


essential way of ensuring that atomic energy was used for peaceful purposes 


and for the benefit of humanity. 


30. It was vitally important that all Member States co-operate with the 
Agency to promote operational safety, and the effective application of the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. His 
delegation was analysing the study of the Chernobyl accident and supported any 
initiative aimed at determining liability for damage caused by nuclear 
accidents. In addition, he urged States to sign and ratify the Convention on 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and voiced his support for the 
prohibition of all armed attacks against nuclear installations devoted to 
peaceful purposes. 
31. Colombia had received help from the Agency with training, equipment and 
peaceful applications of nuclear technology from the Agency. In 1965 the 
Government of the United States had donated the IAN-R1 research reactor to 
Colombia which was still operating satisfactorily and had undergone various 
modernization work. Currently, measurements were being taken in preparation 
for a changeover to a different type of fuel and a power increase; the work 
was being done via a technical assistance project with the Agency and with the 
active collaboration of the United States. The latter had donated uranium for 
the fuel changeover. 
32. With the Agency's support and the backing of the Government of 
Colombia, nuclear technology had been incorporated in various fields, 
including medicine, agricultural applications, hydrology, environmental 
applications, nuclear reactors, irradiation of food and other produce, and 
radiation protection. Colombia currently had 25 nuclear medicine centres 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 


page 12 


which, taken together, were performing some 50 000 investigations per year and 
were benefiting the needier sectors of the population in particular. The 


Institute of Nuclear Affairs supplied the centres with cold reagents which it 
manufactured itself, and any imported radioactive material required. When the 
power of the reactor was increased it should be possible to produce the latter 


locally. Nuclear technology had played an important part in the development 
of radioimmunoassay techniques for identifying hormones, the detection and 


control of which was of vital importance in livestock production. The 
Colombian Agricultural Institute had helped with the development of strains of 
rice and sorghum with greater resistance and higher yield. Tracer techniques 
had been employed to improve the use which was being made of fertilizers in 
many areas of Colombia. A series of projects was being implemented, with the 


technical assistance of the Agency, in health, industry, radiation protection, 


the environment, analytical techniques, agriculture and high-level radiation 


comprising thirteen activities in all. 


33. As an active member of ARCAL, Colombia was involved in ten regional 
projects - two in agriculture, two in human and animal health, and one each in 
hydrology, radiation protection, use of research reactors, nuclear analytical 
techniques, nuclear instrumentation and nuclear information - and had a strong 
interest in taking part in three other projects related to industrial 
applications, health and hydrology. 
34. As counterpart for the various technical assistance projects which were 
being implemented, the Government of Colombia met its annual commitments 
including voluntary contributions and contributions in kind, and provided all 
the required facilities for the construction and equipping of laboratories and 
training of staff, as well as amenities for experts. The Institute of Nuclear 
Affairs had almost finished building 4250 square metres of facilities intended 
for work In agriculture, hydrology, radiation protection, electronics, 
chemistry and radiopharmacy, and for a documentation and data centre. 
35. Over the preceding two years, two events within the country had helped 
promote the activities of the Institute of Nuclear Affairs. The first of 
those was the passing of Law No. 29 on science and technology which had been 
promulgated on 27 February 1990. Regulatory decrees had been issued under 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 13 


that law as of the beginning of 1991 to promote missions abroad and high-level 
professional training, and to improve contractual systems and procedures in 
the areas of science and technology, and arrangements for research workers. 
The other important move had been the setting up of the National Council for 
Science and Technology. 


36. Humanity had taken great steps forward in all areas of technology 
during the twentieth century, many of which were a great danger to its own 
continued existence. Paradoxically, those technical advances had not been 
adequately mirrored by social and economic progress. The great challenge for 
humanity in the future was to ensure that technological and scientific 
development continued while minimizing its destruction potential and improving 
the living conditions of the public, especially in countries where conditions 
were poor. 
Mr. Ammar (Tunisia) took the Chair. 


37. Mr. SILANGWA (Zambia) congratulated Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and 
Yemen on becoming Members of the Agency. 
38. His country was grateful for the technical assistance provided by the 
Agency in the form of equipment, training courses, fellowships and expert 
services. The Agency's technical assistance had enabled Zambia to establish 
research facilities such as the Nuclear Analytical Laboratory, the 
multipurpose cobalt-60 irradiator and the Induced Mutation Plant Breeding 
Laboratory. Zambia hoped that the facilities of the Nuclear Analytical 
Laboratory would be used on a regional and subregional basis within the 
framework of the AFRA agreement. The Southern Africa Development Coordination 
Conference had already indicated that it was interested in collaborating with 
the Induced Mutation Plant Breeding Laboratory and the laboratory was already 
receiving requests for assistance from agricultural firms. Results of the 
Agency-supported project on radioisotopes in agriculture were being 
disseminated and it was hoped that those results would promote the use of 
Zambia's rock phosphate for increased agricultural production. 
39. Zambia was developing its radiation protection service with the 
Agency's technical assistance through the training of personnel, provision of 
expert services and supply of equipment. The Agency was helping Zambia to 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 14 


draft regulations, codes of practice and licensing procedures for radiation 
material, equipment and facilities, as well as regulations on radioactive 
waste management. 


40. Zambia was encouraged by the progress made with regard to resolution 
GC(XXXIV)/RES/545 on South Africa's nuclear capability and threat to the 
southern African subregion. It welcomed the South African Government's 
decision to join the NPT and the signing of the safeguards agreement with the 
Agency. It also shared the concern expressed that the South African 
Government might not be able to provide a complete inventory of its nuclear 
facilities, materials and past nuclear programmes. It therefore urged South 
Africa to co-operate fully with the Agency to make sure that thorough and 
competent inspections and verifications were carried out to ensure that there 
would be peace in the region and that the region would become a nuclearweapon-
free zone. Although Zambia had only recently acceded to the NPT, the 
Zambian Government was committed to peace and to the establishment of a 
genuine mechanism limiting both the vertical and horizontal proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. For its part, Zambia still had no significant nuclear 
programme. 
41. Zambia also supported the initiative being proposed to make the Middle 
East a nuclear-weapon-free zone and believed the Agency should take all the 
necessary steps to ensure that no undeclared nuclear installations and nuclear 
material existed in the Middle East. 
42. His delegation was very concerned that the discussions in the Board of 
Governors on the question of the amendment of Article VI.A of the Statute had 
not resulted in significant progress. The current imbalance in the 
geographical representation on the Board of Governors should be corrected by 
ensuring that the statutory principle of equitable geographical representation 
was applied to Africa and the Middle East and South Asia. That issue was a 
separate one from the revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole. 
43. With regard to the Conventions on Early Notification and on Emergency 
Assistance, Zambia welcomed the Agency's plans to focus its future activities 
on ensuring that all Member States were able to receive notifications and 
transmit them to the Agency in a timely manner and were able to receive 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 15 


critical radiological information from the Agency and elsewhere and to inform 
their citizens quickly and in an appropriate manner to protect their health 
and safety. 


44. With regard to the financing of technical assistance, Zambia continued 
to support proposals which would result in a mechanism guaranteeing reliable 
and predictable resources for the TACF. Zambia would continue to pay its 
assessed voluntary contributions and he was pleased to pledge Zambia's full 
share of its assessed contribution towards the 1992 target for the TACF. 
45. Zambia noted the steps taken by the Agency and progress made in 
implementing the resolution on the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat. The 
Director General should continue his efforts to recruit personnel from 
developing countries, particularly at the professional and policy-making 
levels. In that context, he welcomed the Agency's junior traineeship 
programme under which some candidates from developing countries could receive 
on-the-job training to upgrade them to the level at which they were able to 
compete on an equal basis with their peers in developed countries. 
46. His delegation appreciated the measures that the Agency had taken in 
connection with various resolutions on measures aimed at strengthening 
international co-operation in matters relating to nuclear safety and 
radiological protection. He welcomed the publication of the International 
Chernobyl Report and the findings of the International Conference on the 
Safety of Nuclear Power. He also welcomed the programme for nuclear safety 
and radiation protection regulators arranged for the current session of the 
General Conference. 
47. Mr. MAHIGA (United Republic of Tanzania) welcomed Yemen, 
Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia as new Members of the Agency. 
48. Tanzania was very grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance 
it had provided in the areas of agriculture, veterinary science, pest control 
and medicine. Plans were also under way for the application of irradiation 
technology to food processing and storage. The Agency's technical assistance 
would continue to play an important role in the country's development and 
Tanzania would also make co-operative arrangements with other countries, 
wherever possible, in order to share their expertise and experience in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 16 


49. Tanzania had no plans for the development and application of nuclear 
power in the forseeable future. Although it had vast potential sources of 
renewable energy, such as hydropower, that had not been fully exploited, it 
was still heavily dependent on oil, which consumed two-thirds of its foreign 
exchange earnings. Its energy policy would for a long time be aimed at 
exploiting energy from sources where the country had comparative advantages. 
However, in the long run, the country's development would necessitate the 
diversification and use of other sources of energy, including nuclear energy. 
50. Some developing countries had already made significant strides in the 
development and application of nuclear science and technology and had shown a 
willingness to share that knowledge and experience with other developing 
countries in their regions. Co-operation in the nuclear field offered good 
opportunities for south-south co-operation and the Agency was to be commended 
for its initiatives to assist regional schemes among developing countries. 
Regional schemes not only made economic sense, but also enhanced transparency 
and promoted mutual trust in the use of nuclear technology. As the Agency 
endeavoured to work with a zero-growth budget, it should at all times keep in 
mind the plight of developing and the least developed countries. 
51. With the growing need for energy and concerns about sustainable 
development, a comprehensive approach to the issues of energy supply, demand 
and conservation would have to be adopted by the whole international community 
in order to exploit the full range of energy sources in such a way as to 
ensure sustainable development. Whatever approach or arrangements the 
international community might consider in the field of energy, the Agency 
would continue to play a crucial, if not leading role. 
52. The United Republic of Tanzania acceded to the NPT on 26 May 1991 and 
his Government had authorized its Permanent Representative and Ambassador to 
the United Nations and its Agencies in Geneva and Vienna to sign a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency at any time when mutually convenient. His country 
had never had any nuclear ambitions and had delayed its accession to the NPT 
for so long to protest against the nuclear arms race, which had taken place 
despite the NPT. Its accession to the NPT should be regarded as a sincere 
gesture to confirm its commitment to horizontal and vertical non-proliferation 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 17 


of nuclear weapons and its recognition of recent positive developments. In 
particular, it welcomed the agreement on strategic arms signed in July 1991 
between the United States and the Soviet Union. The significance of that 
agreement was in the opportunities it offered for negotiating further 
reductions in existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons. In that context, 
Tanzania was relieved by assurances from the Soviet Union that the command and 
control system of its nuclear arsenals would continue to be under one 
centralized authority. He also welcomed the fact that two nuclear powers, 
China and France, had announced their intention to accede to the NPT and he 
hoped that the opportunity thereby provided of accelerating the disarmament 
process and preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons would not be 


lost. 


53. Tanzania supported the current initiatives taken by the United Nations 
and the Organization of African Unity to ensure that Africa would remain a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone. While welcoming South Africa's accession to 
the NPT, Tanzania hoped that South Africa would permit the Agency to carry out 
full-scope inspection and verification of all its nuclear materials, including 
the production records of its enrichment plants. 
54. With regard to the situation in the Middle East, the basis for a 
lasting solution to the conflicts did not lie in the acquisition of nuclear 
weapons or weapons of mass destruction, but in a negotiated peaceful 
settlement to the long-standing political problems. His country supported the 
efforts of all the States in the region to establish a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. An effective credible safeguards system was an essential element in 
building confidence and enabling mankind to benefit from nuclear technology in 
peace and prosperity. 
REPORT ON THE SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME 


55. Mr. HOEGBERG, reporting on the Special Scientific Programme on 
behalf of Mr. Palmgren (Chairman of Session lb), said that the Agency's 
activities under the WWER-440/230 project and the recent International 
Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power had formed the basis for the Special 
Scientific Programme session dealing with the prospects for nuclear power and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 18 


the safety aspects of WWER plants in Eastern and Central Europe. Invited 
speakers from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania and the 
Soviet Union had all stressed the importance of continuing their nuclear power 
programmes. 


56. In Bulgaria, it was believed that nuclear power from the Kozloduy power 
plant was bound to remain an essential part of the country's power supply 
programme for the future. Nevertheless, it was recognized that the 
establishing of acceptable safety standards must have priority over the 
provision of full-load service to the country. 
57. In Czechoslovakia, the environmental burden of burning fossil fuels and 
the economic burden of large energy imports were reasons why further nuclear 
construction was felt to be indispensable for the development of the economy. 
So far the share of electric power in total energy and the role of electricity 
in households were very low and would inevitably increase. Burning 
high-sulphur coal would not be possible for much longer. 
58. In Hungary, the Paks plant accounted for 50% of domestic electric power 
production. Since all four WWER-440 units were of the more advanced 213 type, 
there was no pressure to introduce improvement programmes. The Paks plant had 
a good reputation for technical performance and safety. The possibility of 
building additional nuclear power plants remained open pending studies of 
alternatives and needs. 
59. In Poland, the WWER programme had been abandoned and it was expected 
that by the year 2005, and certainly by 2010, a number of advanced nuclear 
power plants would be available. The degree of electrification measured in 
per capita consumption, or in terms of utilization by industry for refined 
products, was still very low in Poland. 
60. In Romania, the Cemovoda Candu project had been thoroughly 
restructured after the political changes. Startup of the five-unit plant was 
scheduled for 1995. Institutional matters and know-how did not constitute 
serious constraints on the progress of the project, but, even though 
dependence on imported fossil fuel energy and environmental degradation 
supported the case for nuclear power in Romania, as elsewhere, economic 
limitations were a serious threat to the programme and international 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 19 


assistance would probably be needed. An impressive fuel manufacturing 
capability had already been established. 


61. In the Soviet Union, where nuclear power accounted for a modest 12% of 
electric power production, the use of nuclear energy was as attractive as 
ever. Fossil fuels, which supplied 70% of the country's electric power needs, 
had to be transported over long distances which made little economic sense 
(coal 4000 km, gas 2000 km). A programme to enhance the safety of operating 
plants was to be followed by the construction of several new units. At many 
sites, new units with advanced safety features were to replace old units which 
were coming to the end of their useful lifetime. The new units would use 
WWER-1000 reactors for the most part, but there might be some smaller WWER 
units as well. The prospects for uranium supply were good. An underground 
leaching technique had been reported which made it possible to exploit lowgrade 
ores. There was capacity for sustaining a large LWR programme 
(100 000 MW), and the USSR's successful prototype fast reactor programme could 
also be expanded. Local political decisions had been made in favour of the 
construction of new nuclear power plants, and in some cases swift action was 
required. An RBMK improvement programme was also under way. 


62, The specialists' meeting had dealt with the safety aspects of 
WWER reactors as a special topic in a sub-session. Agency staff had described 
the organization of the Agency's WWER-440/230 project and its main findings. 
What had emerged was that the WWER-440/230 concept had both strengths and 
limitations. The large water inventory in both primary and secondary 
circuits, low nuclear fuel heat rates and good core operational performance 
were positive design features. On the other hand, it had been found that the 
degree of redundancy, diversity and segregation was low in some reactor 
systems, which were therefore susceptible to common mode failures. It had 
also been found that there were basic weaknesses due to the fact that certain 
nuclear standards for instrumentation and control and electric power supply 
had not been applied at the design stage. By comparison with current 
practices applied to most other nuclear power plant types, analyses had been 
performed for only a narrow range of potential accidents. Operational and 
maintenance practices gave cause for concern, as did the protection provided 
against external hazards and fires, and embrittlement of pressure vessels was 



GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 20 


also a problem at some plants. The development of a proper safety and quality 
culture might prove to be more difficult, although not as expensive, as 
extensive technical measures. 


63. One logical conclusion was that management-related problems might also 
be acute at other operating WWER plants. That possibility had been discussed 
at the special session, but it had not been possible to assess the extent of 
the problem. The Agency should take the initiative and apply the results of 
the WWER-230 studies in further work on other plants. A report on 
WWER-1000 units indicated that the safety technology of those plants was quite 
well in line with current world standards. 
64. As a special topic, the specialists' meeting had heard a report on the 
measures taken at the Krsko plant under the threat of military action. 
Actions taken by the Agency had been recognized as helpful. 
65. Improvements in safety and safety verification at Eastern and Central 
European nuclear plants were being backed up by a great deal of assistance and 
co-operative action. A panel presentation of Agency, WANO and CEC activities, 
complemented by opinions from Western European national regulatory bodies and 
from the receivers of support and assistance, had indicated that there was a 
risk of some confusion and duplication. On the whole it had been felt that 
national bodies in countries receiving assistance would have to play a central 
role in deciding what advice to take and what assistance to request. It had 
been suggested that the Agency might act as a clearing-house or information 
centre on behalf of the activities being carried out, providing advice and 
keeping a registry of information. 
66. The resources allocated to nuclear programmes by the CEC had been noted 
with satisfaction, but many of the problems of ensuring efficiency in safety 
improvement projects were still unsolved. More than a thousand specific 
problems, or weaknesses, had been reported under the Agency project. That 
meant, among other things, that the individual countries affected would have 
to find effective mechanisms for ordering the work and assigning priorities; 
otherwise serious difficulties could be expected to arise. 
67. In conclusion, the specialists' session on the safety of WWER plants 
had recognized that there was a major common problem - but also a willingness 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 21 


to resolve it - and that resources were being made available for the study of 
possible solutions. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1990 (GC(XXXV)/953) (resumed) 


68. Mr. ELYAGIUBI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) commended the Agency for 
its activities on extending the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the 
world for the benefit of mankind, especially in the areas of health, 
agriculture and industry, and for its efforts to strengthen international 
co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological protection. Its success in 
responding to new conditions must be recognized by all Member States. 
69. For many years the General Conference had adopted resolutions calling 
upon the Zionist entity to comply without delay with Security Council 
resolution 487(1981) by submitting all its nuclear installations to Agency 
safeguards. Resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/526 adopted in 1990 had requested the 
Director General to continue consultations with the States concerned with a 
view to applying Agency safeguards to all nuclear installations in the Middle 
East region. But Israel refused to place its nuclear installations under 
Agency control. The region continued to suffer from the effects of wars and 
was exposed to the danger of production and stockpiling of weapons of mass 
destruction. A radical solution must be found urgently so that the region 
could be free from those lethal weapons. In that connection, he reaffirmed 
his country's support for banning weapons of mass destruction throughout the 
world and for divesting what was called Israel of such weapons without delay. 
70. While all Member States agreed on the importance of safeguards, a great 
many States felt that the current method of financing that activity imposed a 
heavier burden on some countries than on others. In his opinion, States with 
substantial nuclear activities ought to bear a greater share of the safeguards 
costs. 
71. Referring to the Agency's Medium-Term Plan for 1994-98, he expressed 
his appreciation of the Secretariat's efforts in that regard. He hoped that 
in preparing the plan it would bear in mind the aspirations and needs of the 
developing countries embarking on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the 
context of increasing demands for food, medical care and industrial goods, in 
satisfying which nuclear techniques could play a role. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 22 


72. Recalling resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/540 requesting the Agency to assess 
the costs of potable water production with a comparison of the costs of 
desalination by nuclear and other means, and the general scarcity of water in 
the world, he pointed out that many developing countries hoped that nuclear 
technology would provide an economical method for desalting sea water to 
overcome that scarcity. While he appreciated the Agency's efforts to study 
the economic and technical feasibility of nuclear desalination, he called upon 
all Member States, especially the industrially developed ones, to participate 
more actively in implementing resolutions which aimed at promoting human 
progress, prosperity and well-being. The Jamahiriya, for its part, was 
earnestly pursuing the objective of supplying drinking water, as was 
demonstrated by the completion of the first stage of the Great Man-Made River 
Project, under which water was being piped over the longest distance in human 
history. He looked forward to the time when sea water processed by nuclear 
technology would make up for water shortage. He emphasized that supply of 
potable water should be a high-priority programme for the international 
organizations concerned and the IAEA should include nuclear desalination among 
its major activities. 


73. The Agency had been involved in the establishment of AFRA, and his 
country attached great importance to co-operation under that regional 
arrangement. He urged all Member States which could do so to provide 
assistance for the numerous AFRA programmes. In his opinion, the Arab Nuclear 
Energy Agency could also provide substantial support to the Agency, and he 
hoped that it would be enabled to play its part in solving energy problems in 
a large part of the world. 
74. The topic of nuclear waste disposal had been on the agenda of the 
previous sessions of the Conference. Although the exact number of radioactive 
sources used in the world were not known, most of those existing in the 
developing countries had been imported from the industrially advanced States 
so that the Agency should continue to assist its developing Member States in 
dealing with the problem. 
75. In conclusion, he stressed the importance of the United Nations 
agencies, which should endeavour to serve all Member States in a balanced and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 23 


equitable manner so as to establish a fair international balance and thereby 
to ensure a life of security and freedom for everyone in the world. 


76. Mr. CASTRO-DIAZ BALART (Cuba) welcomed the Republics of Estonia, 
Latvia, Lithuania and Yemen, which had been approved for membership of the 
Agency. 
77. Nuclear energy was the only available option for electricity production 
in many developing countries, as they had no other energy resources. However, 
although 17% of the world total energy production in 1990 had been nuclear in 
origin, the only developing countries likely to make progress in nuclear power 
development before the end of the century were the few who already had nuclear 
programmes. Under those circumstances, the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation programmes were of even greater importance. In the case of Cuba, 
such activities had contributed to programmes in the areas of, inter alia, 
public health, agricultural development, food, water resources, and the sugar 
industry. Cuba had always paid its voluntary contributions in full, and 
believed that technical assistance should continue to be financed on a 
voluntary basis, and to use the IFF system. 
78. In view of the close link between acquisition of nuclear technology and 
the need for international safeguards to ensure non-proliferation, an 
equitable balance should be maintained between safeguards development and the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The danger of nuclear 
proliferation would decrease if progress were made on nuclear and conventional 
disarmament and if the non-use of force were established as a universal 
principle in international relations. The problem of financing safeguards 
could best be resolved by means of technical analysis to ensure optimization 
of the resources available, in accordance with established objectives and 
priorities. 
79. Cuba's attitude to the events which had led to the adoption of United 
Nations Security Council resolution 687 was based on respect for international 
law and the expectation that Iraq would comply with the obligations arising 
from agreements it had entered into. However, Cuba would like to see the 
Agency show the same willingness to take action to implement the numerous 
resolutions of the General Conference and the Security Council on the nuclear 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 24 


capabilities of South Africa and Israel, which had also caused much concern 
and been justly condemned. 


80. With regard to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, efforts 
would be better directed to finding a solution to the problem of Article VI as 
a whole. The recent International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power 
had demonstrated the broad range of current opinion on the vital role of 
safety in the future of nuclear power. However, nuclear safety should not be 
understood as operational safety alone, and should not be dealt with by means 
of binding legal instruments which went beyond the terms of reference of the 
Agency. 
81. Despite economic and other difficulties, Cuban nuclear activities were 
continuing with optimism. The main focus of attention remained the 
construction of the first nuclear plant, which was one of the most important 
economic initiatives ever undertaken in the country. Ninety per cent of the 
construction work for the first unit had been carried out with completion 
expected in the first six months of 1992, the installation work to be 
completed in the same year. High priority had been given to supervision and 
monitoring, in order to achieve the highest levels of quality and safety at 
the plant, in accordance with existing international requirements. In recent 
times, the various media propaganda campaigns questioning the safety of the 
Juragua nuclear power plant had intensified. Their alarmist tone and lack of 
objective data revealed the true aim behind their claimed concern for the 
inhabitants and the environment in the Caribbean area - to prevent Cuba from 
making use of nuclear power, despite its legitimate right and urgent need to 
do so. 
82. Since the establishment of the nuclear power programme, the Cuban 
Government had followed a well-defined strategy of establishing and 
strengthening the national bodies concerned with nuclear and radiological 
safety. The Radiation Protection and Hygiene Centre and the National Centre 
for Nuclear Safety had been set up as technical, directing and co-ordinating 
institutions to monitor safety at nuclear facilities. A body of state 
inspectors ensured strict and systematic monitoring of installations under 
construction, and substantial efforts had also been made in training 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 25 


specialists for the nuclear programme. Over 2000 professional staff, 
middle-level technicians and qualified workers had been rigorously trained 


abroad and in Cuba in the building, operation and maintenance of the type of 
plant to be used. The Juragua plant had model V-318 WWER reactors, with a 
more advanced design in terms of containment, safety and earthquake resistance 
characteristics than other similar units in successful operation in Finland 
and Hungary. Cuban reactors also incorporated equipment and many modern 
safety features used in the West. 


83. Cuba was open to any joint effort aimed at increasing nuclear safety in 
the Caribbean, and various experts, including North Americans, who had visited 
the country in recent years had commended the technical level and rigour of 
the construction work. In 1991 there had been an exchange of visits of 
Mexican and Cuban specialists and directors between Juragua and Laguna Verde 
as part of the exchange of experiences organized by WANO, with very useful 
results. The Cuban Government would also be prepared to receive an assessment 
team from the Agency, whose recommendations could help raise safety levels 
even further. 
84. Any attempt by the United States or other countries to single out the 
Cuban power plant and to demand additional measures beyond those accepted 
internationally would be rejected, as they had no objective basis and were of 
a political nature. Cuba, conscious of its responsibilities and commitments, 
was prepared to exchange information and experience on a basis of absolute 
reciprocity and respect of sovereignty, and to co-operate in strengthening 
public confidence in the technology. 
85. Satisfactory results had been achieved with other peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, including the extended use of nuclear techniques in vital 
areas such as public health, agriculture, food, and the sugar industry. One 
of Cuba's 22 high-priority science and technology programmes was devoted to 
that field and had already achieved significant economic results. 
86. The construction of a Centre for the Production of Isotopes and 
Radiopharmaceuticals, in co-operation with Argentina, had reached an advanced 
stage. The pilot plant for the processing of low-level radioactive wastes 
would soon be in operation and the new site for the Centre for Radiation 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 26 


Protection and Hygiene which would include, inter alia, secondary calibration 
and whole-body count laboratories donated by the Agency would be completed 
early in the following year. 


87. Construction work was continuing and supplies had been agreed with the 
Soviet Union for the first stage of the Nuclear Research Centre. 
88. Various regional and national courses had been held in co-operation 
with the Agency in 1990. 
89. Cuba also attached great importance to the assistance provided for 
those affected by the Chernobyl accident, and the studies deriving from it. 
Medical assistance had been provided for over 5000 children to date, and 
specialized dosimetric-radiobiological studies had been carried out, providing 
valuable information which would be made available to all interested parties. 
90. Approving the report contained in document GC(XXXV)/953, which showed 
that impressive progress had been made in all sectors of activity in 1990, he 
stressed that the medium-term plan should take into account the requirements 
and characteristics of the developing countries as well as maintain the 
essential balance between the complementary and related areas of promotional 
and regulatory activities. Some internal issues should also be dealt with in 
the Agency to facilitate a more effective work of the governing bodies, 
including the Board. Revision of procedures, greater flexibility, and 
financial adjustments for technical assistance were some of the issues 
requiring attention. 
91. Cuba's participation as an observer at the OPANAL Conference was a 
further indication of its co-operative spirit. At the First Latin American 
Summit of Guadalajara, the Cuban President had stated that although the 
circumstances preventing Cuba from signing the Tlatelolco Treaty had not 
changed, when all the countries of Latin America had assumed their 
responsibilities under the Treaty, Cuba would be prepared to sign it in the 
interests of regional unity. 
92. He commended the results achieved in the application of nuclear energy 
in the year of the Agency's 35th anniversary, and was sure that the Agency 
would continue its work successfully, while observing the principle of respect 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 27 


of national sovereignty and the right of all nations to benefit from peaceful 
nuclear activities. 


93. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria), welcoming the new Member States of the 
Agency, noted that their membership was an important step towards the Agency's 
universality. 
94. The nuclear safeguards regime was recognized increasingly widely as an 
essential feature of a stable and peaceful world order. He welcomed the fact 
that France and China had announced their intention to join the NPT and noted 
that the accession of those two countries would lead to a strengthening of the 
non-proliferation regime. He also welcomed the decisions of Argentina and 
Brazil to establish an international safeguards system on the basis of a 
bilateral treaty and to sign an agreement with the Agency for its 
implementation. A further important development was the accession of South 
Africa to the NPT followed by its signing of a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency. Those parties to the NPT which had not yet done so were urged to 
conclude safeguards agreements as soon as possible and in that context he 
hoped that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea would sign and implement 
its agreement with the Agency in the near future as a follow-up of the steps 
it had already taken. 
95. Iraq's failure to comply with its obligations under its safeguards 
agreement with the Agency was a serious violation of international law and had 
given rise to criticism about the efficiency of the existing safeguards 
system. The events of the past year had demonstrated that the international 
community needed improved systems to ensure that international obligations 
were fulfilled. 
96. As was well known, the results of a referendum had led Austria to 
decide, not to use nuclear fission for the purposes of electricity generation 
and the Austrian Government hoped that Austria's example would be followed by 
other States, particularly its neighbours. In view of its concern about 
safety, Austria welcomed the results of the International Conference on the 
Safety of Nuclear Power, which had laid a good foundation for future 
developments, and hoped that it would lead to the establishment of an 
international nuclear safety convention. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 28 


97. Austria was very interested in the work of the Standing, Committee on 
Liability for Nuclear Damage and welcomed the progress achieved. Although the 
Standing Committee had given priority to the preparation of a thorough 
revision of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, it 
had also embarked on an extensive discussion of an enlarged concept of nuclear 
damage inflicted on the environment. The Committee should be encouraged to 
devise a contractual system of international nuclear liability corresponding 
to that enlarged concept of nuclear damage. Austria welcomed the support 
expressed for the inclusion of elements of international State liability in a 
revised system of international nuclear liability. The existing procedural 
provisions of the Vienna and Paris Conventions for claims settlements were, in 
its view, unsatisfactory. The Standing Committee should therefore also 
consider the establishment of an international claims tribunal or a court of 
arbitration. Austria hoped that a new and comprehensive nuclear liability 
regime could be established which would be acceptable not only to the 
contracting parties of the Vienna and Paris Conventions, but also to countries 
not participating in those two systems. 
98. Lastly, Austria also attached great importance to the Agency's 
technical assistance and co-operation programme and had pledged its share of 
the proposed target for the TACF for 1992. It had also declared its readiness 
to provide extrabudgetary support amounting to approximately US $260 000 for a 
specific pest eradication project. 
99. Mr. AMOO-GOTTFRIED (Ghana) welcomed the four new Members which had 
recently joined the Agency and expressed the hope that they would participate 
fully in the Agency's work and enjoy the many benefits it offered. 
100. Recent events had underlined the need to strengthen the Agency's 
safeguards system. However, care should be taken not to place undue emphasis 
on safeguards at the expense of the Agency's equally important promotional 
activities. In view of the Agency's very limited resources, more effective 
techniques should be developed to make the safeguards system more efficient. 
101. Ghana welcomed the recent bilateral agreement between Argentina and 
Brazil on a common nuclear policy and their readiness to negotiate a fullscope 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. The announcement that the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 29 


Democratic People's Republic of Korea had finalized the negotiation of a 
standard NPT-type safeguards agreement with the Agency was a significant step 
forward and it was to be hoped that the agreement would be signed and ratified 
as soon as possible. His delegation also welcomed the accession of the United 
Republic of Tanzania, Mozambique, Zambia, South Africa and Albania to the NPT 
regime and hoped that many more States would accede to it in order to make 
the NPT universal. 


102. The South African nuclear facilities and activities had caused great 
concern in the African continent. He hoped that, with the signing by South 
Africa of a safeguards agreement with the Agency, it would be possible to 
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. All States with significant 
nuclear programmes which had not yet acceded to the NPT should do so as soon 
as possible and submit their nuclear facilities to full-scope Agency safeguards. 
103. The International Chernobyl Project, which had assessed the radiological 
consequences of the accident and evaluated the protective measures, 
was a highly commendable example of international co-operation. In view of 
the worldwide fear and condemnation of nuclear power following the Chernobyl 
accident, the recent three-week review of the design and operation of the four 
nuclear reactors at Kozloduy in Bulgaria was very timely. The review had 
identified a number of safety-related deficiencies. Other countries with 
similar installations should also submit them regularly to independent safety 
reviews. 
104. While his delegation was pleased that after a delay of 16 years, the 
African region now had an operative regional co-operative agreement, AFRA, it 
was very disappointed at the lack of necessary financial support available and 
therefore appealed for generous donations to support AFRA. In that connection, 
it was particularly grateful to France for funding the project on 
radioimmunoassay and hoped that other States would follow that laudable 
example. 
105. Ghana was making steady progress in its peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. A multipurpose gamma irradiation facility designed for food preservation 
and radiation sterilization of medical products would be commissioned 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 30 


early in 1992. Significant advances had been made in nuclear medicine using 
radioimmunoassay, gamma scanning and radiopharmaceuticals. Users of ionizing 
radiation were being monitored and a project for monitoring radon 
concentrations in selected homes nationwide was under way. Satisfactory 
progress was also being made in the implementation of projects concerning the 
sterile insect technique, food preservation by gamma irradiation, radiation 
processing and radiation-induced genetic mutation breeding. Ghana's facilities 
were also made available to the region through the hosting of regional 
training courses. Ghana had not neglected the legal aspects of radiation 
protection in all these areas and it had finalized a radiation protection law 
which would be soon promulgated. 


106. The Agency was playing an invaluable role in helping small developing 
countries such as Ghana with the acquisition and installation of the necessary 
infrastructure for the development and peaceful utilization of nuclear power. 
It was hoped that developed Member States would continue to make more 
resources available to support the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation programmes. 
107. There was at present unprecedented worldwide concern for the environment. 
The need for a drastic reduction of the greenhouse gases resulting from 
the burning of fossil fuels was now greater than ever before. Currently the 
most viable alternative to fossil fuel as a source of energy was nuclear power 
and the Agency therefore had a pivotal role in leading the efforts to promote 
the development and use of nuclear power and the Agency needed the support of 
all Member States in its activities to promote public acceptance of nuclear 
energy. 
108. Finally, he noted that the revision of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 
was long overdue and that specific steps had to be taken promptly to correct 
the glaring under-representation of the regions of Africa and MESA regions on 
the Board of Governors. 
109. Mr. GHOSHEH (Jordan) congratulated the Republic of Yemen, Estonia, 
Lithuania and Latvia on their becoming Members of the Agency, which would 
certainly benefit from their active and positive contribution to its work. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 31 


110. The present session of the General Conference was taking place at a 
critical time when radical changes had occurred in the socialist countries and 
when the aftermath of the Gulf crisis continued to affect the region and the 
world as a whole. 
111. The Agency's work had seen both success and failure. On the one hand, 
it had succeeded in raising the efficiency and in extending the safeguards 
system, demonstrating thereby that the nations of the world sincerely desired 
the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes to promote development and 
prosperity and not as a means of terror, threat or destruction. 
112. But, on the other hand, for more than ten years the Conference had been 
unable to achieve any result on the crucial subject of the Israeli nuclear 
threat, which was detrimental not only to the security of the neighbouring 
countries, especially Jordan, but to world peace and security. Israel seemed 
to be a unique case, to which what applied to other countries did not apply, 
and it was not interested in trying to create the conditions for peace and 
security in the world. 
113. He recalled that his country had been subject to Israeli threat since 
1948, from which date Israel had successively occupied the whole of Palestine 
and parts of the neighbouring States, including the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, 
the Sinai and the Golan, and continued to use every means of persecution, 
repression and suppression against the unarmed populations of the occupied 
lands, who strongly rejected Israeli occupation. It persisted in denying 
their right to freedom, in seizing their lands and settling thereon immigrants 
foreign to the area, further endangering security and peace in the region. 
International measures must be taken to curb that threat, and the debate that 
had lasted for more than ten years should be ended so that attention could be 
devoted to other, no less important issues. Therefore, Jordan considered it 
necessary to apply safeguards to the Israeli nuclear installations and to 
establish a special international commission to inspect those installations 
and to verify that they and their programmes served peaceful purposes. 
114. Stressing the urgent need for establishing a nuclear-free zone in the 
Middle East, as Jordan had advocated repeatedly at the preceding sessions of 
the Conference, he pointed out that the region would be practically 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 32 


nuclear-free if it were free from Israeli nuclear weapons because Israel alone 
had real military nuclear capabilities and stockpiles of atomic weapons. 
Therefore, as soon as Israel complied with the world community's demand by 
placing its nuclear installations under international control, by ceasing the 
production and development of military nuclear material and devices and by 
signing the NPT, the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East 
would be realized. 


115. Noting that the Director General, perhaps preoccupied with the Gulf 
crisis, had not devoted to the issue of the Israeli nuclear threat the 
attention it had deserved, his delegation called upon the latter to give the 
matter the consideration that he had been requested to do over the preceding 
decade by the General Conference, and to submit a comprehensive report thereon 
at its thirty-sixth session. 
116. Another matter of concern to Jordan and the international community in 
recent years was nuclear waste, which posed a serious threat to human life and 
the environment. In 1988, his country's delegation had submitted a proposal 
to the General Conference on the subject of radioactive and toxic chemical 
waste. He was pleased to note that those suggestions had largely been 
reflected in the Code of Practice on International Transboundary Movement of 
Radioactive Waste adopted by the Conference in 1990, which Jordan's Radiation 
Protection Board had recommended the Government to put into effect. That Code 
of Practice showed what the Agency could do to promote security and 
well-being; it should be binding on all, and regional and international 
machinery be developed with a view to its scrupulous application. 
117. An important factor preventing strifes and conflicts, which were 
responsible for the arms race, was creation of economic prosperity and social 
well-being. There were many ways in which international co-operation could be 
strengthened to achieve that end, the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme certainly being one such means. In that connection, it was 
imperative to correct the existing imbalance between the resources allocated 
to safeguards and those to technical co-operation and assistance. In his 
delegation's opinion, more resources should be available for the latter 
activities and they must be financed on an assured basis and not by voluntary 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 33 


contributions alone, which had been affected year after year by various 
economic and political conditions. 


118. It was necessary to develop regional mechanisms, in co-operation with 
the Agency, in order to implement certain projects. One such mechanism was 
the Arab Nuclear Energy Agency under the Arab League, and he hoped that the 
IAEA would assist that organization, so that the two could complement each 
other in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in protecting human 
health and the environment from the hazards of radiation. 
119. For two decades until the early 1980s Jordan had undergone rapid 
economic, socio-economic and social development and, despite scarcity of 
resources and reliance on imported energy sources, it had attained high growth 
rates. It was among the first ten countries in the world in terms of the 
level of public health services; it had sharply reduced infant mortality in 
the preceding twenty years and had made great strides in the vaccination of 
children. It had expanded educational facilities and had produced tens of 
thousands of university graduates, who were serving the nation and many of 
whom were helping other Arab countries to develop their infrastructures. 
120. Those positive achievements should be viewed against the background of 
scarcity of energy sources, successive immigrations since 1948, the large 
school-going population of 500 000, shortage of water sources, paucity of 
arable land, the Gulf crisis with its economic consequences and, in 
particular, the constant Israeli threat for more than 40 years, all of which 
were placing additional burdens on his country's economy. 
121. His Government therefore attached especial importance to the Agency's 
technical co-operation and assistance programme, and hoped that it would 
assist Jordan's nuclear activities in the areas of agriculture, water 
management, medicine, information, industry, environmental and radiological 
protection, etc. under a multi-year national plan to preserve the high social 
standard attained over the preceding decades. 
122. Jordan's most valuable resource was its people, as King Hussein had 
aptly pointed out, and the Agency was in the best position to assist in 
maintaining the high social standard of that people, who had rendered 
outstanding service to the country and to the world as a whole. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 34 


123. Referring to the need for increased representation of developing 
countries on the Board of Governors and of nationals of those countries in the 
Agency's Secretariat, he urged that the repeated appeals made in that regard 
should be responded to. A crucial factor in the development of the Agency's 
activities was that the majority of Member States should feel that they were 
fairly represented; that would raise the degree of their involvement in the 
running, and in sharing the responsibilities, of the Agency. His delegation 
was therefore in favour of amending Article VI of the Statute, and called upon 
the Conference to settle the issue, which had been on its agenda for a decade 
and a half without any conclusive result. 
124. Jordan wished to express its commitment to pay its assessed 
contribution to the Regular Budget. It regretted that for a few years it had 
been unable to bear its share of voluntary contributions to support the 
technical co-operation and assistance programme but hoped to do so in the 
future. 
125. He endorsed the Agency's programme and budget for 1990, emphasizing, 
however, the need for growth in the budget, especially in the promotional 
areas, with a view to responding to the increasing developmental needs of 
States. 
126. The continuing imbalance between the appropriations for safeguards and 
those for promotional activities hindered the developing countries from making 
use of the Agency's programmes in the manner referred to above and reduced the 
effective utilization of its potential. His delegation urged once again that 
an appropriate formula be found so that the promotional budget would respond 
to Member States' demands and accord with the Agency's responsibilities with 
regard to the promotion of prosperity and security in the world. 
127. Mr. OGADA (Kenya), having welcomed Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia and 
Yemen to the Agency, said that with the end of the Cold War, Member States 
were in a position to discuss serious issues freely without being diverted by 
ideological differences. The delicate balance that had had to be kept on the 
Board in the past was therefore no longer necessary and Article VI.A.2 of the 
Agency's Statute should be revised in favour of a wider geographical 
representation for Africa and MESA. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 35 


128. His Government would soon accede to the Conventions on Early Notification, 
Emergency Assistance and the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
It would also sign a safeguards agreement with the Agency in accordance with 
Article III of the NPT to which it was party. 
129. The political changes unfolding in South Africa were of great interest 
to Kenya. It supported the changes being introduced, but abhorred the interethnic 
violence and killings which had resulted in the unnecessary loss of 
many lives. His delegation welcomed South Africa's accession to the NPT and 
its decision to place some of its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
Mozambique, Zambia and the United Repubic of Tanzania had also signed the NPT, 
thus paving the way for a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. 
130. His delegation attached particular importance to Agency technical 
assistance in the agricultural sector, in particular in areas such as tissue 
culture, mutation breeding, nitrogen fixation, fertilizer research and pest 
control. Kenya was already applying nuclear medicine techniques in diagnosis 
and treatment, non-destructive testing techniques and other industrial 
techniques in the area of food technology and welding. Furthermore, the 
Centre for Nuclear Sciences, which was a pilot project funded by the Agency, 
had been fully integrated into the University of Nairobi Faculty of Engineering 
as a teaching institute. 
131. While welcoming the establishment of AFRA, he noted that its success 
was dependent on external financial support. He therefore appealed to donor 
agencies and governments to provide financial assistance to AFRA. In that 
context, he was particularly grateful to the United States and France for the 
support they had given to AFRA. 
132. Kenya was also very grateful to the United States for having funded a 
large extrabudgetary project on the production of radioimmunoassay kits for 
Kenyan hospitals. His delegation hoped that support could also be provided 
for two other important Agency-approved extrabudgetary projects, one on the 
supply of gamma cameras and related nuclear medical equipment and the other on 
nitrogen fixation. 
133. Owing to the serious economic difficulties experienced by Kenya and 
other commodity producers in the late 1980s, Kenya had not been able to pay 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 36 


its full contributions to many international organizations, including the 
Agency. However, he was pleased to announce that the first instalment of its 
accumulated assessment would be paid to the Agency very shortly. 


134. Mr. HESS (Namibia) noted that Namibia's experience in the field of 
energy was limited and that the Agency's General Conference provided a welcome 
opportunity to enable it to learn more about the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Namibia was a significant uranium producer and in that field was, 
like other developing countries, heavily dependent on the sale of primary 
products. At present, Namibia generated its electricity from hydropower and 
from diesel oil. When there was a shortage of rain the production of 
electricity was reduced and Namibia was forced to buy electricity from its 
neighbours at great cost. In view of Namibia's uranium reserves, nuclear 
energy seemed a possible alternative. However, there were public fears about 
the safety of nuclear power plants and also an urgent need for the transfer of 
nuclear technology to young Namibian scientists. Namibia looked forward to 
participating in Agency training programmes in that area and in the area of 
radiation protection. It was also grateful for the assistance already 
provided by the Agency to its national health, agriculture and veterinary 
programmes. 
135. Mr. SALAS BARAHONA (Peru) noted that recent political developments 
had given special significance to the Agency's activities. In the area of 
safeguards, the Agency had a very important role to play in the 
universalization of the safeguards system and it was essential to ensure that 
effective non-discriminatory measures were applied to control the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. His delegation was pleased that several 
Member States had signed safeguards agreements with the Agency, but was 
concerned at the large number of States which had not yet done so. 
136. As far as Latin America was concerned, the Peruvian President had 
proposed a policy of regional disarmament based on the limitation of weapons 
and the use of the resources which would thereby be released to promote the 
economic and social development of the region. That policy involved a new 
concept of defence aimed at maintaining democratic stability. Peru had 
invited the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Member States of the Rio Group 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 37 


to participate in a special meeting in Lima in order to agree on a joint 
renunciation of the acquisition of all types of weapons of mass destruction. 


137. While Peru fully appreciated the importance of the safeguards system to 
prevent nuclear proliferation, the Agency's technical co-operation activities 
should not be neglected, since they also made a valuable contribution to the 
promotion of peace. Like other developing countries, Peru had always insisted 
that there be a just balance between the Agency's safeguards and technical 
co-operation activities. In that connection, it believed that mechanisms 
should be found to provide the TACF with reliable assured resources. 
138. His delegation noted the progress achieved in the preparation of the 
Medium-Term Plan for 1993-98. In outlining the Agency's future activities, 
the Plan should preserve a certain flexibility and be consistent with national 
development programmes. Continuous co-ordination with national authorities 
was therefore essential. 
139. Peru was very satisfied with the activities carried out under the ARCAL 
programme, which promoted training and research in important areas such as 
health, food and agriculture. The ARCAL programme also stimulated better 
integration of countries in the region and encouraged co-operation between 
them. For its part, Peru was ready to make available the services of the 
Oscar Miro Quesada Nuclear Centre to other countries in the region. Plans 
were also under way to convert the Peruvian Nuclear Centre into a regional 
nuclear technology centre. 
140. In the light of the serious economic situation facing the country, the 
Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute (IPEN) had decided to implement an emergency 
plan to make full use of the country's nuclear facilities and to optimize the 
IPEN's participation in measures to restimulate national development. The 
IPEN had a double role as regulatory authority and as institution promoting 
the uses of nuclear technology. With assistance from the Agency, the IPEN had 
made important progress in standardizing national legislation in the area of 
radiation protection and nuclear safety and had trained a team of specialists 
to inspect the country's nuclear facilities. Reorganizational changes taking 
place in the IPEN would help to increase efficiency and improve co-operation 
with the country's production sectors interested in the use of nuclear 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 38 


technology to improve production and quality control processes. The IPEN had 
established a number of specific institutions to promote the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy, such as the Institute for Non-Destructive Testing and Quality 
Control, the Foundation for Nuclear Techniques and Materials Research, the 
Foundation for the Development of Food Irradiation Technology, Sterilization 
of Medical Products and Treatment of Waste, and the Association for 
Environmental Studies. 


141. He noted with pleasure that the Agency's technical assistance programme 
with Peru had increased continuously since 1977. Currently, some 17 projects 
were being Implemented in various nuclear fields, and Peru was very grateful 
to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom for the 
provision of extrabudgetary resources to finance some of those projects. In 
particular, the United States Government had given valuable support for the 
implementation of a project to update studies on energy and electricity demand 
to determine what priority should be given to the nuclear option. 
142. Mr. HOFFMANN (Luxembourg) expressed his support for the statement 
made by the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the Member States 
of the European Community and that made by the representative of the 
Commission of the European Communities. 
143. With regard to the safety of nuclear power plants, Luxembourg was 
convinced that the proposed nuclear safety convention would improve nuclear 
safety in general. However, such an international convention, while imposing 
on States very strict safety criteria, should not diminish their 
responsibility for guaranteeing the safety of their own nuclear power plants. 
He hoped that the Director General would be able to submit specific proposals 
on that subject for the meeting of the Board of Governors in February 1992. 
It was also very important that the safety of old nuclear power plants which 
did not comply with current safety criteria should be improved and that those 
where the level of safety was inadequate should be shut down. 
144. Recent events in the Gulf had demonstrated the urgent need to 
strengthen the international safeguards system. Luxembourg supported the idea 
of special inspections, which it believed should also be carried out at 
undeclared nuclear facilities. His country also believed that there should be 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 39 


a more effective distribution of inspections, since it did not seem 
appropriate that three large industrialized countries accounted alone for 
about 70% of the total number of Agency inspections. 


145. A third area of particular concern to his delegation was that of the 
establishment of an international liability regime for nuclear damage. Such a 
regime would not only be desirable to improve public attitudes to nuclear 
power, but was also a moral obligation for States with nuclear facilities. 
Although resolutions GC(XXXIII)/RES/508 and GC(XXXIV)/RES/529 attached 
priority to the question of liability for nuclear damage, the meetings which 
had been held in the Agency since 1989 to make preparations for a conference 
to review the Vienna Convention had not yet led to specific results. That was 
regrettable, since it was widely recognized that the existing liability regime 
for nuclear damage was far from satisfactory. He therefore hoped that the 
General Conference would continue to attach particular importance to solving 
that problem. 
146. Before concluding, he wished to reject the statement made to the 
General Conference the previous day by the delegate of Iraq alleging that 
Luxembourg had exported enriched uranium in 1985. That statement was 
incorrect, as verifications carried out by the Agency's Department of 
Safeguards had demonstrated. Furthermore, the Agency's Director General had 
himself rejected the allegations made by Iraq in his reply to the Governor 
from Iraq during the special session of the Board of Governors on 
18 July 1991. 
147. Mr. ATANGANA-ZANG (Cameroon) commended the Director General and 
the Secretariat on the work they had done since the previous session of the 
General Conference. 
148. He welcomed the move towards democratization which was taking place in 
the Soviet Union and which, in the course of a little over two years, had 
transformed the political situation not only in Eastern and Central Europe but 
in the African continent as well. In the context of east-west relations it 
had brought about the end of the Cold War, and in the Third World it had led 
to the extinction of regional conflicts. The Third World of the sixties was 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 40 


poised to become the south of the nineties, faced with a north which was 
united but which would not, it was to be hoped, abandon the south. 


149. Cameroon had been progressing towards democratization under the 
leadership of its President, Mr. Paul Biya, since 1982 and recent events had 
only added the final impetus to that process. Currently, Cameroon had 
approximately 35 political parties and was preparing to hold elections by the 
end of the year. 
150. He therefore welcomed enthusiastically the States of Yemen, and 
particularly Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia, which had just become Members of 
the Agency. After approximately 50 years, Moscow had not only permitted the 
emancipation of its former satellite States but was supporting their 
reintegration into the concert of nations, and into the United Nations system 
of which the Agency formed part. 
151. As a Member of the Agency since 1964, Cameroon had always done its best 
to promote the ideals of the Agency and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
It was pleasing that an ever increasing number of countries were joining the 
Agency and subscribing to the NPT and safeguards system. He welcomed the 
signing by South Africa of the NPT on 10 July 1991, followed shortly 
thereafter by the signing of a safeguards agreement. It was to be hoped that 
the developments which were taking place in that country would swiftly lead to 
a systematic and total removal of the apartheid system. Similarly, he 
commended the moves which the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had made 
towards concluding a safeguards agreement pursuant to the NPT which it had 
signed five years previously. Equally pleasing was the declaration by France, 
in June 1991, that it wished to adhere to the NPT, as was the interest which 
had been expressed by China in that regard. With the five main nuclear-weapon 
States behind it, the Treaty would have an even more universal validity. 
152. Cameroon was a Member of the Board of Governors and was party to 
virtually all the legal instruments with which the Agency was associated. 
Thus it was one of the comparatively few (ten) parties to the Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and party to the Joint 
Protocol linking the Vienna Convention with the Paris Convention on Third 
Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 41 


153. That being so, his country followed the work of the Standing Committee 
on Liability for Nuclear Damage with the closest attention - work which was 
expected to terminate, during the course of the coming year, in a diplomatic 
conference whose task it would be to revise the Vienna Convention. 
154. He urged those countries which were taking part in the work of the 
standing committee to push on their work to a successful conclusion. Cameroon 
had adhered both to the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear 
Accident or Radiological Emergency and to the Convention on Early Notification 
of a Nuclear Accident, as well as the NPT and safeguards. Cameroon had also 
been a member of AFRA since the previous year. He urged all 11 African 
Member States to adhere to that regional agreement. 
155. Despite the economic crisis it was facing, a situation in which it was 
not alone, Cameroon continued to honour all its financial commitments to 
international organizations and particularly those in the United Nations 
system. Thus, only three days previously he had signed a pledge for a 
voluntary contribution of $5259 to the TACF for 1992. 
156. Cameroon was making every effort to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy within its boundaries. As well as the half dozen projects 
which were already being implemented with the help of the Agency, the Ministry 
of Higher Education, Information Science and Technical and Scientific Research 
in Cameroon was currently preparing a draft law on radiation protection and a 
development plan for nuclear techniques, with the help of all interested 
national bodies. In due course, they would be requesting assistance from 
Agency experts for those activities. 
REPLY BY THE DELEGATE OF IRAQ TO THE STATEMENTS MADE BY THE DELEGATES OF 
KUWAIT, ISRAEL AND LUXEMBOURG 


157. Mr. MAJID (Iraq), exercising his right of reply, pointed out that 
the delegation of Kuwait had raised subjects in the morning's meeting which 
were of no relevance to the Conference's work. The delegation of Kuwait was 
going against the movement in the Arab world towards reunification and was 
joining the evil-intentioned campaign, led by the United States, against 
Iraq. His delegation had hoped that the representative of Kuwait would have 
condemned the crime committed and proclaimed by the United States forces of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 42 


burying 8000 Iraqi soldiers alive. With regard to the Kuwaitis in Iraq, Iraq 
had transmitted a list of the names of more than 3000 Kuwaitis to the 
International Red Cross in July 1991. Kuwait had repatriated only 190 persons 
and was still reluctant to repatriate the others under the pretext that it 
needed more time to check their identity papers. Kuwait alone was responsible 
for the delay. It appeared that Kuwait was making a distinction in terms of 
nationality among its citizens, as though there were a group of first-class 
and a group of second-class citizens in Kuwait. 


158. With regard to the statement of the delegate of Israel, the statement 
made by the delegation of Iraq in 1990 was still true, in spite of all the 
false allegations that had been made: the Iraqi nuclear programme was a 
peaceful one. Attempts to introduce uranium enrichment technology did not 
signify that the programme was for military purposes, since such technology 
was a complementary part of the fuel cycle. According to the Agency itself, 
Iraq had more than a year before it was obliged to provide the Agency with 
information on the design of its installations. Israel would always represent 
the most serious nuclear threat in the Middle East and Israel was entirely 
responsible for the introduction of nuclear armaments and the escalation of 
the arms race in the Middle East. 
159. The delegate of Luxembourg had attempted to deceive the General 
Conference about a fact which was confirmed in the records of the meetings of 
the Board of Governors for 1985 and even more clearly in the Safeguards 
Implementation Report. The fact in question reflected a clear violation of 
the safeguards system. 
REPLY BY THE DELEGATE OF KUWAIT TO THE STATEMENT MADE BY THE DELEGATE OF IRAQ 


160. Mr. EL-SAEID (Kuwait), exercising his right of reply, said that in 
order to save time and to avoid getting involved in the lies spread by the 
Iraqi regime, he would avoid discussing any topic which lay outside the scope 
of the Agency. Some points, however, needed to be clarified. 
161. With regard to the Kuwaiti prisoners of war in Iraq, Kuwait had 
submitted a list of 2000 names. It was true that Iraq had provided a list of 
3000 names, but none of those names tallied with those on the Kuwaiti list. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.340 
page 43 


The Iraqi regime, after having been compelled to leave Kuwait, was in fact 


trying to enter Kuwait again through the creation of a fifth column. It was 
well known that the Iraqi regime was multiplying its violations of Kuwait's 
borders. While press reports indicated that Iraq had agreed to allow United 
Nations planes to fly over its territory, it was in fact creating obstacles 
which belied that authorization. All those facts clearly demonstrated that 
Iraq was not serious about its declared intention of implementing Security 
Council resolutions and was still resorting to familiar devious tactics to 
avoid implementation of those resolutions. 


The meeting rose at 7 p.m. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
16 January 1992 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 20 September 1991, at 11.30 a.m. 
President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
Oral report by the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole on the 
following items: 1 30 
- The Agency's accounts for 1990 15 
- Measures to strengthen international 
co-operation in matters relating to 
nuclear safety and radiological 
protection 16 -17 
- The Agency's budget for 1992 18 21 
- Scale of assessment of Members' 
contributions for 1992 22 
- The financing of safeguards 23 24 
- The financing of technical assistance 25 

[*] GC(XXXV)/982. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 


91-4752 
9250e/875e 



GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 2 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


Plan for producing potable water 
economically 26 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 27 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute 28 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute 
as a whole 29 
Rule and policy on the appointment of 
the Director General 30 
22 South Africa's nuclear capabilities 31 - 51 
23 Iraq's non-compliance with its 
safeguards obligations 52 - 79 


Abbreviations used in this record 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 



GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 3 


ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


1. Mr. WILSON (Australia), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the Committee's report on agenda items 11 to 21, noting that he 
would report on the draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/983 concerning 
strengthening of the Agency's promotional activities later, when its 
consideration was completed. 
2. Under item 11, "The Agency's accounts for 1990", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution on page III 
of document GC(XXXV)/954. 
3. Under item 12, "Measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/984 concerning the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material, the draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/992 entitled "Revision of 
the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection", the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXV)/993 entitled "Education and training in radiation protection 
and nuclear safety", the draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/997, and the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/998 entitled "The Agency's contribution 
to sustainable development". 
4. The Committee had briefly discussed agenda sub-item 12(e), "Prohibition 
of all armed attacks against nuclear installations devoted to peaceful 
purposes whether under construction or in operation", without reaching any 
conclusion. 
5. Under item 13, "The Agency's budget for 1992", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt draft resolutions A, B and C in Annex IV 
to Part I of document GC(XXXV)/955. Under the same agenda item, the Committee 
also recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/999 entitled "Strengthening of the safeguards system". 
6. Under item 14, "Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1992", 
the Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
in document GC(XXXV)/967. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 4 


7. Under item 15, "The financing of safeguards", the Committee recommended 
that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/986. In 
addition, the Committee recommended that the Conference request the Director 
General to transmit the summary record of the Committee's discussion on that 
agenda item to the informal working group on the financing of safeguards. 
8. Under item 16, "The financing of technical assistance", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/987. 
9. Under item 17, "Plan for producing potable water economically", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXV)/988. 
10. Under item 18, "Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/994. 
11. Under item 19, "Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute", the 
Committee recommended adoption of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/990. 
12. Under item 20, "Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole", the 
Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
in document GC(XXXV)/991. 
13. Lastly, under item 21, "Rule and policy on the appointment of the 
Director General", the Committee recommended that the Conference take note of 
the report by the Chairman of the Board of Governors contained in document 
GC(XXXV)/965. 
14. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conference should consider one by 
one the agenda items which had been referred to the Committee of the Whole and 
its recommendations thereon, and take up the matter of the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXV)/983 at a later stage. 
The Agency's accounts for 1990 


15. The draft resolution on page III of document GC(XXXV)/954 was adopted. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 5 


Measures to strengthen international co-operation in matters relating to 
nuclear safety and radiological protection 


16. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/984 concerning the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material, the draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/992 entitled "Revision of 
the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection", the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXV)/993 entitled "Education and training in radiation protection 
and nuclear safety", the draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/997, and the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/998 entitled "The Agency's contribution 
to sustainable development". 
17. It was so decided. 
The Agency's budget for 1992 


18. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the Conference wished to adopt draft resolutions A, B and C in Annex IV 
to Part I of document GC(XXXV)/955. 
19. The draft resolutions entitled "Regular Budget appropriations 
for 1992", "Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund allocation for 1992" 
and "The Working Capital Fund in 1992" were adopted. 
20. The PRESIDENT also assumed that, as recommended by the Committee 
of the Whole, the Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/999 entitled "Strengthening of the safeguards system". 
21. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/999 was adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1992 


22. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/967 was adopted. 
The financing of safeguards 


23. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/986 was adopted. 
24. The Director General was requested to transmit the summary record of 
the Committee's discussion on the financing of safeguards to the informal 
working group on the financing of safeguards. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 6 


The financing of technical assistance 


25. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/987 was adopted. 
Plan for producing potable water economically 


26. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/988 was adopted. 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


27. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/994 was adopted. 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


28. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/990 was adopted. 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole 


29. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/991 was adopted. 
Rule and policy on the appointment of the Director General 


30. Note was taken of the report contained in document GC(XXXV)/965. 
SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXXIV)/RES/545; GC(XXXV)/966, 989/Rev.1) 


31. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the item had been Included in the 
agenda pursuant to resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/545 adopted by the General 
Conference in 1990. As requested in that resolution, the Director General had 
presented a report which was contained in document GC(XXXV)/966. 
32. South Africa had become a party to the NPT by depositing an instrument 
of accession to the Treaty on 10 July 1991. At its meetings immediately 
preceding the present session of the General Conference, the Board had 
approved an agreement between the Agency and South Africa for the application 
of safeguards in connection with the Treaty. 
33. The General Conference also had before it, in document GC(XXXV)/989/Rev.1, 
a draft resolution submitted by Zaire on behalf of the African Group. 
34. Mr. GHONDA (Zaire), introducing the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/989/Rev.1 on behalf of the African Group, said that it was the result 
of intensive consultations and enjoyed broad consensus. Although it could not 
be denied that South Africa had made some progress in responding to the 
requests of the Agency and of other international organizations, that progress 
was not far-reaching enough in the eyes of the African countries concerned. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 7 


The African countries therefore recommended continued watchfulness to ensure 
that the obligations undertaken by South Africa were strictly observed. 


35. Mr. BAKSHI (India) recalled that when a similar draft resolution 
had been tabled at the recent meetings of the Board of Governors, his 
delegation had been one of six that had abstained from voting, for although it 
had understood the motivations and concerns of the sponsors, it had been 
concerned that the resolution was not in accordance with the provisions of the 
Agency's Statute. 
36. The draft resolution now under discussion likewise assigned to the 
Director General the responsibility of verifying the completeness of the 
inventory of South Africa's nuclear facilities, equipment and material. 
However, his delegation was convinced that neither the Agency's Statute nor 
document INFCIRC/153, which governed the Agency's rights with respect to 
safeguards agreements concluded with NPT signatories, provided for such a role 
for the Agency. Under the Statute, the application of safeguards by the 
Agency in any State could only be on the basis of a voluntary request by that 
State - except, of course, when safeguards were applied to assistance provided 
by the Agency. 
37. The Agency's role in the application of safeguards only began after a 
State had approached it with a request to apply safeguards to all or some of 
its facilities. That remained true regardless of whether the request had been 
made by the State to the Agency voluntarily or in pursuance of a bilateral or 
multilateral arrangement - such as, in the present case, the NPT. The 
responsibility of verifying that South Africa made a comprehensive declaration 
of all its nuclear facilities, equipment and material, in fulfilment of 
obligations undertaken outside the IAEA, for instance under the NPT, lay with 
the signatories to the NPT. Therefore the Director General could not legally 
be asked to verify whether South Africa had in fact declared all its 
facilities as required under the NPT. That aspect of the matter should be 
considered during the discussion of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/989/Rev.1. 
38. Before concluding, he reiterated India's consistent and long-standing 
support of the just struggle of the people of Africa, particularly South 
Africa. India had stood shoulder to shoulder with its African brothers and 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 8 


sisters and would continue to do so in the years to come. There could be no 
question about the need for the international community to ensure that all the 
nuclear facilities, equipment and material in South Africa were placed under 
safeguards. 


39. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) said that, as a member of the African Group, 
his delegation agreed with the position expressed by the representative of 
Zaire regarding the draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/989/Rev.1, the 
intent of which was to keep the matter of South Africa's nuclear programme 
under review. His delegation was fully aware that South Africa had signed a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency, and acknowledged the commitment made by 
the South African Government through the statement of its representative to 
the Board of Governors. As his country had already made clear in its general 
debate statement, it recognized the potential impact of those developments on 
non-proliferation in the region. Nevertheless, considering how much effort 
had been needed to make that much progress on the matter, there was no room 
for complacency. The draft resolution should allow the Agency time to monitor 
the implementation of the safeguards agreement, which was essential for the 
non-proliferation system, and so his delegation urged the General Conference 
to adopt it unanimously. 
40. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) pointed out that South 
Africa's accession to the NPT on 10 July was a significant foreign and nuclear 
non-proliferation policy achievement. The United States had applauded that 
bold step by President de Klerk, and wished again to commend South Africa on 
its action, which would strengthen the NPT. It was another in a series of 
bold, positive decisions by the South African Government and paved the way for 
reducing tension in southern Africa. He noted the satisfaction expressed by 
the representative of Zaire in introducing the draft resolution. South 
Africa's accession to the NPT would give important impetus to the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the area, a goal endorsed by a 
number of delegations. 
41. South Africa's prompt conclusion and signature of its full-scope NPT 
safeguards agreement with the Agency was also important. He commended both 
the Agency and South Africa for the speed with which they had acted in 
completing the process well within the 18-month period prescribed by the NPT. 
That was an example which should set the standard for the future. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 9 


42. It was clear that South Africa had responded fully to the 
recommendations made by the Board of Governors in its report to the 
thirty-first session of the General Conference pursuant to resolution 
GC(XXX)/RES/468 and other resolutions on that subject adopted by the General 
Conference, most recently resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/545. Accordingly, his 
delegation fully supported the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXV)/989/Rev.1 and joined in the call for its unanimous adoption. 
43. Mr. ZHOU (China) recalled that for a long time South Africa had 
applied a policy of racial segregation, had rejected the relevant resolutions 
passed by the United Nations General Assembly and the General Conference of 
the Agency, and had undertaken nuclear activities not subject to Agency 
safeguards. As a result, it had been condemned on numerous occasions by the 
international community, and in particular by the African countries. 
44. For some years tension had eased somewhat in southern Africa. The 
South African Government's policy of racial discrimination had become milder 
and, in the area of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, South Africa had 
adopted a more positive position as demonstrated by its accession to the NPT 
and by its signing of a safeguards agreement with the Agency. All 
Member States had welcomed that positive development, although it should not 
be forgotten that racial discrimination remained an acute problem in 
South Africa. His delegation hoped that South Africa would abandon that 
inhuman policy once and for all, and that it would honestly abide by its 
obligations under the NPT and the safeguards agreement it had signed. 
45. Mr. LAVINA (Philippines) thanked the representative of Zaire for 
his constructive attitude in trying to find a consensus on the draft 
resolution. Although in the past the Philippine delegation had always voted 
in all international authorities against South Africa, and in particular 
against its policy of apartheid, his delegation had pointed out during the 
discussion on a similar draft resolution which had taken place at the recent 
meetings of the Board of Governors that a resolution of that type did not seem 
necessary and that South Africa should be congratulated on its decision to 
accede to the NPT and to sign a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
Nevertheless, in view of the past record just outlined by the representative 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 10 


of China, his delegation had voted in favour of that draft resolution, and it 
would do the same in the case of the draft resolution now before the General 
Conference. 


46. Mr. PLUG (Netherlands), speaking on behalf of the 12 member States 
of the European Community, recalled that over the past few years many 
delegations had tried to prevail upon the Government of South Africa to accede 
to the NPT. It was therefore a source of satisfaction that South Africa had 
acceded to the Treaty and had negotiated, swiftly, a safeguards agreement 
which had just recently entered into effect. The Twelve not only took note of 
that development, but warmly welcomed it. They assumed that the Director 
General would, as a matter of course, implement that safeguards agreement, as 
he implemented all safeguards agreements. Under those circumstances, the 
Twelve would support the draft resolution under discussion. 
47. Mr. SILANGWA (Zambia), associating himself with the statement made 
by the representative of Zaire, recognized the very encouraging steps taken by 
South Africa which had certainly led to a lessening of tension in southern 
Africa. South Africa's nuclear capability had been a subject of great concern 
in the region. The aim of the draft resolution was to establish whether South 
Africa was acceding to the NPT as a nuclear-weapon or a non-nuclear-weapon 
State. He recalled that there had been a great deal of doubt about the 
nuclear weapons capability of South Africa. If the nuclear material and 
facilities in South Africa were verified with the help of the Agency, fears on 
that subject would be assuaged. The draft resolution merely sought to ensure 
that information would be available in southern Africa concerning the level of 
South Africa's nuclear capability at the time of its signing the NPT. His 
delegation therefore hoped that the resolution would be adopted by consensus. 
48. Mr. ROSALES ARIAS (Cuba) said that the energetic support his 
country had given to the South African people's struggle to rid itself of the 
hateful regime of apartheid was well known. Although from some technical 
points of view the draft resolution did not entirely conform with established 
procedure, Cuba felt able to join the consensus in favour of its adoption 
which seemed to be emerging in the General Conference. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 11 


49. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no further speakers, asked 
the General Conference if it was ready to adopt the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXV)/989/Rev.1 without a vote. 
50. It was so decided. 
51. Ms. MACHADO QUINTELLA (Brazil), supported by Mr. MONDINO 
(Argentina) and Mr. ARAIN (Pakistan), said that her delegation had joined the 
consensus and understood and shared the concerns and apprehensions of the 
sponsors, but wanted to place on record its view that the request contained in 
operative paragraph 2 of the resolution did not fall within the mandate of the 
Director General. For that reason, that paragraph should not be held to 
constitute a precedent or a new guideline for the application of safeguards by 
the Agency. 
IRAQ'S NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ITS SAFEGUARDS OBLIGATIONS (GC(XXXV)/978 
and Add.1, 995) 


52. The PRESIDENT, noting that the item had been placed on the General 
Conference's agenda at the request of the Board of Governors, which had 
discussed the issue once again the preceding week, pointed out that in 
documents GC(XXXV)/978 and Add.1 the General Conference had before it a fairly 
comprehensive set of documents which included Security Council resolutions 687 
and 707. 
53. Document GC(XXXV)/995 contained a draft resolution which had been 
submitted by Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, France, Hungary, Luxembourg, the 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Switzerland, Ukraine, the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
and the United States of America. Subsequently, Australia, Austria, 
Czechoslovakia, Germany, Italy, Japan and the Republic of Korea had 
co-sponsored the draft resolution. 
54. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that consultations were still in progress 
on items 8 and 9 of the agenda and the Iraqi delegation was involved in them. 
The content of his intervention on item 23 would depend closely on the results 
of those consultations, since all three items related to safeguards and their 
application. He therefore requested that item 23 not be taken up until those 
consultations had been concluded. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 12 


55. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), supported by Mr. TALIANI 
(Italy) and Mr. TREMEAU (France), said that he had some difficulty in 
discerning a connection between the draft resolution under consideration and 
items 8 and 9 of the agenda. He therefore saw no need to defer discussion of 
item 23. 
56. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said he simply wished to avoid the General 
Conference becoming embroiled at such a late hour in a discussion which might 
prove lengthy. However, he also wished to raise another point: the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/995 had not been distributed until 
6.30 p.m. on the preceding day. In accordance with the procedure which had 
always been followed, at least 24 hours had to elapse between the distribution 
of a draft resolution and the discussion thereof. He was not asking that 
discussion of the draft be postponed until 6.30 p.m., but only that it be 
postponed until the afternoon. 
57. The PRESIDENT read out Rule 63 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference concerning proposals and amendments: 
"Proposals and amendments shall normally be introduced in writing and 
handed to the Director General who shall circulate copies to all 
delegations. As a general rule and subject to Rule 67 of these Rules, 
no proposal shall be discussed or put to the vote unless its text has 
been distributed to all delegations not later than the day preceding 
the meeting. The presiding officer may, however, permit the discussion 
and consideration of amendments, or of motions as to procedure, even 
though these amendments or motions have not been distributed or have 
been distributed the same day." 


Consequently, though it was true that only a short time had elapsed since the 
draft had been distributed, that period of time was sufficient under Rule 63. 
As no other delegation had voiced its opposition, he assumed that the General 
Conference wished to begin its discussion of item 23 of the agenda immediately. 


58. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXV)/995 needed no commentary. Close examination 
of document GC(XXXV)/978, and in particular the cover note and the Director 
General's report, made the need for such a resolution self-evident. The way 
in which Iraq had discharged its obligations under the NPT, the Agency's 
Statute, the Charter of the United Nations, and the resolutions of the 
Security Council was, to say the least, unsatisfactory in every respect. The 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 13 


draft resolution attempted to remedy the situation in part by demanding that 
Iraq take the necessary measures to comply with International law. He 
therefore hoped that the draft would be adopted unanimously. 


59. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), noting that he had informed delegations of 
all measures which had been taken to implement Security Council resolution 687 
and all facts relating to the application of the safeguards system in Iraq in 
the statement he had made during the plenary meeting on the preceding 
Wednesday, said that he wished to draw attention to a number of important 
points. 
60. Firstly, Iraq had made a complete and definitive declaration of all 
aspects of its nuclear programme and had disclosed all information, documents, 
equipment and materials relating to that programme, as had been stated by the 
Iraqi Minister of Foreign Affairs in a letter addressed to the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations which had been distributed to all delegations. 
61. Secondly, Iraq had co-operated fully with the inspection teams and had 
granted them access to all the sites they had wished to inspect. He 
reiterated his request to the inspection teams to indicate which sites they 
wished to have access to without prior notification. The third and fourth 
inspection teams had confirmed that the Iraqi authorities had co-operated with 
them. 
62. Thirdly, as was clear from the explanations which had been provided by 
Iraq to the Security Council and the General Conference, the so-called 
violation by Iraq of its safeguards agreement was a purely technical issue, 
the importance of which had been grossly exaggerated. He pointed out that 
many laboratories, especially in certain European countries, were performing 
experiments on laser and centrifuge enrichment and on the chemistry of 
Plutonium without notifying the Agency. 
63. Fourthly, all the corrective measures required under the safeguards 
agreement between the Agency and Iraq had been implemented at the appropriate 
time. 
64. Fifthly, the Board of Governors was the only body which had the 
necessary competence to verify the application of safeguards agreements in 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 14 


States, and a safeguards implementation report was published every year for 
that purpose. The Board was also the only body authorized to report on the 
matter. It had already done so with regard to Iraq and, on 18 July 1991, it 
had adopted a resolution on the matter which had been transmitted to the 
Security Council. It was not the business of the General Conference to 
discuss the application of the safeguards system, and he assumed that the 
delegations present at the Conference were aware of the fact that they had 
never examined that question before. 


65. Sixthly, it was up to the Security Council to ensure that its 
resolutions were implemented. Accordingly, it was unthinkable and 
unjustifiable from a legal point of view for the General Conference, spurred 
on by ill-intentioned political pressure, to presume to take the place of the 
Security Council. 
66. Seventhly, most of the States which had attacked Iraq for its so-called 
non-compliance with its safeguards obligations should themselves be condemned 
for serious violations of the safeguards system which they had committed 
either openly or in secret. He recalled the violations committed by 
Luxembourg which, as was reflected in the summary records of the relevant 
meetings of the Board, had sent 41 tonnes of depleted uranium to Israel. 
Those materials had still not been placed under Agency control and nobody was 
able to say where they were at present. Israel, however, was the only State 
in the region which had developed nuclear weapons. Moreover, the United 
States and its Western allies had exported nuclear technology and materials to 
Israel without informing the Agency and had thus enabled the Tel Aviv 
Government to build up a nuclear arsenal in the Middle East. 
67. Eighthly, the attempts made by the inspection teams to prolong 
indefinitely the operations in Iraq, acting as they were with the clear 
support or even on the order of the United States and its allies, were not 
innocent and had nothing to do with the implementation of the Security Council 
resolutions which were fallacious pretexts designed to justify the continued 
interference in the internal affairs of Iraq and the theft of Iraqi technology 
and data by countries which had made hostility towards the Iraqi people and 
the Arab nation the watchword of their international politics. Such actions 
ran entirely counter to the obligations of the Agency which, under its 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 15 


safeguards system, had the responsibility of preserving the confidentiality of 
such information. The problem needed to be discussed in depth so that the 
world would know upon what path the Agency was embarked, for the measures it 
was taking in the field of armaments control were progressively turning into a 
technical and scientific espionage service. 


68. The draft resolution which was before the General Conference had no 
foundation in law and was not based on a single correct fact. It had been 
submitted by States which had themselves committed serious and dangerous 
safeguards violations and which had condoned discriminatory policies and 
double standards for the application of the safeguards system, for instance in 
their recent refusal to impose special inspections on the racist regime of 
South Africa, as reflected in the summary records of the preceding week's 
Board meetings. The draft resolution contravened the working methods of the 
Agency and its Statute. It was an attempt to transform the Agency into an 
executive instrument for policies wielded in the name of the so-called "new 
world order" at the instigation of the United States of America, supposedly 
the only superpower in the world. 
69. The Iraqi delegation did not intend to propose any amendment to the 
wording of the draft resolution, which it rejected totally and considered 
illegitimate. Nevertheless, in the interests of helping the sponsors of the 
draft resolution, if indeed they were willing to include at least one truthful 
statement in it, he suggested they might add the following paragraph to the 
preamble: 
"Noting that all Iraqi nuclear facilities, including all facilities 
under IAEA safeguards, have been totally destroyed by aerial and 
missile attacks during the American-led war against Iraq". 


It was, incidentally, incorrect to speak of Iraqi nuclear facilities now given 
that those facilities had all been destroyed during the war. 


70. The draft resolution was politically motivated and bore witness to the 
desire of certain States to continue wreaking harm on the Iraqi people by 
fabricating absurd, malicious and trumped-up accusations. If it were adopted 
it would provide the United States with a pretext for renewed aggression 
against the Iraqi people. It was a well-known fact that the United States was 
currently concentrating troops in the region in preparation for such an act of 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 16 


aggression. A vote for the draft resolution would be a vote in favour of the 
continued departure of the Agency from the objectives of its Statute and from 
the truth, and its continued refusal to grant the peoples of the Third World 
the right to scientific knowledge and technology, and the use thereof within 
their development programmes. Iraq for its part had done nothing but exercise 
that right, namely the right to possess various types of technologies. 


71. In conclusion, and in the light of the foregoing, the Iraqi delegation 
requested that a roll-call vote be taken on the draft resolution, which it 
urged the General Conference to reject. 
72. Mr. WAGNER (Czechoslovakia) said that his delegation had stated 
its position clearly during the general debate. He unreservedly supported the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/995 and asked to be Included 
in the list of co-sponsors. 
73. Mr. LOOSCH (Germany) said that Iraq's non-compliance with its 
safeguards obligations was a matter for great concern, as were Iraq's 
persistent attempts to justify itself, for example in the letter dated 
3 September 1991 addressed to the Director General by the Resident 
Representative of Iraq (GC(XXXV)/978, Attachment 4). An issue as serious as 
non-compliance with obligations entered into under an agreement concluded with 
the Agency was undeniably the concern of the Agency as a whole, and therefore 
of the General Conference, whatever special functions the Board might have in 
that respect. Furthermore, Germany, as a co-sponsor of the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXV)/995, was naturally opposed to the amendment of 
the preamble which had been proposed by the Iraqi delegation. 
74. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that the representative of Germany had 
just repeated a statement which he had made previously and which was entirely 
incorrect. Iraq had taken all the necessary corrective measures to remedy, on 
a technical level, its non-compliance with its obligations under the 
safeguards agreement it had concluded with the Agency, and had communicated to 
the Agency all the relevant information. 
75. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to vote on the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/995. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.341 
page 17 


76. At the request of the delegate of Iraq, a vote was taken by roll-call. 
77. Cameroon. having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


78. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, 
Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, 
Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of 
Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, 
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, 
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, 
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic 
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, 
Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


Against: Iraq. 


Abstaining: Algeria, Cuba, Jordan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Morocco, Namibia, Sudan. 


79. There were 71 votes in favour and 1 against, with 7 abstentions. The 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/995 was adopted!*]. 


The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 


[*] The Government of El Salvador subsequently informed the Secretariat in 
writing that, if it had been able to take part in the vote on the draft 
resolution, it would have voted in favour of its adoption. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
11 October 1991 
International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


THIRTY-FIFTH (1991) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Friday, 20 September 1991, at 3.45 p.m. 
President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 
Oral report by the Chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole on the following item: 
General debate and annual report for 1990 1 -2 
8 Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East 3 -6 
9 Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat 7 -50 
8 Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East 
(resumed) 51 -79 
24 Examination of delegates' credentials 80 -88 
25 Appointment of the External Auditor 89 -90 
26 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 91 -92 
27 Report on voluntary contributions pledged to the 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1992 93 -93 
Closing of the session 94 100 

[*] GC(XXXV)/982. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/301/Rev.2. 
91-4758 (8864e/828e) 



GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 2 


Abbreviation used in this record 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 



GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 3 


ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


1. Mr. WILSON (Australia), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presenting the Committee's report on item 7 of the agenda, "General debate and 
annual report for 1990", said that the Committee recommended that the General 
Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/1000. 
2. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/1000 was adopted. 
APPLICATION OF IAEA SAFEGUARDS IN THE MIDDLE EAST (GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2) 


3. Mr. KHERBI (Algeria), supported by Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt), said that 
the amended draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2 had only 
just been circulated and that more time was needed for delegates to study it. 
4. Mr. ROSALES ARIAS (Cuba) added that the draft resolution was at 
present available only in English. 
5. The PRESIDENT said that if there was no objection he would 
postpone consideration of the matter. 
6. It was so decided. 
ISRAELI NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES AND THREAT (GC(XXXIV)/RES/526; GC(XXXV)/960, 976) 


7. The PRESIDENT recalled that the item had been included in the 
agenda pursuant to resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/526. In accordance with operative 
paragraph 2 of that resolution, the Director General had submitted the report 
contained in document GC(XXXV)/960. The summary record of the Board's 
discussion on the matter in June was reproduced in Annex B to that document. 
In addition, a draft resolution on the subject had been submitted in document 
GC(XXXV)/979, which he invited the delegate of Jordan to introduce. 
8. Mr. MUR (Jordan) said that the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXV)/979 had been submitted with a view to ensuring that nuclear 
technology in the Middle East was used exclusively for peaceful purposes to 
improve the standard of living of the peoples in that region. Israel's 
possession of short-range and medium-range missiles and aircraft capable of 
reaching distant targets created anxiety about that country's growing nuclear 
capability. Moreover, Israel's continued occupation of Palestinian 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 4 


territories, its refusal to apply the Geneva Convention on civilians in the 
occupied areas, its annexation of Arab Jerusalem, its continued construction 
of settlements in Arab territories, its denial of the Palestinian people's 
right of self-determination and its barbaric practice of terror to suppress 
the Palestinian people were leading to increasing tension and the possibility 
of the use of nuclear weapons. 


9. Although ten years had elapsed since the adoption of Security Council 
resolution 487/1981, which had requested Israel to submit all its nuclear 
installations to the Agency's safeguards system, Israel was still refusing to 
comply with that resolution. Thus, double standards were evidently being 
applied in the implementation of Security Council resolutions. 
10. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/979 was a moderate one and he 
hoped that the Conference would respond positively and adopt it, so that 
people in the area concerned could live in peace and security. 
11. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) expressed his support 
for the draft resolution, although it had been made very mild. While he 
completely agreed with the application of full-scope safeguards in the Middle 
East, it should be remembered that, with the exception of Israel, all States 
in the Middle East with any significant nuclear activities were already under 
full-scope safeguards. A nuclear-weapon-free zone in the area could only be 
established once Israel agreed to place all its nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards. 
12. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) said that her delegation's position was well 
known. Israel should join the NPT and work for the application of full-scope 
safeguards in the Middle East. States exporting nuclear material to Israel 
should make the supply of such material conditional upon the application of 
full-scope safeguards to Israeli nuclear facilities. The co-sponsors of the 
draft resolution having made great efforts to accommodate the different views 
on the subject, she hoped that all delegations would be able to support the 
draft resolution, and requested that a roll-call vote be taken on it. 
13. Mr. LOOSCH (Germany) said that his delegation's opposition to such 
resolutions was equally well known. His country did, however, call upon all 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 5 


countries in the Near and Middle East region to play their part in laying the 
foundations for a peaceful future for all peoples in the region. The 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, involving comprehensive 
safeguards under the NPT, would be in the interest not only of the region 
concerned, but of the international community as a whole. 


14. With regard to the draft resolution in document GC(XXXV)/979, he 
requested, under Rule 75 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, 
that a separate vote be taken on operative paragraph 5. 
15. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) noted that the item had 
been on the General Conference's agenda for a number of years and that the 
debate on it was for the most part repetitive. In 1990 the issue had been 
broadened to include safeguards in the region as a whole, rather than singling 
out Israel, and indeed preambular paragraph (f) of the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXKV)/979 referred to the Director General's report contained in 
document GC(XXXV)/960 dealing with the application of safeguards in the Middle 
East. Since that was the subject of another agenda item, there was apparently 
a case of redundancy. 
16. The United States position on safeguards was quite clear, namely that 
it urged all States to become parties to the NPT and to accept full-scope 
safeguards as required by that Treaty. For its part, the United States made 
full-scope safeguards a condition of nuclear co-operation and supply. 
However, his delegation believed that the draft resolution in document 
GC(XX%V)/979, and in particular its call for reconsideration of the matter in 
1992, was unnecessary and, moreover, undesirable in that it confused the 
issues being discussed under items 8 and 9 of the agenda. 
17. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said that the item "Israeli nuclear 
capabilities and threat" had been included in the agenda for the sole purpose 
of arraigning Israel. His delegation was tired of repeating that the item was 
provocative, counter-productive and discriminatory in that it singled out 
Israel. His country had never threatened the existence of any other country, 
but had been constantly subject to threats from Arab countries. In the course 
of the Gulf War it had become clear that the Iraqi Government had taken steps 
to carry out its threat to obliterate Israel and was engaged in creating a 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 6 


nuclear potential. Israel had always maintained that Iraq had taken advantage 
of its adherence to the NPT to obtain vital technical assistance while 
violating its commitments under the NPT. Recent events had revealed Iraq's 
massive build-up of non-conventional weapons and had established the real 


scope and nature of the Iraqi threat to Israel and other States in the region. 


18. For the past 11 years, Israel had called for free and direct 
negotiations on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle 
East, in the firm belief that only direct negotiations and mutually reassuring 
arrangements could prevent nuclear proliferation. Had such negotiations been 
accepted by the Arab States, they could probably have prevented Iraq's abuse 
of the NPT. 
19. The events in Iraq had undermined the confidence which adherence to the 
NPT and Agency safeguards were supposed to confer, not only in the Middle 
East, but also worldwide, and the Agency must now give earnest thought to ways 
of restoring that confidence. 
20. In conclusion, he believed that the item on Israeli nuclear 
capabilities and threat should be removed from the agenda for future sessions 
of the Conference and urged all delegations to reject the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXV)/979. 
21. Mr. ZHOU (China) welcomed the Director General's report on the 
application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East and expressed his 
delegation's appreciation of all the efforts made by the Agency's Secretariat 
with a view to applying full-scope safeguards in that region. China had 
always supported the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East and accordingly hoped that the countries in the region would give 
serious consideration to the various proposals made by the Agency's 
Secretariat. For the same reason, it supported the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXV)/979. 
22. Mr. AL-MAT000 (Iraq) said that his delegation's views concerning 
the Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat were well known. The 
international community already had sufficient proof that Israel owned a 
complete arsenal of nuclear weapons and thus bore full responsibility for 
starting the arms race in the Middle East region. Joining that arms race had 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 7 


been the only way for the peoples of the region to exercise their legitimate 
right to defend themselves and ensure their future survival. His delegation 
fully endorsed Jordan's statement introducing the draft resolution on behalf 
of the Arab States, and wished only to add a strong condemnation of Israel's 
non-compliance with Security Council resolution 487 (1981) and its persistent 
refusal to submit its nuclear facilities to the Agency's safeguards system. 
His delegation also condemned all Powers extending their protection to Israel, 


for they were thereby obstructing the implementation of the resolutions 


concerning Israel's nuclear armaments adopted by the Agency's General 


Conference and other international forums. 


23. In response to remarks made by the United States delegation, he wished 
to point out that document GC(XXXV)/960 had been prepared pursuant to 
resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/526 regarding the Israeli nuclear capabilities and 
threat, and was not concerned with any other matter. 
24. Recalling once again that all Members were aware of the Israeli nuclear 
threat, he urged them to vote in favour of the draft resolution. 
25. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) reiterated that all 
Middle East States with appreciable nuclear activities had already submitted 
them to full-scope Agency safeguards and were even prepared to accept the 
proposed strengthened safeguards regime. The problems in the Middle East were 
caused by the Illegitimate Israeli regime, whose nuclear threat was the sole 
cause of proliferation in the region. 
26. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said he understood from the 
statement of the United States delegation that it considered the present 
agenda item to be redundant and therefore useless. However, he wished to 
remind that delegation of a past occasion when such repetition had in fact 
proved to be of benefit, namely the Security Council resolution concerning a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. That resolution had been 
presented to the United Nations General Assembly on more than one occasion, 
only to be rejected by Israel. However, Israel had recently agreed to accept 
the resolution, thus proving that repetition could be effective. 
27. The Israeli delegate had claimed that his country was the victim of 
threats from neighbouring countries, threats which were directed only at 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 8 


Israel. However, delegates would recall the acts of aggression that had 
occurred in 1956 and 1967, and remember which State had started the war 
in 1973. Syrian, Lebanese and Palestinian territories had been occupied, and 
Member States were well aware of the identity of the State responsible for 
those actions. 


28. Mr. CONSTENLA (Costa Rica) said he supported the German motion 
that a separate vote be taken on operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXV)/979. 
29. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) expressed a preference for voting 
first of all on the draft resolution as a whole, before dealing separately 
with operative paragraph 5. 
30. Mr. KHERBI (Algeria) shared the preference indicated by the 
delegate of Saudi Arabia. 
31. Mr. AMMAR (Tunisia) said that although, as the United States had 
pointed out, the resolution in question had been presented for a number of 
years in succession, no progress had yet been made with regard to the Israeli 
refusal to submit to monitoring by the international community. His country 
attached great importance to international legality and the right to security, 
and had therefore co-sponsored the draft resolution. He agreed with the views 
of the Algerian and Saudi Arabian delegations as to the order in which the 
votes should be taken. 
32. The PRESIDENT said that under the Conference's Rules of Procedure, 
the vote on operative paragraph 5 would have to be taken before the draft 
resolution as a whole was put to the vote. However, as some delegations had 
opposed taking the votes in that order, he suggested that, in accordance with 
Rule 75, a vote be taken by show of hands on the German motion to vote 
separately on the paragraph in question. 
33. There were 35 votes in favour and 31 against, with 9 abstentions. The 
motion was carried. 
34. The PRESIDENT accordingly asked the Conference to proceed with a 
roll-call vote on whether to retain operative paragraph 5 of the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/979. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 9 


35. Bulgaria, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


36. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Algeria, Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Cuba, Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, Ghana, India, 
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, 
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, 
Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian 
Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, 
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


Against: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, 
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, South 
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 


Abstaining: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Cyprus, 
Ecuador, Holy See, Republic of Korea, Namibia, Thailand, 
Venezuela. 


37. There were 36 votes in favour and 34 against, with 14 abstentions. 
The paragraph was retained. 


38. The PRESIDENT then invited the Conference to take a roll-call vote 
on the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/979 as a whole, as 


requested by the delegate of Egypt. 


39. Canada, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


40. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Algeria, Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Cuba, Cyprus, 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, Ghana, 
India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, 
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syrian 
Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 10 


Against: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, 
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, South Africa, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 


Abstaining: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Holy See, Republic of Korea, Romania, Thailand, Ukraine, 
Venezuela. 


41. There were 39 votes in favour and 31 against, with 13 abstentions. 
The draft resolution was adopted. 
42. Mr. WILSON (Australia), explaining his vote, said that he had 
opposed the resolution because it sought to keep before the Conference 
political issues extraneous to the functions and responsibilities of the 
Agency. His delegation had repeatedly stated that such matters were not 
appropriate subjects for discussion by the Agency. It regretted that the 
issue continued to come before the Conference, where it gave rise to sterile 
debate consisting largely of the annual repetition of set-piece statements, 
offering little prospect of making a real contribution to security in the 
region. Australia had always urged all States to accept the NPT, or at least 
the application of full-scope safeguards and the failure to do so on the part 
of Israel and a small number of other States was a source of concern to his 
country. 
43. Mr. PLUG (Netherlands), speaking on behalf of the 12 Member States 
of the European Community, said that the Twelve had not supported the 
resolution for the same reasons that had led them to decide against it the 
previous year. In addition, there was now even less need for the resolution, 
as its only constructive aspect, "the application of safeguards in the Middle 
East", was now a separate agenda item. 
44. Mr. BAKSHI (India) recalled that, according to Article III.A.5 of 
the Agency's Statute, safeguards could be applied "at the request of the 
parties, to any bilateral or multilateral arrangement, or at the request of a 
State, to any of that State's activities in the field of atomic energy". 
Despite upholding that principle, India had supported the resolution submitted 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 11 


in document GC(XXXV)/979, as well as all earlier resolutions passed by the 
General Conference on that issue, because of the exceptional situation created 


in the Middle East by the undisclosed Israeli nuclear programme, by Israel's 
refusal to withdraw from the occupied territories, and by its continued denial 
of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. It was on account of the 
threat posed by Israel's nuclear activities that the United Nations Security 
Council, following the Israeli military attack on an Iraqi nuclear reactor 
subject to Agency safeguards, had adopted its resolution 487(1981) calling 
upon Israel urgently to submit all its nuclear installations to the Agency's 


safeguards. Ten years on, that requirement still remained unfulfilled, and so 
the task entrusted to the Agency by the Security Council had yet to be 
accomplished. The resolution just adopted would enable the Agency to carry 
out that task, and that was why India had supported it. 


45. Mr. MONDINO (Argentina) said that his country fully shared the 
deep concern of the international community at the escalation of tension in 
the Middle East and reaffirmed the need to encourage and support all efforts 
aimed at preserving peace, stability and compliance with the aims and 
principles of the United Nations Charter in the region. 
46. The position of Argentina regarding the application of safeguards was 
well known: it was firmly convinced that confidence in the Agency's 
safeguards system could only be maintained if the system was applied in strict 
conformity with the Statute. Consequently, any attempt to impose safeguards 
against the sovereign will of a Member State would strike at the essence of 
the system and detract from its credibility. Even a decision taken by 
consensus by the General Conference could not alter the voluntary nature of a 
Member State's acceptance of Agency safeguards, let alone make obligatory the 
acceptance of full-scope safeguards, which were not mentioned in the Agency's 
Statute. Acceptance of such safeguards could be legally binding only for 
States which had freely acceded to an international instrument imposing on 
them an obligation to that effect. Accordingly, Argentina had abstained from 
voting. 
47. Mr. KOSTENKO (Ukraine) said that resolutions of the type contained 
in document GC(XXXV)/979 did not offer a technical organization such as the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 12 


Agency the opportunity to take a step forward in the shared search towards 
ending the problems that had built up over so many years in the Middle East. 
His delegation had therefore abstained. However, he reiterated his country's 
support for those parts of the resolution that referred to the setting up of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 


48. Mr. ENDO (Japan) said that his country's basic position remained 
unchanged: it firmly believed that Israel and other countries which had not 
yet acceded to the NPT should do so as promptly as possible and should agree 
to place all their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
49. However, the Agency was a technical international organization, 
entrusted with promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy worldwide and 
with ensuring global nuclear non-proliferation. Introducing extraneous 
matters such as the proposals contained in document GC(XXXV)/979 only caused 
an undesirable distraction from the Agency's original aims and mandate, and 
could not lead to any constructive results. Moreover, continuing to discuss 
the matter in the future within the Agency would jeopardize the normal conduct 
of its activities as defined in its Statute. Accordingly, Japan had voted 
against the resolution. 
50. Ms. MACHADO OUINTELLA (Brazil) said that her delegation fully 
endorsed the views expressed by the delegate of Argentina. 
APPLICATION OF IAEA SAFEGUARDS IN THE MIDDLE EAST (GC(XXZV)/980/Rev.2) (resumed) 


51. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt), introducing, on behalf of the sponsors, the 
amended draft resolution on the subject contained in document 
GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2, stressed the importance of non-proliferation and the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy and highlighted the danger that existed in the 
Middle East from the presence of nuclear weapons. She called upon all States 
in the region to submit all their nuclear installations to the Agency's 
safeguards and control, and also upon the Agency's Director General, together 
with countries bearing special responsibility in the region, to prepare a 
model safeguards agreement that took full account of the circumstances and 
conditions prevailing there. 
52. The sponsors of the draft resolution firmly believed that in order to 
achieve peace and security in the Middle East, a new approach was needed in 
which the co-operation of all States that either exported or imported nuclear 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 13 


materials would be required. In particular, exporting countries should be 
prepared to submit lists of their nuclear material shipments to the Agency and 


importing countries to place their nuclear installations under Agency 
safeguards. All countries in the region must be persuaded urgently to join in 
that endeavour if the Middle East was to emulate the pattern set over the last 
few years in matters of disarmament by the United States and the Soviet 
Union. 


53. The sponsors had been calling for a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East since 1974, and had been encouraged in submitting their draft 
resolution by recent international developments in disarmament and the 
Agency's new role in the application of safeguards. Given its high aims, 
therefore, she hoped that the Conference would adopt the draft resolution and 
thereby mark the beginning of a new era of co-operation between the Middle 
East region and the Agency. 
54. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium) said his delegation was particularly 
pleased to welcome a draft resolution that, for the first time, offered the 
possibility of an equitable solution to the long-standing problems in the 
Middle East. He fully endorsed the text given in document GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2, 
which was well conceived and well balanced. The adoption of the resolution by 
the General Conference would show that the Agency was aware of its responsibilities 
and ready to play a part in solving a conflict which had disturbed 
international peace and security for more than forty years. 
55. Mr. EL-SAEID (Kuwait) associated himself with the comments made by 
the delegate of Egypt. He was convinced that the Agency's safeguards could 
play an important role In the Middle East and hoped that the resolution would 
be approved unanimously by the General Conference. 
56. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) said that his country had always favoured the 
setting-up of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different regions of the world. 
The application of Agency safeguards to all nuclear installations in the 
Middle East in a non-discriminatory manner, together with the establishment of 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region, would be an important 
confidence-building measure and would strengthen the non-proliferation 
regime. His delegation therefore fully supported the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 14 


57. Mr. PLUG (Netherlands), speaking on behalf of the 12 Member States 
of the European Community, welcomed the constructive efforts by the sponsors 
of the draft resolution to contribute to the development of a zone free of 
weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, in the Middle East. 
In the view of the Twelve, the establishment of such a zone was primarily a 
task for the countries in that region and would require the co-operation of 
all States concerned. In that respect, the wording of operative paragraph 2 
of the draft resolution placed too heavy a burden on the Director General of 
the Agency. Nevertheless, the Twelve felt that the resolution would be a most 
important step on the way to establishing a climate of confidence in the 
region and would vote in favour of its adoption. 
58. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said his country had always 
supported the adherence to the NPT and acceptance of full-scope safeguards by 
all Middle East States, and had called for those measures on several previous 
occasions, including meetings of the General Conference and of the United 
Nations Security Council. The item should if necessary remain on the agenda 
of the General Conference for several years to come. His delegation hoped the 
forthcoming peace conference to be held in the Middle East would result in an 
equitable and just solution for the fundamental problems relating to the 
presence of weapons of mass destruction in that region. It therefore wished 
to see discussion of document GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2 postponed until the following 
year, in case it should affect, by its wording, the outcome of the peace 
conference. 
59. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that great efforts had 
been made recently to broaden the scope of discussions concerning the question 
of non-proliferation in the Middle East away from single issues towards 
consideration of all the countries in the region. In the opinion of his 
delegation, that was the right direction for the Agency to take. He 
regretted, therefore, that the General Conference had elected to include a 
separate item concerning Israel in the agenda for its next session. The 
present draft resolution, by contrast with that adopted on item 9, was much 
more in keeping with the Agency's role and concerns, could be more effectively 
discharged by the Agency, and deserved approval by a consensus of the General 
Conference. He had therfore listened with regret to the statement made by the 
delegate of the Syrian Arab Republic. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 15 


60. Mr. KHERBI (Algeria) said that the draft resolution, if adopted, 
would have both a short- and a long-term impact on the operations and the 
Statute of the Agency. His country unreservedly endorsed the principle of 
non-proliferation, both vertical and horizontal, but did not wholly approve of 
the methods of preparation or the wording of the amended document now before 
the Conference. Therefore, although fully in agreement with many of the 
points it contained, his delegation wished to see consideration of the item 
deferred, believing that immediate adoption of the resolution would have a 
negative effect on the Agency and on diplomatic and strategic considerations 
in the Middle East. 
61. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) felt that the arrangements made for consultations 
on the amended version of the draft resolution to take place among 
representatives of the various regions had been adequate to allow interested 
delegations to express their views; there had certainly been no intention to 
hide the proposed amendments from any delegation. While she agreed that the 
item should remain under discussion, she would welcome an early decision on 
the draft resolution and hoped that there would be a consensus. If misgivings 
persisted, however, she might request a roll-call vote on it. 
62. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said it was gratifying 
to note that the draft resolution had brought delegations closer together on 
the issue of safeguards in the Middle East. Believing as he did in the 
application of full-scope safeguards to all Middle East Member States, he felt 
that the draft resolution's only shortcoming was its general nature: it 
should be made more specific and point to the source of the nuclear threat in 
the Middle East, namely Israel. 
63. Mr. TREMEAU (France) said that while resolutions on the present 
subject had in the past been no more than a ritual, the draft resolution now 
under discussion was positive, constructive and novel in approach and came at 
an important time in the life of the Agency as well as in the broader international 
context, when the cause of non-proliferation was at a crossroads and 
there was general agreement that the safeguards system should be upgraded. It 
was arguably the most important draft resolution before the Conference, and 
for that reason, but also for the sake of the Agency's credibility and of 
international democracy, it should be considered and decided upon at the 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 16 


present session - unless its sponsors volunteered to have it withdrawn - for 
after all, Member States were entitled, indeed had the duty, to prepare and 
table resolutions. 


64. Mr. WILSON (Australia) commended the Secretariat on the thought it 
had given to the application of safeguards in the Middle East and encouraged 
it to study the subject further. The "measures" cited by the Secretariat in 
Annex A to document GC(XXXV)/960 corresponded to his country's view of how 
Agency safeguards should be strengthened wherever they were applied, in 
particular through the use of special inspections, where appropriate, and the 
earlier provision of design information. 
65. The objective of universal adherence to the NPT was fundamental, and he 
called upon the few Middle East States which had not yet acceded to the NPT to 
do so soon, or at least to accept full-scope safeguards. He supported an 
increase in the Agency's contribution to confidence-building in the Middle 
East through the application of IAEA safeguards to all nuclear installations 
in that region, and called upon those NPT parties which had yet to conclude 
and bring into force their NPT safeguards agreements with the Agency to do so 
promptly in fulfilment of their Treaty obligations. 
66. As to the draft resolution contained in document GC(KXXV)/980/Rev.2, it 
should attract wide support since it offered the prospect of progress towards 
the universal application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East, and his 
delegation was certainly in favour of adopting it. 
67. Mr. TALIANI (Italy) said that although two delegations wished to 
postpone consideration of the draft resolution to the next session of the 
General Conference, none had actually spoken against it. Virtually all other 
speakers had expressed their satisfaction with the draft resolution and their 
desire to adopt it forthwith. He hoped that those favouring deferral could be 
persuaded to join in a consensus. 
68. Mr. CZERVENY (Hungary) said that he welcomed the draft resolution 
as an expression of the long-standing wish of all Member States to apply 
Agency safeguards in the Middle East with a view to the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in that very important region. The Agency had a 
historic opportunity to make a positive contribution to that process. Since 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 17 


the sponsors of the draft resolution, and Egypt in particular, had evidently 
understood that historic opportunity and attempted to formulate the resolution 
in a responsible manner acceptable to all, he supported its adoption, though 
he would accept a vote on it if need be; in that event, he would vote in 
favour of its adoption, for the introduction and application of Agency 
safeguards in the Middle East was a matter of urgency. 


69. Mr. GHONDA (Zaire) said that, despite a certain hesitancy, there 
was clearly general support for the reasons advanced by Egypt, France, Belgium 
and Hungary in favour of adopting the draft resolution, which met the concerns 
of all the parties present. In accordance with the democratic process, to 
which the French delegation had drawn attention, the voice of the people, 
which was also usually the voice of the majority, should prevail and the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2 be adopted. 
70. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that although he endorsed 
the principles embodied in the draft resolution, the text had been communicated 
to him too late and he would prefer the item to be placed on the agenda 
for the next session. However, if the Conference wished to consider the 
matter and adopt the draft resolution by consensus on the present occasion, he 
would follow that decision and withdraw his request for the item to be 
deferred. 
71. Mr. ALER (Sweden) associated himself with the Australian 
delegation and others in supporting the draft resolution and hoping it would 
be approved by consensus. 
72. Mr. SALLOUKH (Lebanon) said that the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2, in whose preparation his country had participated, 
was a step towards the establishment of a lasting and just peace in the 
Middle East. The countries in that region, and Lebanon in particular, wanted 
it to be free of weapons of mass destruction. Consequently, if the draft 
resolution enjoyed a consensus, he would support it in the interest of 
restoring peace in the Middle East and throughout the world. 
73. The PRESIDENT said he took it that the Conference wished to adopt 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2 without a vote. 
74. It was so decided. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 18 


75. Mr. BAKSHI (India) said that he wished to explain his delegation's 
position regarding the resolution contained in document GC(XXXV)/980/Rev.2. 
During the discussion of the present agenda item, "Application of IAEA 
safeguards in the Middle East", no Middle East Member State seemed to have 
expressed disagreement with the call, in the operative paragraphs of the 
resolution, for the application of IAEA safeguards to all nuclear activities 
in the region. In view of the implied consent of all States in the region to 
the application of Agency safeguards to all their nuclear activities and the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, his delegation 
had gone along with the consensus to adopt the resolution, even though he was 
not aware that any formal request had been made to the Agency by the 
Member States of the region for the application of Agency safeguards, as 
required by Article III.A.5 of the Statute. It did not appear necessary to 
insist on observance of the law in the letter when it was clear to all that it 
was being honoured in spirit. However, that was without prejudice to his 
country's consistent and long-standing position of principle that, in keeping 
with Article III.A.5, the Agency could apply safeguards only on the basis of 
voluntary requests by Member States, regardless of whether the requests were 
made individually, bilaterally, or as part of a multilateral arrangement. 
76. Mr. AL-MATOOO (Iraq), explaining his country's position on the 
resolution, said that, apart from wishing not to break the consensus at the 
present meeting, his country had always supported the creation of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, believing as it did that all 
nuclear facilities should be placed under international safeguards. However, 
despite the general agreement on the implementation of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone, Israel persisted in its refusal to submit its nuclear facilities to the 
safeguards system. The resolution inviting Israel to do so passed earlier 
under agenda item 9 was very general in nature, imposed no legal obligation on 
Israel to apply Security Council resolution 487(1981), and, in conjunction 
with the resolution on the present item, led to the inherent contradiction 
that all the countries in the region would be applying a global system of 
safeguards except Israel, which was the only one to possess nuclear weapons. 
77. Mr. MONDINO (Argentina) said that although he had joined the 
consensus on the resolution, he wished to record his reservations on operative 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 19 


paragraph 1 for the reasons already indicated following the vote under agenda 
item 9. 


78. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said that his delegation found it 
unacceptable that an item entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat" 
should again be placed on the agenda for the next session of the General 
Conference for the sole purpose of arraigning Israel. However, his delegation 
had decided to support efforts to develop a more constructive approach. In 
particular, it believed that IAEA safeguards should be applied in the Middle 
East in the context of a nuclear-weapon-free zone based on the following 
principles: (i) Primacy of zonal initiatives; (ii) Negotiations among the 
States in the region; and (iii) Verification of agreements through mutual 
inspections complemented by IAEA safeguards. Those were the essential 
conditions for a credible non-proliferation regime in the Middle East, and 
bringing them about would serve as an unambiguous confidence-building measure. 
79. Ms. MACHADO QUINTELLA (Brazil) said that, having signed and 
ratified the Tlatelolco Treaty creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin 
America, her Government applauded the aim of the resolution just adopted, 
namely to promote the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East. However, the voluntary adherence of the States concerned was of 
paramount importance to achieving that aim. She would therefore have preferred 
the wording of operative paragraph 1, to reflect her country's views 
more closely, but she had joined in the consensus because of the political 
importance of the resolution. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXXV)/996) 


80. The PRESIDENT drew attention to document GC(XXXV)/996, which 
contained the General Committee's report on its meeting to examine delegates' 
credentials, as provided for in Rule 28 of the General Conference's Rules of 
Procedure. Paragraphs 2 to 18 of the report described the manner in which the 
Committee had approached its task and conveyed the opinions expressed during 
the discussion. The Committee had agreed to recommend the adoption of the 
draft resolution contained in paragraph 19 of its report. 
81. Since the report had been issued, credentials in proper form had also 
been received from Ukraine and Jordan. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 20 


82. Mr. SALLOUKH (Lebanon), speaking on behalf of the delegations from 
member countries of the League of Arab States participating in the General 
Conference, drew attention to the reservations regarding the credentials of 
the Israeli delegate expressed by those delegations in the statement 
circulated in document GC(XXXV)/981 and reproduced in Annex I to the General 
Committee's report in document GC(XXXV)/996. 
83. Mr. GHONDA (Zaire), speaking on behalf of the African Group, drew 
attention to the reservations regarding the credentials of the South African 
delegate expressed by that Group in the statement reproduced in Annex II to 
document GC(XXXV)/996. 
84. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) expressed strong 
reservations concerning the credentials of the Israeli delegate because 
Israel, from its very inception, had illegitimately occupied Palestinian land 
and imposed a Zionist State on the peoples of the Middle East region. 
85. Ms. TALLAWY (Egypt) reiterated her country's reservations 
regarding the credentials of the South African delegate, as expressed in the 
African Group's statement in Annex II to the General Committee's report. 
86. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) said that he, too, shared the African Group's 
reservations about the credentials of the South African delegate. The recent 
actions taken by South Africa were only a part of the measures necessary for 
that country to be accepted by the international community. Moreover, 
although certain legal props of the apartheid system had been removed, 
discrimination still persisted in South Africa. 
87. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) endorsed the statement made by 
Lebanon and the Islamic Republic of Iran regarding the credentials of the 
Israeli delegate. 
88. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) also associated himself with the statement by 
the delegate of Lebanon concerning the credentials of the Israeli delegate. 
Moreover, he wished to place on record his reservations about the credentials 
of the delegate representing Afghanistan. In view of the decision taken by 
the Organization of the Islamic Countries and the realities of the situation 
in Afghanistan, Pakistan continued to withhold recognition of the regime in 
Kabul. 
88 bis. The draft resolution contained in paragraph 19 of document 
GC(XXXV)/996 was adopted. 



GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 21 


APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 


89. The PRESIDENT recalled that the term of office of the present 
External Auditor, who was the Auditor General of Canada, would end after he 
had completed auditing the Agency's accounts for 1991, and that it was 
therefore necessary for the Conference at its current session to make an 
appointment to provide for the auditing of the accounts for 1992 and 1993. He 
had been informed that the Auditor General of Canada would be prepared to 
serve as the Agency's External Auditor for a further period of two years, and 
so he proposed that the General Conference appoint the Auditor General of 
Canada as External Auditor to audit the Agency's accounts for 1992 and 1993. 
90. The President's proposal was accepted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


91. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was currently 
represented on the Agency's Staff Pension Committee by two members -
Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands) and Ms. Schick (Australia) - with Mr. Hamada 
(Tunisia) and Mr. Hernandez (Argentina) as alternates. Mr. de Klerk and 
Mr. Hernandez being no longer available to serve on the Committee, he proposed 
that Mr. Hamada (Tunisia) be elected as a member and Mr. Khalifa (Egypt) and 
Mr. Myck (Luxembourg) as alternates. 
92. Mr. Hamada (Tunisia) was elected as a member of the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee and Mr. Khalifa (Egypt) and Mr. Myck (Luxembourg) were 
elected as alternates, with Ms. Schick continuing to serve as a member. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1992 ((GC(XXXV)/972/Rev.3) 


93. The PRESIDENT said that, as indicated in document 
GC(XXXV)/972/Rev.3, by 7 p.m. on 19 September 1991 the voluntary contributions 
pledged by Member States to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 
1992 had reached a total of US $17 880 688. Since then, Belgium had pledged 
$166 667, Kenya $5250 and Zaire $1500, thus bringing the total amount pledged 
to $18 054 105. 

GC(XXXV)/OR.342 
page 22 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


94. Mr. CSERVENY (Hungary), speaking as a representative of the 
country whose delegate had chaired the Conference's preceding session, 
commended the diplomatic skill and professional ability with which the 
President had conducted the work of the Conference, which had had before it 
several complex and controversial issues. Under the President's able guidance, 
the Agency had completed a truly historic session and was now ready for the 
necessary adjustments and improvements to meet the diverse challenges facing it. 
95. Mr. ENDO (Japan), speaking on behalf of the Far East Group, 
expressed its sincere appreciation of the excellent way in which the President 
had guided the work of the Conference. 
96. Mr. GHONDA (Zaire), Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Repubic of Iran), 
Mr. BOROVIKOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic), Mr. REUTER 
(Luxembourg), Mr. CASTRO DIAZ BALART (Cuba) and Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) 
paid rich tributes to the exemplary manner in which the President had 
conducted the proceedings. 
97. The PRESIDENT said he was touched by the kind words addressed to 
him. It had indeed been an honour and privilege to serve as the President of 
the thirty-fifth regular session of the Conference. He wished to express his 
gratitude to delegations for the co-operation extended to him during the 
conduct of business, which had involved a number of complex problems. 
98. On behalf of the Conference he thanked the Austrian authorities and the 
City of Vienna for their traditional hospitality and for the facilities 
provided at the Hofburg conference centre. He also thanked the Director 
General and his staff, whose valuable support had enabled the Conference to 
complete its work successfully. 
99. Before closing the session, in accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited delegations to observe a minute of silence dedicated to 
prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


100. The PRESIDENT declared the thirty-fifth regular session of the 
General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m. 



