GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 


2 October 1992 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 21 September 1992, at 10.45 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) 
President: Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


Opening of the session 1 -7 


1 Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 8 - 14 


Point of order regarding the participation 
of the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) 15 - 26 


2 Applications for membership of 
the Agency 27 - 35 


3 Message from the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations 36 - 42 


6 Voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1993 43 - 45 


[*] GC(XXXVI)/1001. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVl)/INF/313/Rev.2. 


0399n/030n 
92-03652 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 2 


Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
4 Statement by the Director General 46 - 111 
7 General debate and annual report 
for 1991 112 - 138 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Japan 
Canada 
112 - 123 
124 - 138 

Abbreviations used in this record 


ASSET 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 


CANDU 
Canada deuterium-uranium [reactor] 


CEC 
Commission of the European Communities 


DPRK 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 


FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 


FCCC 
Framework Convention on Climate Change 


IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency 
ICGFI International Consultative Group on Food Irradiation 
INES International Nuclear Event Scale 


ITER 
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 


NEA 
Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 


NPT 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 


NUSSAG 
Nuclear Safety Standards Advisory Group 


OSART 
Operational Safety Review Team 


RADWASS 
Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 


RBHK 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 


RCA 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 


SAGSI 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 


TACF 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 


WHO 
World Health Organization 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 3 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirty-sixth regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, after welcoming all the participants, 
said that in the past twelve months international events at the political, 
economic and geographical levels had had repercussions for the Agency, one of 
which was the welcome acquisition of new Members as a result of developments 
in Eastern Europe. Such changes brought important new challenges and 
responsibilities for the Agency. 
4. In the field of safeguards, the Agency's role had been under review as 
a consequence of recent international developments, and various new measures 
were under consideration. The Director General and the Secretariat had made 
commendable efforts in the past year to render safeguards more effective, 
efficient and credible. At the same time, the major methodological and 
technological developments that had been talcing place in safeguards during 
recent years seemed to warrant a thorough review of the entire safeguards 
system. 
5. Still on the subject of safeguards, various agreements signed with the 
Agency showed that some progress had been made towards enhancing international 
confidence with regard to the nuclear fuel cycle. The recent developments 
involving Argentina, Brazil and the Agency and the successful completion of 
the process of amending the Treaty of Tlatelolco were welcome and important 
steps towards the Treaty's entry into force in the near future and the 
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America. 
6. As far as nuclear safety was concerned, serious measures had been 
necessary in the past year to improve safety levels at certain types of 
nuclear installations, and the need for some kind of international safety 
convention was now more evident than ever before. 
7. Finally, the Agency's present financial situation was a source of 
concern to all its Member States and another instance of the Agency's 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 4 


vulnerability to the effects of international events. He urged Member States 
to co-operate among themselves and with the Secretariat in seeking a speedy 


solution to those problems, taking due account of the financial situation of 
many Member States. 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


8. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
9. Mr. LAMAMRA (Algeria), speaking on behalf of the African Group, 
proposed Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria) as President of the thirty-sixth regular 
session of the General Conference. Mr. Adekanye occupied an eminent position 
in the international organizations in Vienna as Resident Representative of 
Nigeria and Chairman of the Group of 77. 
10. Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria) was elected President by acclamation. 
11. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, on his own behalf and on behalf of all 
the delegates, congratulated Mr. Adekanye on his election and wished him every 
success. 
Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria) took the Chair. 


12. The PRESIDENT said that he appreciated the honour done to himself 
and his country by his election as President of the thirty-sixth session of 
the General Conference and the expression of confidence which it represented 
in his country's role in the Agency's work. He also wished to express his 
gratitude to Mr. Santana Carvalho, the outgoing President, under whose 
guidance the Agency had accomplished a great deal. He looked forward to 
presiding over a fruitful session, which he trusted would be marked by a 
spirit of co-operation. 
13. He recalled that under Rules 34 and 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the 
Conference had to elect eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole and five additional members of the General Committee. Since one 
group had yet to agree on its candidates to serve on the General Committee, he 
suggested proceeding with the election of the candidates whose names were 
already known and deferring the election of the other member of the Committee 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 5 


until the regional group in question had completed its consultations. He 
therefore proposed that, under Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, the 
delegates of Bangladesh, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, the Republic of Korea, New 
Zealand, the Russian Federation and the United States of America be elected as 
Vice-Presidents and Mr. Fahmy El-Saidi (Egypt) as Chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole and that, under Rule 40, the delegates of Spain, Qatar, Ukraine and 
the United Kingdom be elected as additional members of the General Committee. 


14. The President's proposals were accepted. 
POINT OF ORDER REGARDING THE PARTICIPATION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF 
YUGOSLAVIA (SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO) 


15. Mr. WALKER (United Kingdom), taking the floor on a point of order, 
said that the European Community and its member States had given long and 
careful thought to the position of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia 
and Montenegro) in international organizations, including the United Nations. 
During the latter part of the 46th session of the General Assembly, the member 
States of the European Community had repeatedly stated that they did not 
accept the automatic continuity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 
international organizations, including the United Nations. 
16. It was clear that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia did not have any 
right to claim the seat of the former Socialist Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia. Its position in that regard was no different from that of other 
components of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. 
17. Under those circumstances it was anomalous and unacceptable that 
representatives of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should continue to 
participate in the work of international organizations, including United 
Nations bodies. The European Community and its Member States were pressing 
for early action by the appropriate organs of the United Nations in accordance 
with the Charter. They welcomed the Security Council resolution adopted on 
19 September which, inter alia, recommended to the General Assembly that the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should apply for membership in the United 
Nations and that it should not participate in the work of the General Assembly. 
18. Mr. SELIN (United States of America) said that his Government had 
asked him to read out the following statement: 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 6 


"We call your attention to Security Council resolution 757 of 
30 May 1992, which noted: 'The claim by the Federal Republic of 


Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to continue automatically the 


membership of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 


the United Nations has not been generally accepted*. 


"The United States firmly believes that the Socialist Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia no longer exists. Furthermore, we do not consider 
Serbia-Montenegro to be the continuation of, or sole successor to, the 
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. 


"Accordingly, the position of the United States is that Serbia-
Montenegro is not entitled to assume, either as member or observer, the 
seat of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 
international organizations, including this organization. 


"The United States also believes that this issue needs to be resolved 
first in the United Nations Security Council and General Assembly and 
that this body should be guided by their disposition of the issue." 


19. Mr. CSERVENY (Hungary) said that the declaration by the People's 
Republic of Serbia and the Republic of Montenegro of 27 April 1992 had raised 
questions concerning the continuity of Yugoslavia's membership in international 
organizations and conferences, including the IAEA. His country had 
never accepted the idea that Serbia and Montenegro should automatically 
continue the membership of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
in international organizations and conferences, including the IAEA. It had 
become increasingly clear that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia could not 
rightfully claim to be the legal successor of the former Socialist Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia in the United Nations or in other international 
organizations. It was essential that the same conditions be applied to all 
countries which had formed part of the Socialist Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia. He associated himself with the views which had been expressed by 
the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the Member States of the 
European Community and welcomed the Security Council resolution of 
19 September, which, inter alia, recommended to the General Assembly that the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should apply for membership in the United 
Nations and that it should not participate in the work of the General 
Assembly. Hungary would do its utmost, in accordance with the Charter, to put 
the recommendations of the Security Council into practice as soon as possible. 
20. Mr. WILSON (Australia) said that Australia had not accepted the 
claim of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that it continued the 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 7 


international personality of the former Socialist Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia. It therefore reserved its position with regard to the status of 
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and issues relating to representation by 
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in international organizations. It was the 
view of the Australian Government that those essentially political questions 
should be decided in the United Nations Security Council and General Assembly 
rather than in the specialized agencies or other bodies such as the IAEA. 


21. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) endorsed the views which had been 
expressed by earlier speakers. 
22. Mr. AAMODT (Norway), speaking on behalf of the delegations of 
Denmark, Iceland, Finland, Sweden and Norway, said that the Governments of 
those States did not recognize the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as the 
successor State to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. He 
therefore considered that the presence of the delegation in question at the 
current series of meetings should not be allowed to prejudice future 
decisions, pending a final decision in the United Nations. 
23. Mr. VETTOVAGLIA (Switzerland) associated himself with the views 
which had been expressed by the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf 
of the Member States of the European Community, and stressed that the presence 
of the representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at the current 
series of meetings should in no way be viewed as setting a precedent. 
24. Ms. DJURICKOVIC-TUVIC (Yugoslavia) said her delegation deeply 
regretted that the issue of its participation and status had been raised at 
the General Conference, particularly in view of the universal nature of the 
Agency and its objectives. The General Conference was clearly not the right 
place for a discussion of political problems, especially since those problems 
were currently under discussion at the United Nations General Assembly. The 
issue of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's membership in international 
organizations should not be taken up before its status in the United Nations 
had been resolved. 
25. While the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would continue to exercise all 
the rights conferred upon and all the obligations assumed by the Socialist 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in international relations, including its 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 8 


membership in international organizations, it had never claimed to he the sole 


legal successor to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On 
the contrary, it had expressed its readiness to discuss succession issues and 
all other relevant matters on an equal footing with all the others concerned 
at the International Conference on the former Yugoslavia which was currently 
talcing place. It had also reaffirmed its total commitment to the decisions 
taken at the London stage of the International Conference on the former 
Yugoslavia, in particular that all outstanding issues should be resolved by 
peaceful means, on the basis of existing borders, and through a process of 
urgent and continuing negotiations. The exclusion of the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia from the Agency and other international organizations could be 
detrimental to the peace negotiations in progress. On the other hand, any 


final decision on the membership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the 
United Nations and other international organizations should not be allowed to 
prejudice eventual solutions to the overall crisis in the former Socialist 


Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was, 
moreover, not attempting to hinder the inclusion of newly formed States in the 
United Nations and other international organizations. 


26. The PRESIDENT said that the question of the participation of the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in the United Nations 
and other international organizations had been discussed towards the end of 
the preceding week in the Security Council of the United Nations. The 
Security Council had been reported as having made a recommendation to the 
General Assembly, but it seemed that the General Assembly had not yet taken a 
final decision as to whether the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia could continue 
the membership of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the 
United Nations or not. In those circumstances, he suggested that no decision 
should be taken with regard to the representation of Yugoslavia in the Agency 
until the General Assembly had taken a decision. In the meantime, it was 
understood that the participation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
(Serbia and Montenegro) in the activities of the Conference and of any other 
organ of the Agency should be viewed as being without prejudice to the final 
disposition of the issue. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 9 


APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(XXXVI)/1002, 1003 and 1025) 


27. The PRESIDENT informed delegates that there were three applications 
for membership before the General Conference, which had been submitted 
by the Republic of Croatia (document GC(XXXVI)/1002), the Republic of Slovenia 
(document GC(XXXVI)/1003), and the Republic of Uzbekistan (document 
GC(XXXVI/1025). The applications had been endorsed by the Board, which had 
also submitted draft resolutions dealing with each of those cases for adoption 
by the General Conference. 
28. He assumed that the Conference wished to adopt the three draft 
resolutions in question. 
29. It was so decided. 
30. Mr. BRNELIC (Croatia) said that it was a great pleasure and honour 
to be able to thank all those present, on behalf of the Republic of Croatia, 
for accepting Croatia as a Member State of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency. President Tudjman, on the occasion of Croatia joining the United 
Nations family, had stated that Croatia assumed all the international 
obligations and would honour all the treaties which it had inherited from the 
former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its predecessors. 
31. Although his country's history dated back a thousand years, Croatia was 
still a young State. Nevertheless, it had capable and experienced experts who 
had been closely involved in the work of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency, were no strangers to its activities and procedures, and were ready to 
serve the Agency again. With the accession of the Republic of Croatia, the 
Agency would gain a useful and professional associate committed to the aims 
and objectives of the organization. 
32. Mr. GUTIERREZ-LEYTON (Chile) noted that he had specifically 
requested the floor earlier in order to lend his support to the applications 
of Slovenia and Croatia for membership of the Agency, and he was surprised 
that he had not been invited to speak. Chile was particularly pleased that 
Croatia and Slovenia had been accepted into the Agency and he expressed his 
firm support for that decision. 
33. Mr. BOH (Slovenia) said that it was a great honour and a privilege 
to address the General Conference on behalf of the Republic of Slovenia, and 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 10 


he thanked the Board and the Secretariat for the confidence they had shown in 


endorsing Slovenia's application for membership of the Agency. Slovenia's 


acceptance as a full member of the Agency was the culmination of a year of 


endeavour. 


34. Slovenia would strive to meet fully its obligations under the Agency's 
Statute, and intended to contribute in important ways to the IAEA's activities 


in the field of nuclear safety. 


35. In conclusion, he extended his sincere thanks to the representative of 
Chile for his support, and welcomed the Republic of Croatia and the Republic 


of Uzbekistan as fellow new Members of the Agency. 


MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


36. Mr. GIACOMELLI (Representative of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations) conveyed the Secretary-General's congratulations to the Agency 
on its thirty-fifth anniversary and his particular regret at not being able to 
address the Conference personally at a time when collaboration between the 
United Nations and the Agency had been acquiring ever greater importance. 
37. The United Nations and the Agency had, through their highly effective 
co-operation, done commendable work in the aftermath of the conflict in the 
Persian Gulf. The Secretary-General had been briefed regularly by the 
Director General of the Agency and Ambassador Ekeus, Chairman of the Special 
Commission on Iraq, on all questions related to the implementation of Security 
Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715. 
38. The universal condemnation of Iraq for violating the safeguards agreements 
that it had entered into freely, and the steadfastness with which the 
Security Council had demanded access to and full information on nuclear 
facilities in Iraq should be enough to deter any other countries which might 
be contemplating similar clandestine programmes. The Board's efforts to 
strengthen the Agency's ability to detect and gain access to any such 
undeclared activities thus merited serious attention. The significant 
reduction of nuclear arsenals by the United States and the Russian Federation 
and the comprehensive safeguards agreements with the Agency recently concluded 
by several States engaged in significant nuclear activities augured well for 
the success of the NPT Review Conference in 1995. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 11 


39. The Agency's mission to help ensure the safety of nuclear power plants 
had received wide international attention during the past year. Countries 
operating plants with safety shortcomings were anxious - as were their 
neighbours - that the Agency should provide the necessary technical analysis 
and advice and that remedial safety measures with multinational or bilateral 
financing should be taken as a result. 
40. The Rio Conference on Environment and Development had underlined the 
need for further international co-operation to strengthen the Agency's work in 
the areas of nuclear safety and radioactive waste management. The Secretary-
General understood that the second meeting of the group of experts on a 
binding international nuclear safety convention was to be held in October and 
that a consensus was emerging on the so-called "safety fundamentals" and 
review mechanisms. 
41. During the past two years there had been close collaboration between 
the United Nations Co-ordinator and the Agency to mitigate the consequences of 
the Chernobyl accident in pursuance of General Assembly and ECOSOC resolutions. 
The application in the affected republics of the innovative 
technique developed by the Agency and FAO to reduce caesium levels substantially 
in milk and meat had been funded by the Chernobyl Trust Fund established 
by the United Nations. A careful screening of other practical and 
worthwhile projects that could improve everyday life for people in the 
affected areas was currently being undertaken by an inter-agency task force. 
In addition, the Agency's impressive multisectoral technical co-operation 
programme, encompassing projects all over the world in areas such as food 
preservation and environmental protection, were making unique contributions to 
the welfare of mankind. 
42. As the Rio Conference had also emphasized, the security and well-being 
of peoples throughout the world needed to be preserved not only against 
weapons proliferation and nuclear disasters but also through the development 
of a sound integrated approach to the formidable challenges presented to the 
world by problems of energy, the environment, health, agriculture and 
development. The Agency had much to contribute to attaining those important 
objectives. As the United Nations geared itself to meeting its responsibilities 
in the last decade of the 20th century, the Secretary-General looked 

6G(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 12 


forward to even closer collaboration with the Agency and wished the Conference 
every success in its deliberations. 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND 
FOR 1993 


43. The PRESIDENT said that the Agency's policy-making bodies had, 
since 1982, followed the practice of recommending indicative planning figures 
to be used in fixing annual targets for voluntary contributions to the TACF. 
In June the Board had reached agreement on increases in the targets for 
voluntary contributions to the TACF from the 1992 level of US $52.5 million 
to $55.5 million in 1993, $58.5 million in 1994 and $61.5 million in 1995. 
Accordingly, in the draft resolution relating to the TACF - contained in 
Annex IV to document GC(XXXVI)/1006 - the Board recommended the figure of 
$55.5 million as the target for voluntary contributions to the TACF for 1993. 
44. Early pledging of voluntary contributions was of considerable help to 
the Secretariat in planning technical assistance programmes. He therefore 
urged all delegations that were in a position to do so, but had not done so as 
yet, to notify the Secretariat during the current session of the voluntary 
contributions which their Governments would be making to the TACF in 1993. It 
was equally important, if the Secretariat was to be able to carry out the 
planned programme effectively, that all Member States should make good their 
pledges, in full and in a timely manner, and that every effort should be made 
to avoid a further decline in pledges and payments. 
45. He would report at the end of the session, under a later agenda item, 
on the voluntary contributions which had been pledged up to that time, and was 
confident that he would then be in a position to report favourably on the 
percentage of the 1993 target figure already pledged. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


46. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that 1992 marked the fiftieth anniversary 
of controlled nuclear fission and the thirty-fifth anniversary of the 
Agency. The sustained, controlled chain reaction mastered by Enrico Fermi had 
been an experiment that had changed the world, creating both a new source of 
energy and a new source of destruction. Ever since, mankind had had to 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 13 


face the dual challenge of the atom - how to preclude its military use and how 
to exploit its peaceful potential safety. The Agency had been assigned a 
major role by its member governments in respect of both those challenges. 


47. The two-pronged "Atoms for Peace" approach, whereby access to nuclear 
technology for peaceful purposes was offered and undertakings regarding 
exclusively peaceful use were required simultaneously, had been chosen early. 
Now the commitment to limit the use of fission to exclusively peaceful 
purposes was stronger and more widespread than ever, and for the first time 
there was hope that both a universal commitment to non-proliferation and 
drastic nuclear disarmament might come about. The creation of the Agency in 
1957 had been an integral part of the efforts to realize the Atoms for Peace 
policy and to meet the dual challenge of the atom. 
48. The Agency's role of "promoting" nuclear energy - for under the Statute 
it was called upon "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world" - was sometimes 
criticized. It had been suggested that any legitimate transfers of technology 
could be handled by other United Nations bodies and that the Agency's 
activities could be confined to what were termed "regulatory" functions 
- specifically, nuclear safety and safeguards. He was of the opinion, 
however, that such surgery on the functions of the Agency would be unwise. 
The Agency had been established to serve all its Members, and many of them saw 
its greatest value precisely in "promotional" activities, notably in the 
transfer of technology. Indeed, discussions and resolutions of the General 
Conference demonstrated convincingly that support for the Agency rested on the 
maintenance of an appropriate balance of activities. 
49. That was not to suggest that the status quo should be regarded as 
sacred or immutable. After 35 years of operation it was by no means 
unreasonable to examine whether the Agency's range of programmes responded to 
present priority interests of Members. If necessary, adjustments could be 
made to meet new circumstances. An international organization was a living 
thing that had to adapt to meet the challenges of a changing world. It was 
easy to see that the last 12 months had brought many changes which had had an 
impact on the Agency and might require appropriate responses through the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 14 


Agency. The agreements on rapid reduction of the nuclear arsenals of the 
United States and Russia and the withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons were 
helping to promote horizontal non-proliferation. However, as security 
problems between the declared nuclear-weapon States receded, regional security 
problems - including nuclear-related ones - were continuing and needed to be 
dealt with. The revelations of Agency inspections in Iraq under Security 
Council resolution 687 had prompted not only a decision by the Council about 
the neutralization of a clandestine nuclear weapons development programme but 
also new thinking and action about safeguards verification. 


50. The emergence on the territory of the former Soviet Union of a number 
of States that were already in the process if joining or were about to join 
NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States was drastically enlarging the scope of 
non-proliferation, and hence the obligations of the Agency in respect of 
safeguards. The formation of new States, combined with changes in their 
political and economic systems, was leading to the recognition of urgent 
nuclear safety problems which had to be confronted. In that sphere, too, the 
Agency and Member governments were facing new challenges. Cases of 
trafficking in nuclear material were also placing new demands on the alertness 
of the Agency. 
51. The list of changes affecting the Agency's work could be made very 
long, and he would only add the problems of the environment and development 
which had been the subject of the global summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro in 
June 1992. The outcome of that meeting was, in some areas, directly relevant 
to the Agency's own work; those areas were highlighted in document 
GC(XXXVI)/INF/310, in particular the question of defining the scope for 
nuclear power and nuclear applications to contribute to the twin goals of 
development and environmental protection. 
52. The Agency had shown itself to be a viable and versatile instrument: 
that had been demonstrated at the time of the energy crisis, the Chernobyl 
crisis, the continuing environmental crisis and the Iraqi crisis. It was 
vital that the Agency should be prepared for new challenges and that it should 
not be paralysed by financial crisis. 

GC(XKXVI)/OR.343 
page 15 


53. The Medium-Term Plan had been an attempt to look systematically at the 
Agency's work and to define priorities for the 1993-98 period. Even during 
that period new and unexpected problems and challenges would undoubtedly arise 
and would have to be tackled. There were a number of areas which governments 
might wish to examine in particular. One was nuclear safety, already the 
subject of searching discussion, although important questions remained to be 
considered. How extensive should a network of binding rules be? What should 
be the scope of the international safety convention? How much use should be 
made of review services like OSARTs and ASSETS, and what effect were they 
intended to have? 
54. The safe disposal of radioactive waste in the crust of the earth whence 
the uranium had originated was another question, one naturally of interest to 
present and future generations. Should that interest be reflected in binding 
international minimum standards? Should there be an international register of 
all disposal sites, at least for high-level waste, in order to create one 
focal point for gathering information about the location of all such sites? 
55. The use made of nuclear materials recovered from dismantled weapons was 
a matter of interest not only to weapon States. The entire international 
community might wish to feel confident - through international verification about 
the peaceful use or storage of such material. Was that a role which the 
Agency should be asked to fulfil? Stocks of plutonium were bound to increase, 
both from the dismantling of weapons and from the reprocessing of spent 
nuclear fuel. Should new international measures be taken to ensure and verify 
the peaceful use or storage of that material? Should "international plutonium 
storage" again appear on the agenda? In a world where nuclear disarmament was 
accelerating and non-proliferation was making further gains, did governments 
wish to examine the question of verified restrictions on the production of 
weapons-usable material? 
56. The general debate which was about to begin offered governments an 
opportunity to discuss whether issues and activities such as those he had 
mentioned should be taken up - and, likewise, whether some other activities 
should be phased out. As an introduction to those deliberations he proposed 
to summarize a few of the Agency's activities, beginning with the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 16 


organization's engagement in the transfer of nuclear technology and know-how, 
a subject to which many Member States attributed great importance. 


57. A general precondition for any responsible transfer of nuclear 
technology was that it should be attended by adequate safety, proper radiation 
protection and proper waste management arrangements. Those were not pro forma 
requirements, but statutory conditions that the Agency had to take seriously 
in order to reduce the risk of radiological accidents to a minimum. In fact, 
nearly 20 per cent of the Agency's present technical co-operation programmes 
were devoted to radiation protection and safety. In addition, expert missions 
were sent to check conditions on the spot. 
58. Human resource development remained a major aim of the technical 
co-operation programme and a necessity for technology transfer. That was 
particularly true in countries where nuclear technology was still in the early 
stages. At present particularly great emphasis was being placed on human 
resource development in African Member States, where a training survey was 
under way. 
59. A significant level of nuclear technology had been successfully introduced 
into industries in Asian countries. A Regional Co-operation Agreement 
(RCA) project on industrial applications had helped convince emerging industries 
that applied nuclear technology could bring industrial and commercial 
advances. As a result of that project, investments of US $190 million had 
been generated, of which no less than US $150 million had been provided 
through the private sector. 
60. Irradiation of medical equipment for sterilization was already widely 
practised. The Board of Governors had, in the course of its session the 
previous week, endorsed a Draft Action Plan on "Assistance to Developing 
Countries in Introducing Commercial Food Irradiation", suggested by India. As 
work progressed, full co-operation with FAO and WHO and the International 
Consultative Group on Food Irradiation (ICGFI) would be sought. 
61. There was increasing interest in Agency assistance with the use of 
nuclear techniques for environmental monitoring purposes, an area where the 
IAEA had much experience and capability. It was in fact the only body in the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 17 


UN family to have a Marine Environment Laboratory, the services of which were 


subject to increasing demand. The Laboratory had been instrumental in 
monitoring the environmental situation in the Persian Gulf after the armed 


conflict and was now participating in a Norwegian-Russian investigation in the 
Barents and Kara Seas. The Agency was very grateful to the host authorities 


in Monaco for offering the Laboratory an excellent new home, which would 


further enhance its usefulness and capacity. 


62. A further point worth mentioning was the increased assistance the 
Agency was giving to Member States in Eastern Europe which operated WWER-type 
reactors. It was a familiar fact that that particularly valuable assistance 
was aimed at upgrading safety in plant management and in radioactive waste 
management. 
63. The financial health of the Agency's Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund (TACF) was crucial to many of the activities he had 
mentioned. The total value of the technical co-operation programme delivered 
in 1991 had amounted to US $43 million; in fact, it had doubled in the last 
decade. Now that the targets for voluntary contributions to the TACF had been 
agreed upon for the next three years, he urged every Member State to help meet 
the collective political commitment by paying its full share in a timely 
fashion. 
64. There were also programmes for the transfer of technology which lay 
partly or wholly outside the technical co-operation framework and which were 
of direct importance to Members in the developing world. An example was the 
successful screwworm eradication campaign in Libya, which had been financed by 
extrabudgetary contributions. It had been calculated that the benefit-to-cost 
ratio for that project had been 50 to 1. Another example was the project 
examining the use of nuclear reactors for the desalination of water. All 
those subjects aroused very substantial interest among governments. The 
increasing shortages of fresh water in many areas, not least on the Southern 
and Eastern shores of the Mediterranean, meant that attention would continue 
to be directed at desalination by nuclear power. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 18 


65. The global summit in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992 had been about the 
environment and development. There was no doubt that development would 
require the use of more energy, especially in developing countries. That 
inevitably created a dilemma in that increased use of fossil fuels, the main 
contemporary energy source, was incompatible with the apparent need to reduce 
emissions of C02 and other greenhouse gases. Although the aim of the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) was to stabilize greenhouse gas 
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level such as to forestall dangerous 
interference with the world's climate, no agreement had been reached on how 
that was to be done, nor had any targets been adopted concerning C02 or 
other greenhouse gas emissions. There was, however, a growing awareness that 
energy conservation and the exploitation of CO -free renewable sources would 
not suffice to meet growing energy requirements. There was also increasing 
awareness that nuclear energy, though not a panacea, was one of the few 
options at the world's disposal for expanding energy production without 
significantly increasing CO emissions. Nuclear power, alone, could not 
solve the CO problem, but the CO problem could not be solved without 
nuclear power. 
66. The nuclear option therefore remained important for the future. In 
saying that he was by no means underestimating the desirable contribution that 
could be made to the energy situation by conservation, and by solar, geothermal, 
wind and biomass energy sources. None of the renewable sources of 
energy, however, was likely to make a real and substantial contribution for 
several decades. The choice, particularly for large, new base-load needs, 
would continue to be between fossil fuels and nuclear. The outcome of that 
choice was not obvious. It depended upon the actions of many people, governments 
and organizations, notably in relation to operational safety, and safe 
waste disposal, as well as on guarantees against the development of nuclear 
weapons. 
67. Although nuclear safety had always been a part of the Agency's mandate, 
its programme in that area had grown sharply because so many of the actions 
which its Member States saw as necessary were international in scope or 
character. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 19 


68. "How safe is safe enough?" was not a technical question but a political 
one, to which the public responded through movements, political parties and 
representative governments, and the answers to it were influenced by perceived 
experience and feelings, by opinion-makers and by political debate. The 
technical data which expert bodies could contribute were by no means irrelevant 
to that process, but they were only a part of the input. 
69. There was, in fact, no single answer: it varied from country to 
country and from time to time, but if one were to venture to state some common 
line it would probably be that the level of nuclear safety must be such that 
no significant radiological releases into the biosphere took place. Whenever 
a release occurred, appeared to occur or nearly occurred, nuclear activities 
as a whole were termed not safe enough and calls came for freezes and the 
phasing out of nuclear power. 
70. Those engaged in nuclear work might often feel that that was an unduly 
harsh and somewhat irrational reaction. In particular, they might feel that, 
in comparison with other productive human activities, the exploitation of 
nuclear energy was required to have excessively high safety standards. 
71. Comparisons were not irrelevant to the process through which the public 
and political institutions responded to the question, "How safe is safe 
enough?". It was the Agency's duty to present them, just as it was its duty 
to provide factual data about nuclear incidents and about the risks of nuclear 
power and waste disposal. The International Nuclear Event Scale (INES), to 
mention one example, had been a successful tool for presenting facts. It was 
important to be aware however that, as matters stood, the public was much less 
tolerant about the effect on health of exposure to radiation than of coal mine 
accidents, the bursting of hydroelectric dams, the explosion of gas cisterns 
or the burning of fossil fuels. The public response to the question, "How 
safe is safe enough?" - whatever one might think of it - must form the point 
of departure for those in a position to improve the level of safety. 
72. Achieving the goal of a higher level of safety was facilitated by 
certain factors and made more difficult by others. One positive element was 
that safety was never static: there was a constant process of learning and 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 20 


adjusting. The exchange of nuclear experience between operators and between 
countries was a very wide-ranging activity that resulted in greater knowledge 
and improved safety. 


73. Achieving higher safety levels was complicated by the fact that the 
public was inclined to base its judgement of nuclear safety on worldwide 
performance. Thus, the weakest performance - wherever it was - affected that 
judgement. That was really the driving force behind the accelerated efforts 
over the past decade to move on from an international exchange of safety 
experience and compilations and codes of good practice to what was termed an 
"international nuclear safety culture" from which no country or nuclear 
activity would be exempt. That was most clearly illustrated in the efforts 
currently being deployed in Eastern and Central Europe to improve nuclear 
safety and bring it into line with international standards. However, the 
increasing demand for minimum safety norms binding for all had to be 
reconciled with the diversity of national legal systems and local conditions. 
Even more important, there was a need to ensure that national authorities 
remained fully responsible for safety. 
74. A new approach, currently evolving, was the framing of a nuclear safety 
convention containing norms which would become binding upon States which 
adhered to it. The norms might develop through subsequent reviews and 
additions. The main obligations currently being considered were based in 
large measure on the principles contained in a recently produced document 
called "NUSSAG Safety Fundamentals". Should the current momentum of 
preparatory work be maintained, which he hoped would be the case, the 
convention might conceivably be ready by the time of the next General 
Conference. 
75. Another part of the response to the demand for more effective 
international measures which would lay the groundwork for an international 
safety culture lay in the various safety-related international expert reviews 
and peer reviews which were increasingly performed through the IAEA. Such 
missions - whether OSARTs, ASSETS or others - had proved to be valuable in 
verifying whether nuclear authorities and facilities were living up to high 
international safety standards or whether they needed to be advised and 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 21 


assisted on how to do so. A question Which had not yet been answered was 
whether there should be some commitment to accept international review and 
advisory teams periodically or otherwise. The current system of visits upon 


invitation and against payment had the merit that visits were not requested as 
a matter of bureaucratic routine, but only if the service was felt to be 
needed and useful. A drawback was that there was no guarantee that those 


installations which perhaps most urgently needed an infusion of advice would 


actually be visited. He took it, however, that in practice no Member State 
would decline an advisory mission when one was suggested and good reasons were 
given for it. 


76. A comprehensive and complex effort was currently under way in connection 
with the safety of power reactors of all types in the former Soviet 
Union and in Eastern and Central Europe. Awareness had grown, in those 
countries and outside them, that the reactors themselves and the manner in 
which they were operated had certain deficiencies. 
77. Judgements had to be made as to how much backfitting would be economical 
and when and at what stage the phasing out of some reactors might be 
feasible. The question of phasing out was not an easy one. It seemed clear 
that no more plants of the RBMK type would be built, but it was not equally 
clear how long that reactor model would remain in operation - with added 
safety features. 
78. While many industrialized countries were keenly interested in mounting 
an assistance effort, it was important not to ignore the fact that the best 
expertise on, and the most thorough knowledge of, the nuclear power plants in 
question was to be found in the countries which had designed and operated 
them. The effort must be one of co-operation in the common interest, with due 
recognition of the economically precarious situation. 
79. The international effort was being launched largely outside the 
mechanisms for intergovernmental co-operation which the IAEA offered. There 
was, above all, co-operation between Russia and other Eastern and Central 
European countries on the one side and individual or groups of industrialized 
countries on the other. The chief mechanism created for co-ordination was the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 22 


so-called Group of 24, assisted by a Secretariat located in the CEC. The IAEA 
was invited to participate in that work with technical advice. It also made 
available its own assistance to the Eastern and Central European countries, 
which was largely financed by extrabudgetary contributions and which aimed, 
for instance, at carrying out a safety review of the RBMK reactor. Part of 
the Agency's contribution to the diagnostic phase would be in the form of 
expert missions to individual reactor plants. 


80. There were two items closely related to the subject of nuclear safety 
which he wished to report on, if only briefly, before moving on to other 
topics: those were liability and physical protection. 
81. Efforts to strengthen the nuclear liability regime had made concrete 
progress. The Joint Protocol Relating to the Application of the Vienna 
Convention and the Paris Convention, adopted in 1988, had entered into force 
on 27 April 1992 with ten Member States party to it. That meant an improvement 
in the international liability regime, since the two basic conventions 
existing in the field of civil liability were in effect combined into one 
expanded regime. 
82. The work of the Standing Committee on Nuclear Liability had also 
progressed. In the context of the revision of the Vienna Convention, a number 
of draft amendments had been provisionally agreed upon, covering many 
questions in relation to which a need for improvement had been recognized. As 
far as the time schedule for future work was concerned, he noted the view of 
the Standing Committee that,efforts to achieve consensus should be intensified 
so that a revision conference could be convened in the near future. 
83. During the week following the General Conference, a conference would be 
held on the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the aim 
being to review not only its implementation but also its adequacy. It was 
hoped that, as a result of the review conference, more States would take 
action to become parties to the Convention. 
84. The question, "How safe is safe enough?" also applied to safety of 
nuclear waste. Again the answer was political rather than technical, and it 
was the public that decided in the last instance. In a way the problem was 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 23 


more difficult than that of safety in nuclear power plants, because, while in 
the latter tangible improvements could be achieved, especially in some geographical 
areas, technical experts would generally maintain that the solutions 
currently available for the long-term disposal of high-level radioactive waste 
were fully adequate and that it was public resistance to the use of almost any 
site for waste disposal that was the major problem. 


85. Information, explanations, patience, selection of appropriate sites, 
construction of proper installations for nuclear waste disposal and their 
responsible use over a period of time were likely to promote public confidence 
and acceptance - as had, in fact, been seen in the case of some installations 
for low- and intermediate-level waste. 
86. There were, however, some things that could and should be done. In 
individual States, any past disposal of nuclear waste which had not been 
carried out with due respect for appropriate safety rules should be cleaned 
up. That applied in particular to nuclear waste from military activities in 
nuclear-weapon States. For the present-day public and for succeeding 
generations, it did not really matter whether waste resulted from military or 
peaceful nuclear activities. 
87. A case in point was the dumping of radioactive materials, including 
reactor cores, in the Barents and Kara Seas. A Russian-Norwegian investigation 
with the participation of the IAEA's Monaco Laboratory had been looking 
into that matter. The IAEA having been designated by the London Dumping 
Convention as the competent international technical authority with regard to 
the dumping of radioactive wastes at sea, IAEA involvement in that factfinding 
mission had been both appropriate and necessary. 
88. At the international level, the establishment of safety standards for 
radioactive waste disposal and international expert missions to promote the 
implementation of such norms would be a helpful way of reassuring the public 
that that area, too, belonged firmly in the realm of the international safety 
culture. 
89. The Agency's main action in that area so far had been to develop the 
Radioactive Waste Safety Standards - RADWASS - programme, which provided 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 


page 24 


Member States with a comprehensive series of internationally agreed documents 


to complement, or form the basis for, national standards and criteria. Good 
progress had been made since work on the RADWASS programme had started in 


1991. The first Safety Guides and Safety Practices produced under the 
programme had been or would be submitted for publication in 1992. Furthermore, 
the Safety Fundamentals document and four Safety Standards were to be 


submitted to Member States in 1993 for review and approval. RADWASS would 


continue to be the main focal point for the Agency's waste management efforts, 
and Phase I of the programme was scheduled to be completed by the end of 1994. 


90. In the waste disposal field, as in the field of operational safety, the 
best international approach was probably to offer advisory and/or peer review 
services rather than supervision. They did not impinge on the authority and 
responsibility of national institutions but might help to strengthen their 
hand. 
91. The revelation through IAEA inspection that Iraq, a party to the NPT 
and to a full-scope safeguards agreement, had been engaged in a major, secret 
programme to enrich uranium and to design a nuclear weapon, and that it had 
disregarded the safeguards agreement with the Agency by successfully 
withholding information which should have been declared, had prompted the 
Agency to make serious efforts to strengthen the safeguards system. 
92. Under Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715 (1991), the IAEA 
had been given three substantial assignments: the charting of Iraq's present 
and past nuclear activities; the removal, destruction or rendering harmless, 
as appropriate, of materials, equipment and facilities used by Iraq in 
activities prohibited under resolution 687; and the preparation and 
implementation of a long-term monitoring plan to verify Iraq's compliance with 
the requirements of the relevant Security Council resolutions. 
93. Fourteen IAEA on-site inspections had been conducted in Iraq since 
May 1991, with the assistance and co-operation of the Special Commission of 
the United Nations. More than 2700 inspection days had been carried out. 
Sixty-five sites had been inspected, most of them several times, and hundreds 
of various samples, collected by the Agency's inspectors in Iraq, had been 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 25 


analysed by the Laboratory in Seibersdorf. The picture emerging was that of a 
widely based, well funded, multipronged approach to the production of highly 
enriched uranium, combined with a parallel programme to assess requirements 
and make preparations for designing and manufacturing a nuclear weapon. The 
comprehensive project had been kept secret. 


94. The process of removal, destruction or rendering harmless of Iraqi 
nuclear-weapon capabilities under resolution 687 had started in October 1991 
and had continued throughout recent months. On 11 October 1991, the Security 
Council had adopted resolution 715, approving, inter alia, the plan submitted 
by the Agency for future monitoring activities. In June 1992, the Iraqi 
authorities had provided the Agency with what they considered to be a full, 
final and complete description of their nuclear programme and had promised to 
update and complete a detailed list of facilities and equipment related to 
that programme. The list would be of use to the Agency in completing its 
preparations for the full implementation of the long-term plan. 
95. The Agency's work under the three parts of the Security Council mandate 
was thus continuing. Through the inspections and the arduous work done by the 
Action Team under the skilled and diligent leadership of Professor Zifferero, 
a relatively consistent picture of Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme was 
being developed. Details of varying degrees of importance, such as full 
information about procurement and technical expert assistance, were still 
missing, however, and it was to be hoped that they, too, would emerge. 
96. The degree of Iraqi co-operation had varied from zero or worse to 
helpful information and co-operation in the destruction of important 
facilities. It was sad but true that, while credibility took time to develop, 
it could be lost overnight. Although much information given by Iraq had 
proved correct and useful, it could not be relied upon without independent 
verification. Even though diminishing amounts of new data were being 
generated through inspections and the Iraqi counterparts asserted that no more 
would be found, the possibility could not be excluded that some new 
information would prompt further investigative inspections side by side with 
the Agency's long-term monitoring, with the aim of giving the fullest possible 
guarantees that no clandestine nuclear activities would be revived. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 26 


97. The safeguards system had been designed to provide assurances that 
nuclear material and installations subject to safeguards were used exclusively 
for peaceful purposes and were fully accounted for. Such assurances had 
important consequences for relations between States at the regional and global 
levels as well as for nuclear trade. 
98. All States party to the safeguards system had agreed to co-operate with 
and be open to the Agency in a number of specific areas. Through such 
institutionalized transparency, the Agency was to be enabled to verify the 
exclusively peaceful use of programmes, installations and material subject to 
safeguards. The case of Iraq had demonstrated that nuclear activities which 
should have been declared but had in fact been kept secret could go undetected 
by the safeguards system in its existing form. It had been concluded that the 
Agency needed other sources of information, notably in the event that 
information required from a State was withheld, and that in certain 
circumstances it might need to perform special inspections at non-declared 
sites. 
99. He was pleased to report that, over the past year, the Board had taken 
several steps to strengthen the information basis of the safeguards system and 
had affirmed the Agency's right to conduct special inspections under the terms 
of comprehensive safeguards agreements. Should a Member State having such an 
agreement deny such a request, the Director General could submit the matter to 
the Board. If the Board so resolved, the matter could go to the Security 
Council. The Board had also decided that the requirement in safeguards 
agreements to provide design information on nuclear facilities "as early as 
possible" included the requirement that preliminary information be provided as 
soon as a decision had been taken to construct a new facility or to modify an 
existing one. 
100. The Board had also considered the question of establishing a universal 
reporting system on the export and import of nuclear material and equipment 
and of certain non-nuclear items, and it would continue its examination of 
that question. For the time being, it had indicated that States which were in 
a position to do so could start reporting to the Agency on such items on a 
voluntary basis. The Secretariat had informed all Member States of that 
decision and was in the process of setting up the system. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 27 


101. States were, of course, free to practice greater nuclear transparency 
than expressly required under safeguards agreements. The agreements 
established a minimum, not a maximum, and it might well be in the interest of 
many States to practice a much greater degree of openness about their nuclear 
programmes. In the past year he had received with appreciation commitments by 
several States to open any site and any installation to Agency visits, 
regardless of whether the sites and installations were covered by safeguards. 
In some instances the Agency had made use of such commitments. They were of 
high value for confidence building - provided that they were fully accepted in 
practice. 
102. He wished to conclude his comments on the safeguards system by 
reporting that efforts were under way to make safeguards not only more 
effective, but also more cost-effective. It was by no means a new idea. Over 
the past few years the Secretariat had been able to cut safeguards costs 
significantly. Some new savings had been achieved in 1992 and had had an 
impact on the draft budget for 1993. Others had been actively discussed and 
would be the subject of close examination by outside experts in SAGSI - the 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation. 
103. Two important new safeguards agreements were now being implemented. 
The Secretariat had carried out a total of 77 inspections of South African 
facilities and locations outside declared facilities. There was an inherent 
difficulty in verifying the completeness of an original inventory in a country 
where a substantial nuclear programme had been going on for some time. It 
required much effort by the inspectors and much openness and co-operation by 
the inspected party - extending beyond declared facilities and current 
records. Even so, as the Agency must report what it had actually seen and 
verified, it was hard, even in the best of cases, to come to any better 
conclusion than that, after intense analysis and inspection, no evidence had 
been found suggesting that the original inventory was not complete. That 
conclusion could be found in paragraph 31 of the report on South Africa in 
document GOV/2609. 
104. Only a few months had passed since, on 4 May 1992, the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea had submitted its initial report on nuclear 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 28 


material subject to safeguards; but there, too, much verification work had 
already been done through three ad hoc inspections, with the third finishing 
only a week and a half ago. Like South Africa, the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea had offered the Agency some original operating records and 
had invited Agency officials to visit any place or facility, regardless of 
whether they were on the original inventory. That commitment was helpful and 
was being made use of. 


105. The past twelve months had seen significant advances in the 
non-proliferation field. Two nuclear-weapon States - China and France - had 
adhered to the NPT, which now counted all five recognized nuclear-weapon 
States as parties. Through the agreement between Argentina and Brazil on a 
joint accounting and control system and a full-scope safeguards agreement with 
the IAEA, the prospects for bringing the Tlatelolco Treaty fully into force 
had increased greatly. Recently, a number of amendments to the Treaty had 
been unanimously adopted at a conference in Mexico. Those amendments 
reinforced the role of the IAEA. It was to be hoped that the Treaty, with the 
amendments, could come fully into force for all countries in the region at an 
early date. 
106. As to safeguards in the Middle East, General Conference resolution 
GC(XXXV)/RES/571 had requested the Director General "to take such measures as 
are necessary to facilitate the early application of full-scope Agency 
safeguards to all nuclear activities in the Middle East, and in particular to 
prepare a model agreement taking into account the views of the States in the 
region, as a necessary step towards the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone". As could be seen from the report in document GC(XXXVI)/1019, he had 
continued his consultations with the States of the region, and he intended to 
intensify those efforts. The report also contained an inventory of 
undertakings that could be incorporated in a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East and a number of verification modalities that could be applied. He 
intended to seek the views of the States of the region on them. A model 
safeguards agreement could be drafted when the States concerned had formed 
views on the substantive obligations that were to be verified. Since many 
modalities could be contemplated and the Agency's experience was extensive, it 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 29 


could offer seminars in which interested States could benefit from its wide 
experience in the area. 


107. In 1995 the extension of the NPT was to be considered. If present 
trends in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation commitments continued, the 
outlook would be for a successful conference. The IAEA was prepared to 
undertake such preparatory analytical work as governments requested. A 
strengthened safeguards regime and effective channels for the transfer of 
nuclear techniques were contributions that the Agency must offer. An 
extension of the Treaty must be coupled with increased confidence that 
observance of the commitments entered into was being reliably verified. 
108. He wished to conclude his statement with some comments on the Agency's 
financial situation and the budget. 
109. With considerable difficulty, the Board of Governors had reached a 
consensus in June on a draft budget. Modest increases in the areas of 
safeguards and nuclear safety had been largely offset by reductions in other 
programmes, in particular nuclear power and the fuel cycle. The modest growth 
in the Agency's Regular Budget in real terms amounted to US $1.5 million, or 
just 0.8%, for 1993. 
110. The increase in the Agency's Regular Budget, however small, was 
welcome, but would be of almost purely theoretical interest if the shortfalls 
in Member States' contributions were to continue. Prolonged shortfalls in 
payments by major contributors inevitably had a negative impact on the 
Agency's ability to implement its approved programme. During the past year, 
the Agency had had first-hand experience of the disruptive effect on its 
programmes that ensued when a major contributor was forced to suspend payments. 
111. At the most recent session of the Board of Governors, the Governor from 
the Russian Federation had announced a plan to resume payments to the Agency. 
Several other members had announced that arrears had been paid, or had made 
commitments to do so. Those were very welcome developments, for they would 
allow the Agency to address itself vigorously to the important challenges 
facing it. He therefore wished to conclude by reiterating his plea to all 
Member States to pay their contributions in a timely fashion. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 30 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (GC(XXXVI)/1004) 


112. Mr. TANIGAWA (Japan), having warmly welcomed Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan as Members of the Agency, urged them to accede to the NPT and 
conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with the Agency as soon as 
possible. 
113. Japan had always attached importance to the NPT, which it regarded as 
the pillar of the international nuclear non-proliferation system, and strongly 
supported the idea of extending the NPT for as long a period as possible at 
the NPT Extension Conference scheduled for 1995. The agreement concluded in 
June between the United States and the Russian Federation to decrease their 
strategic nuclear weapons further was a welcome development and would create 
favourable conditions for the HPT Extension Conference. Japan hoped that 
other nuclear-weapon States would also promote further reduction of nuclear 
armaments, while welcoming the fact that a number of States had acceded to 
the NPT during the past two years and that Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan 
were expected to complete procedures to join the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon 
States in the near future, his Government urged all countries that had not yet 
done so, to accede to the NPT as soon as possible. 
114. The Agency's inspections in Iraq related to the implementation of 
Security Council resolution 687 had revealed a broad range of activities 
associated with the development of nuclear weapons. Japan fully supported the 
Agency's inspection activities and called upon the Government of Iraq to 
reveal the entire scope of its nuclear weapons programme and to renounce its 
capability for developing nuclear weapons. 
115. With regard to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), Japan 
welcomed the fact that a safeguards agreement between the DPRK and the Agency 
had finally entered into force in April 1992 and that ad hoc inspections had 
been carried out after submission of the initial report and design 
information. However, Japan remained concerned at the possible development of 
nuclear weapons by the DPRK and urged that country to implement the 
comprehensive safeguards agreement, unconditionally and completely, at an 
early stage. It also requested it to implement the Joint Declaration on the 
Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 31 


116. With the disclosure of Iraq's non-compliance with its safeguards 
obligations, the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system had become a 
matter of urgency. The need for special inspections of undeclared facilities 
and for the early submission of design information had been reconfirmed or 
agreed upon by the Board. Those actions would further enhance the 
effectiveness and reliability of the safeguards system. 
117. The next task was to establish a universal reporting system for the 
export and import of nuclear material, non-nuclear material and certain types 
of equipment. It was important for all countries to submit such reports and 
Japan basically agreed with the purport of the proposal made by the Agency's 
Secretariat. However, a number of problems related to the implementation of 
such a reporting system had been raised at Board meetings and further 
examination of those points was required. 
118. As the number of facilities subject to safeguards increased, it was 
important to streamline safeguards as an integral part of improving and 
strengthening the safeguards system. Given the Agency's critical financial 
state, Member States should make every effort to reduce the costs, whilst 
maintaining the effectiveness of the safeguards system. Japan had made 
specific proposals at the meetings of the Board in June for further 
streamlining measures, taking into account factors such as the transparency of 
nuclear activities of countries which had already accepted safeguards, the 
effectiveness of national safeguards systems and the vigorous development and 
use of equipment. It was also important to extend the application of 
safeguards to facilities for peaceful uses in nuclear-weapon States and the 
Agency should gradually implement steps in that direction, within the limits 
of its human and financial resources. 
119. There was considerable concern about the safety of nuclear power 
plants of Soviet design built to old standards. The Agency had already taken 
steps to evaluate and upgrade the safety of such plants. With regard to the 
nuclear safety convention which was currently being prepared by the Agency, 
his country would like to see agreement on it as soon as possible. Japan had 
extended its technical and financial co-operation in past years and had 
provided special funds for the Agency's safety evaluation activities. It had 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 32 


already announced its intention to make available $25 million for bilateral 
co-operation in that area and was planning to establish a centre for 
operational safety technology of nuclear power plants and a system for 
detecting abnormal operating conditions. Nevertheless, nuclear safety 
remained primarily the responsibility of the countries in Which the nuclear 
power plants were situated and all countries concerned should do their part 
to improve the safety of their own nuclear power plants. 


120. The rapid progress in nuclear disarmament in recent years was a 
positive step towards international peace and stability. However, during the 
course of dismantling nuclear warheads in the former Soviet Union, 
considerable amounts of nuclear material would be generated and measures for 
international co-operation in the area of the management and peaceful uses of 
such material would have to be prepared. The Agency had an important role to 
play in that area and, for its part, Japan would make available the knowledge 
and experience it had gained through many years of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
121. Japan attached great importance to the recycling of nuclear fuel and 
was steadily promoting programmes for the construction of a reprocessing 
facility and a fast breeder reactor. The plutonium separated from the 
reprocessing of its spent fuel by overseas firms was due to be shipped back in 
the autumn. Japan would take various physical protection measures to ensure 
the security of that nuclear material during transport. In promoting its 
nuclear fuel recycling plan, Japan not only took maximum care to ensure the 
strictest control of the nuclear material involved, but had also adopted the 
principle of not possessing more plutonium than was necessary and, in 
promoting its recycling plan, also took into account the balance of supply and 
demand of plutonium. With regard to the disposal of high-level radioactive 
wastes, a plan had been drawn up in August 1992 and an organization to 
implement that disposal work would be established around the year 2000, after 
which designated disposal sites would be selected. 
122. Turning to research and development on nuclear fusion, which was 
expected to be the ultimate energy source for mankind, he expressed his 
country's satisfaction at the agreement signed in July 1992 regarding the 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.343 
page 33 


engineering design activities of the International Thermonuclear Experimental 
Reactor Programme, (ITER), which was being promoted by Japan, the United 
States, the EC and the Russian Federation. 


123. In conclusion, while making every effort to contribute to solving the 
urgent task facing the Agency, Japan did not intend to neglect research and 
development and the promotion of technical co-operation and would continue to 
support the activities of the RCA and other similar types of regional 
co-operation agreement. 
124. Mr. LEE (Canada) said that even though Canada possessed 
significant and diverse energy resources, its Government had concluded in 1990 
that the CANDU nuclear power option was vital to the country's energy and 
environmental interests, and had even gone so far as to assure the financing 
of its research and development programme for seven years. Of the four major 
factors which had influenced its decision: economics, security and diversity 
of energy supply, environment, and industrial benefits, the environmental 
issue had been particularly important, and due consideration had been paid to 
the worldwide effects of burning large amounts of fossil fuels, particularly 
coal, to generate electricity. 
125. It was gratifying to note that other Governments had reached similar 
conclusions with regard to the part to be played by the CANDU reactor in their 
own energy mix, most recently the Republic of Korea, which had decided to 
construct a second CANDU-600 unit in 1990 and had just committed itself to 
building a further two units on the same site. 
126. The benefits of nuclear techniques in other areas were undisputed, 
particularly in health, agriculture, industry and environmental protection. 
The IAEA was performing an essential service in that regard as demonstrated by 
the work of the Department of Research and Isotopes and the Seibersdorf 
Laboratory. 
127. The problems associated with nuclear power, however, could not be 
underestimated, one of the most difficult encountered by many Member States 
being public acceptance. It was therefore essential that sound information on 
all the relevant issues should be made widely available. To that end the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 34 


Canadian Government had encouraged its nuclear industry to conduct a vigorous 
public education programme and the industry had responded well. 


128. Public concern tended to focus on the three main areas of safety, waste 
disposal and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Agency was already 
making a vital contribution in each of those areas. Canada for its part had 
developed considerable expertise in those fields which reinforced and 
complemented the work of the Agency. Furthermore, the advances made in those 
areas would greatly contribute to resolving the problem of public acceptance 
as they became more widely known and understood. 
129. Since the Chernobyl accident, national and international activity in 
the field of nuclear safety had intensified. The Agency's role in that 
process was important both as a clearing house and repository for the exchange 
of information and in facilitating the development of an international safety 
convention applicable to all types of nuclear reactors. Canada intended to 
make every effort to contribute to the successful completion of that 
convention. 
130. Significant advances had been made in nuclear safety at the national 
level. Recent measures taken in Canada included increased government support 
for research, increased support for the regulation of nuclear activities with 
emphasis on power reactors, and close collaboration with other countries to 
ensure the safety of the CANDU reactors. Canada was also helping to alleviate 
the problem of the safety of reactors in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet 
Union; it had recently made.a $30 million commitment to make its nuclear 
expertise available to those countries to reduce the risk of nuclear accidents 
with RBMK-type reactors, a programme which was to be co-ordinated with the 
work carried out by international organizations such as the IAEA and the EC. 
131. In the area of radioactive waste disposal, Canada had participated at 
the technical and public levels in the three major sub-areas of high-level, 
low-level and uranium mine waste management. High-level waste in the form of 
used fuel was currently stored safely and economically at reactor sites, and 
while there was no technical urgency to proceed with final disposal of used 
fuel, the Canadian Government had initiated a formal environment assessment 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 35 


and review of the concept of deep geological disposal in hard crystalline 
rock, which was being extensively researched in Canada. It had also adopted a 
new approach to the siting of disposal facilities for some of the low-level 
wastes currently in storage, by relying on the voluntary participation of 


interested communities. In addition, formal public review processes had again 
been set up to review the management of uranium wastes and examine proposals 


for opening new uranium mines and decommissioning old ones. 


132. Canada had actively co-operated with the IAEA in those areas and 
strongly recommended that the Agency continue its efforts in co-operation with 
other national and international agencies to provide guidance on radioactive 
waste management. 
133. The Agency's activities in the uranium area dated back to the 
mid-sixties, mostly in close collaboration with the Nuclear Energy 
Agency (NEA) in Paris with the broad participation of Member States. In that 
area, the best-known activity had undoubtedly been the NEA/IAEA red book 
exercise, a comprehensive assessment of world uranium resources, production 
and demand, to which Canada had always given high priority, the more so now 
with the entry of the former Soviet Union into the international uranium 
market. If that work was to be successful, co-operation between the NEA and 
the IAEA in the uranium area should be continued and enhanced. In due course, 
the two Agencies might even reconsider the idea of reconstituting the NEA 
uranium group as a formal joint group, as it had been prior to 1985. The 
Agency should strongly support such activities. 
134. The Agency's most important work, however, was in world security. The 
Agency's safeguards system was a vital pillar in the maintenance of world 
peace and stability, particularly in the international community's efforts to 
control and, it was to be hoped, reverse the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. Those safeguards were an essential prerequisite to international 
co-operation and world trade in nuclear technology, materials and equipment. 
135. The Canadian Prime Minister had recently highlighted the Agency's role 
in support of the non-proliferation regime. In order to prevent "nuclear 
cheating", the Agency's mandate should be strengthened and Member States 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.343 
page 36 


should provide the resources needed for that purpose. Canada was prepared to 
support efforts to make the IAEA safeguards system more effective, and to 
consider expanding the safeguards regime to include the modality of 


inspections "in any country, at any time," and looked forward to seeing 
proposals along those lines as a result of the Agency's review of the 
safeguards system later in the year. The Board of Governors should be in a 
position to review the preliminary results of that study at its next session. 
Further study and research would undoubtedly uncover ways of improving 
efficiency and reducing expenditure; any scheme that would enable the Agency 
to conserve resources for use in strengthening its ability to expose 
non-compliance with treaty obligations would be of particular interest. 
Canada was prepared to help the Agency with any relevant study and research 


insofar as its resources allowed. 


136. Canada also supported recent proposals to strengthen the safeguards 
system, including the suggestion that Member States should report more 
extensively on nuclear exports to enable an early warning system to be 
established. It was also willing to participate in such a system provided the 
system was universal and could be seen to yield non-profit benefits. 
137. Canada also believed that the Agency could assist in solving the 
problem of vertical proliferation, particularly with respect to nuclear 
material transferred from the military to the civilian sector, as the result 
of reducing nuclear-weapons stockpiles. 
138. The Agency had responded constructively and responsibly to the 
challenges of safety, waste disposal and non-proliferation, and had made the 
best use of its limited resources. Canada was committed to strengthening its 
own programmes in those fields and, in so doing, contributing to the viability 
and effectiveness of the Agency's efforts. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
15 March 1993 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

Original: FRENCH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD Of THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 21 September 1992, at 3 p.m. 


President: Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee (continued) 1 -2 


General debate and annual report 
for 1991 (continued) 3 - 151 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United States of America 
3 


24 
Mexico 25 -46 
United Kingdom 47 -72 
Malaysia 73 -78 
Saudi Arabia 79 -87 
Greece 88 -104 
France 105 -118 
Czechoslovakia 119 -133 
China 134 -151 


[*] GC(XXXVI)/1001. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI)/lNF/313/Rev.2. 


92-03659 
1008n/072n 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 2 


ASSET 
CEC 
CIS 
DPRK 
EDF 
EURATOM 
G-7 
G-24 


ICRP 
MOX 
MW(e) 
NBA 
NPT 
OECD 
OPANAL 


OSART 
R&D 
RBMK 
RCA 


SAGS I 
TACF 
THORP 
TW.h 
WWER 


Abbreviations used in this record 


Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 


Commission of the European Communities 


Commonwealth of Independent States 


Democratic People's Republic of Korea 


Electricite de France 


European Atomic Energy Community 


Group of Seven 


Group of Twenty-Four (countries) 
International Commission on Radiological Protection 


Mixed oxide 


Megawatt (electrical) 


Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 


Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 


Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 


Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 


America and the Caribbean 


Operational Safety Review Team 


Research and development 


High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 


Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (for 


Asia and the Pacific) 


Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 


Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 


Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant (British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.) 


Terawatt hours 


Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 



GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 3 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT said that agreement had been reached in the Latin 
America Group on proposing the delegate of Ecuador for election as Vice-
President of the General Conference and the delegate of Cuba for election as 
Additional Member of the General Committee. If there was no objection, he 
would propose that those delegates be elected. They would hold office until 
the close of the session. 
2. It was so agreed. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (resumed) 


3. Mr. SELIN (United States of America) prefaced his statement by 
reading out the following message from the President of the United States - a 
message which, he said, underlined not only the unwavering support of the 
United States Government for the Agency and its role, but also the President's 
personal commitment to non-proliferation and nuclear safety worldwide. 
"1 am pleased to send greetings to all those who are gathered for the 


thirty-sixth General Conference of the International Atomic Energy 


Agency. 


"For decades, this organization has served as a leader in efforts to 


stem the spread of nuclear weapons and to encourage peaceful uses of 


nuclear technology. Recent events have underscored the vital 


importance of the IAEA: the Agency has effectively implemented United 


Nations Security Council resolutions for the destruction of Iraq's 


nuclear weapons programme. We know, of course, that continuing 


vigilance is essential. 


"The world community has shown its strong support for the IAEA and for 
the principles on which it was founded as an increasing number of 
countries have joined the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, entered 
into full-scope safeguards agreements, and embraced a strengthened 
safeguards system. In an appropriate response to current challenges, 
the IAEA has also devoted increasing attention to problems of nuclear 
safety, especially in Eastern Europe. 


"The United States stands firmly behind the 1AEA. AS you may know, I 


recently announced that, as part of our global non-proliferation 
initiative, the United States would work with other nations to 


strengthen the Agency, including necessary increases in the safeguards 


budget. We will also continue our support of the Agency's technical 


assistance programmes. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 4 


"The IAEA is a cornerstone of mutual efforts to promote peace and 
security in a changing world. The United States therefore calls on all 


Member States to join in supporting the Agency and its critical 


mission." 


4. The nineties were seeing changes of a scale and rapidity which had 
scarcely any parallel in history. Because of those changes, leaders, 
governments and institutions worldwide had been, and were continuing to be, 
put to the test. During the Iraq crisis of 1991 the United Nations, of which 
the Agency was a part, had shown itself worthy of the trust placed in it at 
the time of its founding and had justified the hope that organizations 
representing the world community and embodying the values it shared could act 
with unity and decisiveness to compel adherence to the rule of law among 
nations. 
5. The success achieved by the United Nations system in dealing with the 
complex problems of the world of the 1990s was a tribute to its institutional 
flexibility - a flexibility which derived in large measure from its 
willingness in past years to review its own programmes and policies 
dispassionately and make the course corrections necessary for meeting the 
changing demands of a changing world. Now the challenge for the Agency was to 
show comparable clear-sightedness and candour about its evolving responsibilities, 
so that in the coming decades it could build on the outstanding 
successes it had achieved during its first 35 years. 
6. The Agency's international co-operation regime was a pillar of 
stability and security for the world community. The safeguards responsibilities 
entrusted to the Agency in 1957 had been considerably broadened by 
the opening of the NPT for signature in 1968, during the Cold War and the arms 
race. The Cold War and the arms race were now history and, thanks in no small 
measure to the Agency, the proliferation of nuclear weapons so feared two 
decades before had not occurred. 
7. On the contrary, the principles of non-proliferation were being 
accepted more and more widely. The recent accession of France, the People's 
Republic of China and South Africa to the NPT, the conclusion of comprehensive 
safeguards agreements with South Africa and the Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea, the steps towards full-scope safeguards in Argentina and Brazil, and 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 5 


the increasing Likelihood that the Tlatelolco Treaty would enter into force 
for the whole of Latin America within the next year were developments which 
constituted an implicit endorsement both of the goal of non-proliferation and 
of the Agency's role in helping to achieve it. In addition, the technical 
assistance provided by the Agency in the course of more than three decades had 
done much to improve the quality of life throughout the world. 


8. The experience with Iraq in 1991 had shown how effective the Agency's 
safeguards could be when given the full support of Member States. For the 
first time, a party to the MPT had been found to have violated its safeguards 
agreement with the Agency. In response to that, the Board of Governors had 
confirmed that the Agency had the authority to conduct special inspections 
wherever there were indications of undeclared nuclear materials or activities 
in a State which had concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement. Over the 
past 18 months, Agency teams had performed with distinction in implementing 
the provisions of United Nations Security Council resolution 687. In so 
doing, they had underlined the fact that the relationship with the Security 
Council envisaged in the Agency's Statute would be an important factor in the 
future. 
9. However, it had to be acknowledged that the example of Iraq had 
demonstrated not only the strengths of the Agency's safeguards regime but 
also - as the Director General had made clear recently at Elsinore - the 
challenges faced by the Agency and its Member States. On that occasion he 
said: 
"The lesson of Iraq is ... that more must be done to increase the risk 
of discovery of secret, non-declared activity. It is not practical or 
possible to send inspectors to roam the whole territory of States, 
searching in every nook and cranny for secret nuclear installations. 
Inspectors must have information about where they should look. In the 
case of Iraq, this information came from defectors and satellites. In 
the future, the IAEA will make use of many sources of information apart 
from the declarations of inspected States: from exporters, from the 
media, and from Member States. ... It may be hoped that the existence 
of strengthened verification and Security Council determination will 
deter any State so inclined from attempting to cheat." 


10. The Iraqi example had shown that a safeguards system designed to detect 
diversions of nuclear materials from civilian uses should not be expected to 
detect a clandestine nuclear weapons programme which did not depend on 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 6 


diverted material. Time and the steady increase in technical sophistication 
around the world had shifted the emphasis of the Agency's safeguards 
programme. Nevertheless, as the Director General had indicated, the events in 
Iraq were a valuable lesson as well as an opportunity. The Agency's 
safeguards system could and should be strengthened, use being made of the full 
range of information-gathering resources available. The Agency should 
continue to order its priorities so as to ensure that the safeguards regime 
effectively met the challenges of the coming decades. 


11. It was ironic that, as the world community rejoiced that the Cold War 
had ended, awareness of the grave threat posed by the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction had increased. The Parties to the NPT would have the 
opportunity to strengthen the non-proliferation regime when they met in 1995 
to extend the Treaty. For almost 25 years, the NPT had been the cornerstone 
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, serving as the principal legal 
barrier to the spread of nuclear weapons. No other treaty could match it for 
the number of signatories. His country believed that the NPT should be 
extended indefinitely and unconditionally in 1995. 
12. On 13 July 1992, President Bush had announced a major initiative aimed 
at promoting international efforts to prevent the spread of weapons of mass 
destruction. In recognition of the Agency's place at the centre of those 
efforts, the President had vowed that the United States would collaborate with 
other countries in strengthening the Agency and would support the necessary 
increases in the safeguards budget. As part of that initiative the United 
States had announced that it would not produce plutonium or highly enriched 
uranium for nuclear explosive purposes. That step was intended to encourage 
countries in regions of tension such as the Middle East and South Asia to take 
similar steps and halt the production or acquisition of weapons usable 
materials. 
13. A further area where circumstances had changed markedly since the 
establishment of the Agency was nuclear safety. Although the promotion of 
nuclear safety was among the Agency's primary functions, it had only recently 
become clear how vital a role the Agency had to play in offering a global 
framework for efforts to improve the safety of nuclear power facilities. As 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 7 


nuclear technology had expanded steadily throughout the world, especially for 
the generation of electricity, the need for rigorous, well defined and 
consistently applied safety principles in all countries opting for nuclear 
energy had become increasingly apparent, not only to nuclear specialists but, 
also - and more importantly - to the public, the media and national 


legislatures. 


14. Since the Chernobyl accident in 1986, the Agency had been playing a key 
role in addressing the safety problems of high-risk reactors of Soviet 
design. In the past three years, the Agency's comprehensive safety reviews of 
WWER-440/230 plants and its efforts to undertake similar reviews of 
RBMK plants had helped to reduce the danger of another catastrophe at a 
nuclear power plant. His country strongly supported the Agency's work in that 
regard. 
15. Faced with the most imminent nuclear hazards in Eastern Europe, the 
Agency had performed its role admirably. Unfortunately, nations had not been 
as swift to respond as the situation demanded. In light of that experience, 
efforts were being made to ensure that, as requests for assistance were 
received from States of the former Soviet Union (where a generation of illdesigned 
reactors was being operated, each one a threat and in urgent need of 
corrective measures), the necessary assistance would be provided without delay. 
16. Despite the difficulties encountered initially in providing assistance 
to Eastern Europe, the United States remained convinced that bilateral 
agreements were the best basis for the provision of large-scale assistance to 
the countries in question. Accordingly, in May 1992 at the Lisbon Conference 
on Assistance to New Independent States, Secretary of State Mr. Baker had 
announced a US $25 million programme of nuclear safety assistance for the 
Russian Federation and Ukraine. The assistance would consist mainly of 
near-term measures relating - inter alia - to operational safety, the 
strengthening of regulatory authorities and technical improvements at existing 
reactors. 
17. His delegation was gratified that a number of other countries, 
including Japan, Canada, Sweden and members of the European Community, had 
also announced plans for multi-million dollar safety assistance programmes. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 8 


Those initiatives had received further impetus at the July summit of the 
G- 7 countries in Munich. Through the G-24 mechanism established to provide 
safety assistance to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, a 
co-ordinated programme, broadened to allow the new States of the former Soviet 
Union to benefit, was being implemented. The Agency's contribution in 
assessing the safety needs of the recipient countries and acting as a 
repository of information on assistance programmes would be essential to the 
success of those efforts. 


18. As in the area of safeguards, the Agency's activities relating to 
Eastern Europe's reactors were a measure of the Agency's strength but also a 
potential source of weaknesses. Extremely important activities were having to 
be funded from extrabudgetary contributions. At a time when the Agency was 
being called upon to provide technical assistance in order to ensure nuclear 
safety worldwide, its resource requirements were growing. It was therefore 
important to transfer resources from lower- to higher-priority programmes arid 
for Member States to ensure that the Agency had sufficient resources for 
implementing its highest-priority activities. 
19. Apart from the immediate threat posed by the power reactors of the 
former Soviet bloc (a threat not to be underestimated), the existence of so 
many power plants of deficient design clearly illustrated the desirability of 
an international nuclear safety convention that would ensure at least minimum 
levels of safety at all plants, wherever they might be. The fact that fission 
products from a nuclear accident ignored national boundaries was not the only 
consideration; for nuclear power to be accepted by the public as a means of 
electricity generation, it had to be perceived - and perceived accurately - as 
a reasonably safe and environmentally sound form of energy. 
20. The formulation of an international nuclear safety convention, however, 
raised the complex issue of how best to proceed in order to ensure acceptable 
safety levels when legal systems, technologies and industrial organization 
varied widely from one country to another. While it would be wrong to settle 
for a "lowest common denominator" approach, in trying to codify internationally 
binding obligations in the nuclear safety field one should not 
ignore such complexities. His country wished to see rapid progress towards an 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 9 


instrument to which the great majority of countries using nuclear power for 
electricity production could accede, for, if only a few countries ultimately 
signed or ratified, the goal of achieving a broad consensus on what was needed 
in order to ensure safety would not have been attained. 


21. A watershed had been reached in nuclear safeguards and nuclear safety, 
and also in the life of the Agency as an organization. The dramatic changes 
of recent years were a challenge to the world community and the Agency: seize 
the opportunity presented or risk being passed by irrevocably! His country's 
position was unequivocal. It had demonstrated its commitment in a number of 
important ways, especially by deciding not to produce plutonium or highly 
enriched uranium for explosive devices and by supporting the provision of 
increased funding for Agency safeguards. 
22. For its part, the Agency should continue to re-examine its policies and 
priorities in the light of the new realities. He had mentioned earlier the 
re evaluation which had been carried out in the late 1980s and which had 
played a large part in enabling the United Nations to respond flexibly and 
effectively to the Iraqi threat. That re-evaluation had not proceeded 
entirely from within - the United Nations, appreciating the need for a 
completely objective analysis, had wisely allowed a group of internationally 
recognized outside experts to conduct the necessary study. 
23. As part of the current effort to develop a Medium-Term Plan, the Agency 
had also invited a group of distinguished experts to assess its needs and 
priorities; for that it was to be commended. The salutary process of selfanalysis 
triggered by that group should continue and be expanded. The results 
could be invaluable in helping the Agency and its Member States to make wise 
decisions about the course which the Agency would follow as it entered the 
next century. 
2A. The Agency's Statute was sound and did not need to be revised. What 
was needed was a dispassionate appraisal of how the Agency could best fulfil 


its responsibilities under the Statute as it stood. The moment was right and 
should be seized. The circumstances were too propitious, and the potential 
consequences of inaction too grave, for the opportunity to be lost. In the 
coming decades, the world community would need, more than ever, an effective 



GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 10 


and dynamic Agency with its attention and resources firmly focused on the 
areas of greatest need. With the support of its Member States, the Agency 
should be ready to meet the challenge, so that in 10, 20 or 30 years' time it 
would still be building on success. 


25. Mr. HELLER ROUASSANT (Mexico) said that since the previous session 
of the General Conference significant events which opened up new prospects for 
the last decade of the 20th century had occurred in the area of 
non-proliferation. In particular, his country welcomed the steps taken to 
achieve the full entry into force of the Tlatelolco Treaty in the zone of 
application as specified in Article 4 of the Treaty. In that regard, he 
emphasized the amendments to Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 20 of the Treaty 
approved at the 7th Extraordinary Meeting of the General Conference of OPANAL 
on 26 August 1992. 
26. Following proposals for amendments to the Tlatelolco Treaty from 
Argentina, Brazil and Chile in March 1992, Mexico, as depositary, had 
initiated consultations with those countries and the Agency. The consultations 
had resulted in the submission of the proposed amendments to the OPANAL 
General Conference. The approved amendments, which did not in any way alter 
the spirit of the Treaty, ensured that the obligations deriving from the 
Treaty would not hinder the acquisition or development of peaceful nuclear 
technology. They strengthened the Agency's role by giving it the power to 
carry out special inspections in accordance with Article 12 and the agreements 
referred to in Article 13 of the Treaty. Likewise, at the request of any of 
the Parties and in accordance with the procedures specified in Article 15 of 
the Treaty, the Council of OPANAL could submit for the Agency's consideration 
a request that the mechanisms necessary for carrying out a special inspection 
be set in motion. 
27. His country welcomed the decision of Argentina, Brazil and Chile to 
take the steps necessary for bringing the Tlatelolco Treaty fully into effect 
as soon as possible for each of them and the fact that Cuba had reiterated its 
intention to accede to the Treaty once all other Latin American countries had 
become Parties. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 11 


28. Thirteen States had endorsed the amendments, which would have to be 
ratified, thereby opening the way to their entry into effect for all countries 
of the region. The only thing remaining was to invite those Caribbean States 
which had not acceded to the Treaty to take the necessary steps to do so. His 
country had reason for hoping that would happen during the months to come. A 
further very important event had been the ratification by France of Additional 
Protocol 1 to the Tlatelolco Treaty, which ensured that all the nuclear Powers 
would respect the region's denuclearized status. The strengthening of the 
regime established under the Tlatelolco Treaty, which was the product of 
genuine political will, proved - both for Latin Americans and for people 
living in other regions - that it was possible to rid oneself of the danger of 
nuclear weapons. 


29. As the preamble to the Tlatelolco Treaty pointed out, militarily 
denuclearized zones were not an end in themselves, but rather a means for 
achieving general and complete disarmament under effective international 
control, as provided for in Article VI of the NPT. livery new accession to 
the NPT strengthened the universal non-proliferation regime, and his 
delegation accordingly welcomed the deposition by China and France of 
instruments of ratification of the Treaty, the speedy implementation of the 
safeguards agreement between South Africa and the Agency, the fact that the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea had fulfilled its obligation to conclude 
a full-scope safeguards agreement with the Agency and, finally, the imminent 
accession of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine to the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon 
St ates. 
30. Besides those signs of promise for the non-proliferation regime, the 
time was right to recall the other pillar of the NPT - the undertaking by all 
States party to the Treaty to facilitate the exchange of nuclear equipment and 
technology for peaceful purposes. His delegation shared the view of those 
States which had pointed to the necessity of strengthening the promotional 
provisions contained in Article IV of the NPT and Articles 11 and 111.A of the 
Agency's Statute. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.344 
page 12 


31. His Government, which was participating in the consultations among 
States party to the NPT on the establishment - during the 47th regular session 
of the United Nations General Assembly - of the Preparatory Committee for the 
Fifth NPT Review Conference, to be held in 1995, firmly believed that the 
Review Conference should not only examine all issues relating to the NPT, but 
also consider the question of extending the Treaty. The 1995 Conference would 
be an excellent opportunity to analyse the experience gained since the NPT 
entered into force and to adopt measures for establishing a genuinely 
universal non-proliferation regime. Thus, as part of the NPT review process 
it was essential to strengthen the exchange of nuclear equipment, material and 
technology for peaceful purposes with the help of the mechanisms developed by 
the Agency. 
32. His country had always supported the strengthening of the Agency as the 
basis of a non-proliferation regime which both promoted and protected the free 
exchange of technology for peaceful purposes. Countries should not reserve 
for themselves, individually or collectively, discretionary powers regarding 
the transfer to other countries of dual-use material and high-technology 
equipment for use in the nuclear field. Their unilateral decisions could be 
extremely harmful to the transfer of technology if they were not based on 
Agency information or decisions concerning the nuclear activities of the 
recipient country. The time was right to recall that the NPT placed 
obligations not only on non-nuclear-weapon States but also on the nuclear 
Powers. 
33. In the opinion of his Government, being a Party to the NPT implied a 
sincere commitment to the aims of the Treaty regarding safeguards and 
technical assistance and co-operation in the nuclear field. It was for the 
international community as a whole to prevent clandestine nuclear weapons 
programmes like that of Iraq. In that connection, his delegation acknowledged 
the role played by the Agency in Iraq pursuant to the relevant Security 
Council resolutions. 
34. Mexico was continuing to use nuclear energy for the economic and social 
well-being of the country, in accordance with its obligations under the 
Agency's Statute. The first unit of the Laguna Verde nuclear power station, 
which accounted for over 4% of the electricity generated in Mexico, was still 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 13 


being operated to high standards of reliability, safety and efficiency by the 
Federal Electricity Commission. The second unit, due to take on fuel towards 
the end of 1993, would contribute a similar amount to the national electricity 
supply when it went into service. The supply of annual fuel reloads under 
trilateral agreements between Mexico, the Agency and the United States of 
America was proceeding without problems. 


35. Low- and medium-level waste was being stored temporarily, under the 
surveillance of the National Commission for Nuclear Safety and Safeguards, in 
a building constructed for the purpose inside the power station perimeter. In 
addition, the long-term spent fuel storage capacity of the ponds in the 
reactor buildings had been increased. 
36. Mexico favoured increased Agency involvement in the transfer of 
technology and the provision of technical assistance for the management of 
waste from nuclear power plants (including exploitation of the uranium and 
Plutonium in irradiated fuel) and waste resulting from radioisotope 
applications in agriculture, medicine, industry and scientific research. 
37. Mexico supported the Agency initiatives aimed at strengthening 
international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological protection and 
promoting the establishment of a universal nuclear safety regime with global 
harmonization as its ultimate objective. In particular, in accordance with 
the principle - which Mexico had always supported in all fora - that 
international law should be codified, his delegation saw the international 
nuclear safety convention as a useful instrument for setting international 
standards of conduct in an area of great importance for the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. In that connection, while acknowledging the valuable 
consultative role which the Agency could play, he reaffirmed his country's 
conviction that supreme responsibility and authority in nuclear safety matters 
rested with each State. 
38. His country had made considerable progress regarding the various 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy in agriculture, medicine, industry and 
scientific research. In agriculture, Mexico was a leader in developing and 
applying sterile-insect techniques. Furthermore, its National Nuclear 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 14 


Research Institute had acquired experience of food irradiation, and the 
private sector was interested in launching commercial-scale food irradiation 
projects. 


39. With regard to nuclear applications in medicine, Mexico had also 
acquired some experience of using radiation therapy techniques. In nuclear 
medicine, radioisotope methods and techniques for diagnosing various illnesses 
of frequent occurrence in Mexico had been introduced. Mexico would like to 
see the Agency increase its technical assistance to developing countries 
wishing to step up and diversify their local production of 
radiopharmaceuticals, the demand for which was growing constantly as nuclear 
applications in medicine expanded. 
40. During the 1991-92 biennium, Mexico was implementing - together with 
the Agency - 32 technical co-operation projects at seven national 
institutions. Ten of those projects had been funded from extrabudgetary 
resources provided by the United States of America, the United Kingdom and 
Spain. In 1991, Mexico had organized one interregional and three regional 
courses; 18 Mexicans had received fellowship training and five had benefited 
from scientific visits to various foreign institutions. Also, 56 specialists 
had taken part in training courses held under the auspices of the Agency. In 
both 1991 and 1992, Mexico had pledged and paid in fulL its calculated share 
of the TACF target. 
41. For the 1993-94 biennial programme, his Government had submitted 
19 requests for assistance and co-operation in projects involving a wide range 
of non-power applications of atomic energy. The envisaged project activities 
reflected the progress that Mexico had made in research and development and 
the establishment of regulations in the nuclear field, where it was among the 
most advanced countries of the region. 
42. His delegation reaffirmed its support for the efforts to strengthen the 
Agency's safeguards system through the early provision of nuclear facility 
design information, on the understanding that the decision taken by the Board 
of Governors on 26 February 1992 could be revised if adherence to the time 
limits set for providing the information should prove difficult. In addition, 
Mexico had notified the Agency that it was able to provide the inspectors 
assigned to Mexico with multiple entry-exit visas valid for a year. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 15 


43. Mexico supported SAGS1 in iis task of examining the most promising 
ideas for reducing the costs of safeguards while maintaining their 
effectiveness. His delegation welcomed the Director General's intention to 
seek the advice of leading experts. 
44. The liquidity crises which the Agency was undergoing because of delays 
in payments by certain contributors was a reason for particular concern. The 
precarious financial situation in which the Agency found itself had already 
had a detrimental impact on all areas of activity. Mexico called upon a]l 
Member States to give the matter serious consideration; fulfilment of the 
important functions and objectives set forth in Articles II and 111.A of the 
Statute should not be hampered by financial obstacles. 
45. His delegation had emphasized on several occasions that the financial 
crisis was not confined to the Regular Budget but also affected the budget for 
technical co-operation financed from voluntary contributions. Mexico's 
Resident Representative to the Agency had chaired an informal working group 
which had held consultations with Member States, pursuant to resolution 
GC(XXXV)/RES/562, on the financing of technical assistance. The report on the 
outcome of those consultations had been transmitted to the General 
Conference. As the report confirmed, there were widely differing opinions as 
to the best way of ensuring the payment of contributions. It was clear, 
however, that a further decline in contributions could not and should not be 
accepted. 
46. His delegation wished to reaffirm Mexico's unwavering commitment to the 
Agency. It was convinced that, with a sound Agency backed by the confidence 
and financial support of its Member States, peaceful nuclear applications, 
horizontal and vertical non-proliferation and nuclear safety could be 
strengthened. 
47. Mr. EGGAR (United Kingdom), speaking on behalf of the European 
Community and its member States, thanked the Agency for the role it had played 
over the past year, which had been one of intense activity. The year ahead 
was likely to be no less important. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 16 


48. The Community and its member States congratulated the Agency on the 
important contribution it had made to international efforts to uncover and 
render harmless Iraq's weapons of mass destruction pursuant to United Nations 
Security Council resolution 687. The announcement by the Security Council on 
31 January 1992 that it would take appropriate measures in any further cases 
of non-compliance with NPT obligations reported by the Agency was an important 
new element in the overall non-proliferation regime. 
49. Despite Iraq's persistent efforts to deceive and obstruct them, the 
inspection teams had exposed incontrovertible evidence that Iraq had been 
engaged in a complex and comprehensive nuclear weapons development programme 
and had destroyed key components of that programme. Doubts remained 
concerning the full extent of the programme, however, and it was essential 
that the international community maintain concerted pressure on Iraq, in order 
to force it to comply with all relevant United Nations resolutions and thereby 
ensure that it was never again in a position to threaten its neighbours. The 
Agency would continue to play an important role in that process. 
50. In that context, the Community and its member States applauded the 
progress made by the Agency over the previous 12 months in its efforts to 
improve and strengthen its safeguards system in the ]ight of recent 
experience. Effective assurance that nuclear energy would not be misused was 
essential to the peaceful nuclear development which it was the Agency's task 
to promote. 
51. The past year had also seen a number of more welcome developments which 
had strengthened the non-proliferation regime. China and France had acceded 
to the NPT, so that all the nuclear-weapon States and all the members of the 
European Community were now Parties. 
52. The Community and its member States welcomed the progress towards 
nuclear non-proliferation in Latin America, especially the conclusion of a 
full-scope safeguards agreement between Argentina, Brazil and the Agency. 
They were following the implementation of that agreement - and other 
developments in Latin America - with sympathy and interest, as they were the 
progress made in implementing the full-scope safeguards agreement which the 
Government of South Africa had concluded the previous year. They also 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.344 
page 17 


welcomed the ratification by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of its 
safeguards agreement with the Agency; they looked forward to its speedy and 
complete implementation and would continue to follow progress closely. 
Equally, they looked forward to full implementation of the agreement between 
the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsular and a bilateral system of inspection. 


53. The Agency's safeguards played a crucial role within the framework 
of the NPT. As the Statute showed, the application of safeguards was one of 
the Agency's basic functions. The Community and its member States had long 
attached the highest priority to improving and strengthening the whole 
safeguards system. 
54. At the previous General Conference session, the Twelve had proposed, in 
their joint statement, a programme for strengthening and improving the 
Agency's safeguards system. They were pleased that their ideas had helped to 
shape the discussions. They welcomed in particular the Board's reaffirmation 
of the Agency's right to conduct special inspections. They were working out 
how best to respond to the Director General's request that Agency Member 
States support the work of the Department of Safeguards by voluntarily 
providing additional information on the production of concentrates, on 
inventories of nuclear material and on international transfers of sensitive 
equipment. They hoped to have arrangements in place by the end of the year. 
55. The task of strengthening the Agency's safeguards was not, however, 
finished. The fundamental study of possible alternative safeguards regimes 
which the Secretariat had begun should be continued, and it should draw on the 
best available technical advice. The Community and its member States also 
intended to play an active role in the preparations for the 1995 NPT Extension 
Conference with a view to contributing to international nuclear co-operation 
for peaceful purposes in the framework of a strengthened non-proliferation 
regi me. 
56. In the same context, the Community and its member States attached great 
importance to the agreement between the Director General and Commissioner 
Cardosa e Cunha on a new partnership between the CEC and the Agency's 
Department of Safeguards. The case for rationalizing the work of the two 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 18 


safeguards bodies was clear. The new partnership arrangement would provide an 
excellent opportunity not only to secure full implementation of the agreement 
set forth in document INFC1RC/193 in a manner which respected the responsibilities 
of both parties, but also to redirect resources to areas where 
safeguards could make the greatest contribution to non-proliferation. 


57. The Community and its member States also paid a tribute to the work of 
the Nuclear Suppliers Group, which had resumed its activities and reached 
agreement on a new regime for controlling the export of nuclear-related 
dual-use items. That should permit the continued development of peaceful 
nuclear trade on the basis of transparent non-proliferation criteria. The 
Community and its member States also noted with satisfaction that all members 
of the Group had stated that they would make nuclear supplies subject to the 
application of full-scope safeguards; it was to be hoped that other suppliers 
would follow suit without delay. 
58. Without safeguards, no one could promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. However, the Agency had a number of other, more directly promotional 
functions. The Community and its member States welcomed what had been 
achieved in the past year. The Agency's annual report gave many examples of 
work done in developing non-power uses of nuclear energy and thereby in 
helping to raise standards of living worldwide. The Agency was also to be 
commended for its continuing efforts in providing technical assistance. 
Despite difficult economic circumstances members of the Community were 
continuing to contribute according to their means. 
59. The Parties to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material would be meeting in Vienna the following week to review the 
Convention. The Twelve intended to express their overall satisfaction with 
the way the Convention was functioning. 
60. With regard to nuclear safety, the Community and its member States 
noted with satisfaction that agreement had been reached on the formulation of 
safety fundamentals, which would constitute a basic document. The Agency's 
review teams had also made a practical contribution to the enhancement of 
nuclear safety worldwide. The increasing number of requests for OSART and 
ASSET missions was the clearest evidence of their value. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 19 


61. At the previous session of the General Conference, the Community and 
its member States had welcomed the start of a step-by-step process for 
establishing an international nuclear safety regime. As initiators of the 
International Conference on the Safety of Muclear Power held in Vienna in 
Septeraber 1991, they continued to be strongly in favour of the conclusion of a 
nuclear safety convention, believing that such an instrument would help 
greatly to raise the general level of nuclear safety worldwide and promote a 
harmonized international approach to all aspects of nuclear safety. They were 
pleased to note that a group of experts had started work on the preparation of 
such a convention and hoped that the experts' activities would be completed 
soon. They wore committed to playing a positive role in the negotiation of 
the convention and in the continuing discussions  on the basis of current 
international nuclear safety experience - of the means of implementing it. 
6?. The Community and its member States also recognized the Agency's 
contribution in helping - for example, through OSART and ASSET missions - the 
countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union to improve nuclear 
safety. Furthermore, they wished to underline the importance of the Agency's 
extrabudgetary programme on WWER-440/230 reactors and the results it had 
produced to date. They wished to continue their close co-operation with the 
Agency in the development of its technical assistance programmes in that 
area. Similarly, they supported the call by the Group of 7 at its July summit 
in Munich for the international community to contribute to the financing of an 
urgent programme aimed at improving the safety of nuclear facilities in 
Eastorn Europe and the former Soviet Union. However, the problem was so large 
and complex, and those trying to provide assistance so numerous, that 
effective co ordination was essential in order to set priorities and avoid 
duplication of effort. b'or that reason, the members of the Group of 24 had 
derided to improve the co-ordination of their efforts. Jn so doing, the Group 
would continue to rely on the Agency's advice. 


63. The European Energy Charter, which had been signed at The Hague since 
the last session of the General Conference, encouraged the liberalization of 
trade and investment in the energy sector and also the achievement and 
maintenance of a high level of nuclear safety and effective co-operation in 
the nuclear safety field. Further work had since taken place to develop more 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 20 


detailed provisions, and the Community and its member States hoped that the 
Charter's Basic Agreement and its Protocol on principles governing the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the safety of nuclear installations would 
be concluded soon. They were grateful to the Agency for the help which it had 
given in connection with the negotiation of the Protocol. 


64. The Agency's budget and general financial situation remained causes of 
great concern to the Community and its member States. The Agency could not 
function properly unless all Member States paid their assessed contributions 
in full and on time. It was therefore important that all Member States 
concerned remedy the situation as a matter of urgency. The Agency, for its 
part, should reduce its costs as much as possible and display realism. 
65. Speaking as delegate of the United Kingdom, he said his country 
welcomed the progress made the previous week in developing mechanisms for the 
co-ordination of Western assistance in nuclear safety to Eastern Europe and 
the former Soviet Union. Co-ordination was not an end in itself; nor was it 
sufficient to carry out more studies. It was therefore important that the 
various bilateral and multilateral programmes of assistance move beyond the 
study phase and that practical help be given promptly, so that real 
improvements could be made to the operational safety of the plants in 
question. To that end, all donors needed to co-operate closely with the 
recipient countries. Everyone needed to demonstrate a genuine commitment to 
safety by taking action. He hoped that the European Community would do so by 
identifying specific projects for early implementation. The United Kingdom 
would continue to play its part in the process. 
66. The energy market in the United Kingdom was continuing to evolve 
following the recent privatization of the electricity supply industry. One of 
the main objectives of privatization was to introduce competition into the 
electricity market. Competition was already beginning to take effect, and it 
was expected to intensify during the next few years. 
67. His Government saw two main advantages in the continued use of nuclear 
power. First, it increased the range of available fuels, thereby improving 
security of supply. Second, by replacing fossil fuels it made a valuable 
contribution to efforts to reduce atmospheric pollution. His Government 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 21 


therefore intended to continue with the nuclear power option, provided nuclear 
power became economic and the nuclear industry demonstrated that it was 
capable of maintaining its high standards of safety and environmental 
protection. 


68. It was clear that the main challenge facing the British nuclear 
industry was to become competitive. The review of the prospects for nuclear 
power to be undertaken in the United Kingdom in 1994 would thus focus on the 
central issue of the economic viability of the nuclear power generation in a 
free and open energy market. The nuclear power generating companies in the 
United Kingdom were striving to lower their costs while maintaining their 
excellent safety records. In 1991-92, output from both the Magnox and the 
advanced gas-cooled reactors had reached record levels, and those reactors 
were currently meeting around 20% of the country's electricity needs. Total 
output had risen from 45 TWh in 1990-91 to 48.4 TWh in 1991-92. 
69. Public concern about the environmental effects of burning fossil fuels 
also had implications for nuclear power. Economic nuclear power could make a 
significant contribution to attempts to reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide, 
nitrogen oxides and carbon dioxide. However, that depended on nuclear power 
remaining environmentally acceptable and on the current high safety standards 
being maintained. Public perceptions of safety would continue to be shaped by 
events around the world. 
70. The British nuclear industry was pressing ahead with the construction 
of its first pressurized-water reactor, at Sizewell. Work was eight months 
ahead of schedule, and the station was due to begin commercial operations in 
1994. The United Kingdom was continuing to make progress in the search for a 
solution to the problem of the long-term disposal of intermediate-level 
radioactive waste. In June, the waste management company UK Nirex had 
announced that it would defer by one year its decision on whether to apply for 
planning permission to construct a deep repository at Sellafield as the 
drilling of some deep boreholes had been delayed. Information from the test 
drilling was important to the establishment of a complete and satisfactory 
safety case for the proposed repository. UK Nirex hoped to be in a 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 22 


position to submit a repository planning appJication towards the end of 1993. 
Obviously, it was essential to get the design right, even at the cost of some 
delay. 


71. The new reprocessing plant at Sellafield (THORP) had been completed on 
schedule, in February 1992. It had received a favourable opinion from the 
European Commission under the relevant provision of the EURATOM Treaty. The 
plant was due to commence full-scale commercial operations early in 1993. It 
already had orders worth some 9 billion pounds sterling. 
72. Research and development had demonstrated its value in solving the 
technical problems associated with reactor operation and safety, which had to 
be the responsibility primarily of operators and vendors as it was they who 
were best placed to set priorities and ensure value for money. In addition, 
research and development could provide governments and regulatory bodies with 
valuable information about more effective ways of discharging their respective 
responsibilities. His Government's aim was that the nuclear industry, which 
was now a mature industry, should operate according to commercial principles 
and justify research and development by reference to commercial 
considerations. The true economics of nuclear power could be assessed only if 
the research and development costs were also properly taken into account. 
73. Mr. TAN (Malaysia) said that, like most international 
organizations, the Agency was not insulated from the present profound changes 
and socio-economic and political turmoil. Indeed, it was now more than ever 
inextricably involved in the search for and maintenance of world peace and 
security. It was therefore imperative that the Agency maintain an objective 
balance between its regulatory and promotional activities. Malaysia had high 
expectations that further progress would be made in those two areas, pursuant 
to NPT and as a result of the present discussions on the strengthening, of 
Agency safeguards. 
74. His country believed that proper and timely inspections carried out in 
accordance with comprehensive safeguards agreements were very important in 
order to thwart efforts to use facilities, equipment and materials in a manner 
detrimental to world peace and security. Hence, Malaysia reaffirmed its 
support for measures to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 23 


safeguards system, provided that the sovereign rights of the Member States 
concerned were taken into account. Also, it considered that careful 
deliberations on the proposal for a global nuclear safety and liability 
convention were absolutely essential in order to clearly define the 
responsibilities of the operators of nuclear facilities and to take full 
account of global environmental rights and interests. 


75. Developing countries regarded the Agency's technical co-operation 
programmes as one means of effectively transferring nuclear know-how. Those 
programmes had helped his country to build up its energy and nuclear power 
planning capabilities and to apply nuclear technology in non-power sectors, 
and Malaysia was therefore concerned about the recent decline in financing for 
them. Urgent measures to improve the situation should be considered. 
76. That having been said, he wished to place on record his delegation's 
appreciation of the Agency's contribution to the development of nuclear 
science and technology in Malaysia. Also, he thanked the Secretariat for its 
untiring efforts in promoting development in Asia and the Pacific through the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA), which had recently been extended 
until 1997, and in encouraging beneficial bilateral arrangements with 
developed countries in the region such as Australia and Japan. He hoped that 
those arrangements would be further reinforced and improved. 
77. Having benefited from the Agency's programmes, his country stood ready 
to continue co-operating with the Agency, and he was pleased to announce that 
in 1993 it would be making a further modest contribution ($66 600) to 
the TACF; that was in addition to an offer of fellowships for scientists from 
other developing countries to be trained in non-power areas of nuclear science 
at relevant Malaysian institutions. In that connection, Malaysia wished to 
encourage the establishment of networking arrangements between its nuclear 
science and research institutions and counterparts in developed and other 
developing countries. 
78. In conclusion, he said that the joint commitment to protect the 
environment required a global approach and partnership in order that there 
should be continuing support for economic growth and the creation of 
conditions conducive to sustainable development. He hoped that the dialogue 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 24 


between developing and developed countries, which had begun well before the 
Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, would eventually help resolve some of the 
complex problems relating to the environment and sustainable development. If 
not, the present economic disarray and political inequality would mean that 
the laudable international efforts initiated before the Earth Summit and the 
hope placed in the international community subsequently had been in vain. The 
Agency's programmes would undoubtedly be an integral part of that process. 


79. Mr. AL-SULEIMAN (Saudi Arabia) said that in fulfilment of its 
statutory obligations the Agency should promote efforts to achieve and 
maintain a high level of radiation protection and nuclear safety throughout 
the world. Radioactive waste management remained one of the critical issues 
hampering the expansion of nuclear energy applications. All States using 
nuclear energy in any form accumulated radioactive waste that had to be 
disposed of properly. The Agency should therefore promote appropriate 
technologies for radioactive waste management - especially low- and mediumlevel 
waste management technologies which took into account various aspects of 
radiation protection, nuclear safety and siting as well as environmental 
factors. The Agency should also pursue its advisory activities with a view to 
helping developing Member States to plan integrated systems for the disposal 
of radioactive waste. 
80. The efficiency and effectiveness of the safeguards system remained a 
major concern of the Agency and Member States, as safeguards strengthened 
confidence that transferred nuclear technology was being used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. His delegation felt that realism was essential in planning 
and implementation as the grave monetary crisis faced by the Agency in 1992 
would have an adverse impact on the effectiveness of safeguards activities. 
Further consultations between the Secretariat and Member States would lead to 
increased confidence in the Agency's safeguards system and help to strengthen 
and improve the system, which should not, however, be done at the expense of 
technical co-operation. 
81. In resolution GC(XXXIII)/RES/515 the General Conference had requested 
the Director General "to assess the technical and economic potential for using 
nuclear heat reactors in sea water desalination in the light of relevant 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 25 


experience gained during the past decade". In resolution GC(XXX1V)/RES/54O 
the General Conference had further requested the Director General to assess in 
detail "the costs of potable water production with various sizes of nuclear 
desalination plant" and "to include nuclear desalination as one of the 
activities in future programmes of the Agency". 


82. The Middle East, one of the most volatile and tense regions of the 
world, was facing a severe shortage of water, and so the provision of water 
for households, industry and agriculture was receiving the highest priority. 
Saudi Arabia and the member States of the Gulf Co- operation Council were among 
the first countries to meet their fresh water requirements through the 
desalination of sea water using fossil fuels. The use of nuclear energy for 
desalination was technically effective and could be economically competitive. 
His delegation felt that the Agency should continue to support the development 
of the necessary technology. 
83. Commending the Agency on the achievements of the two-year programming 
cycle, he emphasized that technical co-operation was among the Agency's most 
important activities and stressed the need to provide assured and predictable 
financing for it - namely, from the Regular Budget. 
84. Resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/571, entitled "Application of IAEA Safeguards 
in the Middle East", had been adopted by consensus with the aim of underlining 
that the peace and security of the Middle East depended on the establishment 
of a nuclear-weapon free zone in the region. The Arab countries had been the 
first to support that resolution in the belief that Agency safeguards would be 
applied to all nuclear activities in the Middle East without exception or 
reservation. The achievement of stability in the Middle East required 
balanced controls and the application of safeguards to all nuclear activities 
in the region. Saudi Arabia supported efforts aimed at establishing a 
nuclear-weapon free zone in the Middle East and reiterated that nuclear 
disarmament should apply to all States in the region without exception. Also, 
it supported the establishment of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction 
in the Middle East. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 26 


85. In resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/561 the General Conference had requested the 
Informal Working Group on the Financing of Safeguards "to continue its work so 
that consensus may be reached on the arrangements for the future financing of 
safeguards and to report, through the Board of Governors, to the Conference at 
its thirty-sixth regular session". His delegation appreciated the efforts of 
the Chairman of the Informal Working Group and the recommendations made. It 
would like not only Member States' national incomes to be taken into account 
in the computing of budgetary contributions, but also the number of nuclear 
installations in each State and the State's capacity to manage and operate 
them. 
86. In view of the importance of food irradiation for developing countries, 
his delegation hoped that the Agency would devise and implement programmes in 
that area and disseminate relevant research results and that it would provide 
developing countries with assistance in reducing food losses, improving food 
production and expanding their trade in irradiated foodstuffs. 
87. Saudi Arabia was not party either to the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage or to the Paris Convention on Third Party 
Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy. However, his delegation had 
followed with great interest the meetings of the Standing Committee on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage. It had noted the divergent views expressed by 
members of the Committee on various topics, especially the financial 
involvement of the State in compensating for nuclear damage in excess of the 
operator's liability and the submission of military installations to the 
provisions of the conventions. Some States with nuclear installations were 
calling on States with no such installations to help meet the costs of 
compensation payments. His delegation felt that the States which had built 
nuclear installations should assume responsibility for such costs. 
88. Mr. TSOUNIS (Greece), while fully associating himself with the 
statement made by the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the 
European Community, wanted to make a few additional remarks. His Government 
was grateful to the Director General and his staff for the work done during 
the past year and endorsed the Agency's Annual Report for 1991. The Agency 
had made tremendous efforts since its creation in helping to harness atomic 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 27 


energy for peace and prosperity, in spite of financial difficulties which had 
greatly hampered its operations during recent years. Sometimes those efforts 
had met with success, but not always. 


89. A new era was now beginning for the Agency. The unprecedented changes 
in the world today made careful examination - and possible expansion - of the 
Agency's role necessary in order to meet the new needs of Member States. Over 
the past 35 years, the Agency had shown that it was efficient. It had 
managed, sometimes despite great difficulties, to perform its duties 
successfully with limited financial resources. Thus there was good reason to 
hope that the new challenges would also be dealt with in a cost-effective 
manner. To that end, certain administrative and structural reforms were 
necessary. His delegation urged the Director General to study the matter with 
a view to ensuring greater efficiency and effectiveness and to report to the 
General Conference at its next session. 


90. Greece both provided and received technical assistance through the 
Agency. A number of individuals from developing countries had been trained at 
Greek scientific establishments. At the same time, substantial assistance had 
been provided to various Greek institutions. The Agency was providing 
assistance to developing countries especially in non-power uses of nuclear 
energy. Through its technical co- operation programme the Agency was trying to 
provide tools for solving problems related to health, nutrition, water 
supplies, agricultural development, animal husbandry, soil fertility, and so 
on. 
91. The Agency's increased functions in the area of safety had 
unfortunately coincided with major cuts in its budget and the establishment of 
a policy of zero real growth. Those important functions had been pursued 
vigorously with the help of extrabudgetary resources. Greece was still 
closely following the Agency's activities relating to WWER- 440/230 reactors, 
especially those at Kozloduy, and expected that the results of those 
activities would provide a basis for developing programmes designed to enhance 
the safety of those reactors. The G 24 countries were relying on the Agency's 
advice, and major efforts were being made to help countries in Eastern and 
Central Europe, including Bulgaria and the new democracies of the former 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.344 
page 28 


Soviet Union, to raise safety levels at their nuclear power plants. While 
supporting progress through the use of nuclear energy, his country was acutely 
aware of the great risks involved in operating nuclear plants which did not 
meet the Agency's safety standards. 


92. His Government noted with satisfaction the co-operation between the 
Agency and the CEC and NEA in providing technical and financial support to 
East European countries in the field of nuclear safety. In that context, the 
Greek Atomic Energy Commission, in co-operation with the CEC, was organizing a 
training seminar on emergency planning and response in the event of a nuclear 
accident for Bulgarian and Greek participants; the seminar was to be held in 
Athens in October 1992. 
93. Greece had been an active member of the working group negotiating a 
nuclear safety convention on the basis of a Secretariat draft. It supported 
the conclusion of such a convention, which was expected to contain internationally 
harmonized minimum safety standards and to enhance the role of the 
Agency. The convention should cover all parts of the fuel cycle, including 
radioactive waste. 
94. Greece had been one of the first countries to accede to the NPT and, 
despite certain unfortunate recent events, it remained firmly convinced that 
the Treaty was the only instrument which could ensure a stable and safe 
world. It was true that the NPT and the corresponding safeguards regime had 
been negotiated at a time when the world had been a very different place. The 
end of the Cold War and the new geopolitical environment had led to new 
thinking and lent new dimensions to the issues of non-proliferation. However, 
the NPT was still the only hope. Despite what some people might think about 
its imperfections, the Treaty was the most widely accepted agreement in the 
field of arms control and disarmament, and Greece felt that its continuation 
must be ensured. 
95. A number of important steps had been taken since the previous session 
of the General Conference. The recent accession of France and China to 
the NPT was much appreciated. In addition, South Africa's co-operation with 
the Agency in the implementation of its NPT safeguards agreement and the steps 
taken by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to assist 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 29 


the Agency in performing its safeguards functions were encouraging. Regarding 
South Africa, his Government was satisfied with the inventory report on the 
country's nuclear material and installations and with the report's general 
conclusion - that no evidence had been found that South Africa's initial 
report had been incomplete. As to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
his Government looked forward to full co-operation with the Agency in the 
safeguards area and to full implementation of the bilateral agreement between 
the two Koreas on the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and the 
establishment of a common inspection system. 


96. The Brazilian-Argentine agreement had set a good precedent and 
contributed to confidence-building at the regional level. The Tlatelolco 
Treaty, on which that agreement was based, and the Treaty of Rarotonga were 
good examples of the regional non-proliferation approach. As his delegation 
had stated the previous year, non-proliferation objectives were served by 
regional approaches. Progress in the Middle East, with the opening of peace 
negotiations among the interested countries, raised the hope of progress as 
regards nuclear issues. 
97. His delegation endorsed document GC(XXXV1)/1019, particularly 
paragraph 8. It shared the view that the Director General should make every 
effort, together with Member States of the region, to find a positive 
solution. Although safeguards seminars might be useful, only political will 
could ultimately lead to a political commitment in the form of a regional 
treaty. His delegation also shared the view that a model safeguards agreement 
should be drafted once the obligations to be included in such a treaty had 
been clarified. 
98. There was no doubt that the Agency had done its utmost to carry out the 
tasks entrusted to it in Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715. The 
Director General had handled that sensitive matter skilfully and had reported, 
as requested, through the Secretary-General to the Security Council. Thus 
far, 14 inspection missions had taken place and Iraq's secret nuclear 
programme had been uncovered. Its size and sophistication had surprised the 
world community. Iraq's non-compliance with the NPT and its safeguards 
obligations and its non-compliance with the Security Council resolutions were 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 30 


regrettable. His delegation urged Iraq to stop withholding information which 


should be communicated without delay to the Agency's inspectors in accordance 
with the provisions of the Security Council resolutions. If Iraq wished to 
prove its peaceful intentions, it should review its policies and co-operate 
more closely with the Agency. His delegation congratulated the Agency's 


inspection teams on their efforts not only in uncovering Iraq's clandestine 


facilities but also in rendering harmless Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. 


99. That isolated, but unfortunate, precedent had given real impetus to a 
process aimed at strengthening Agency safeguards by improving the present 
system and taking necessary new measures. The Board of Governors had already 
made good progress in that direction. The Agency's right to conduct special 
inspections had been reaffirmed by the Board and already invoked in some 
isolated cases. 
100. The time had come for the Agency to consider alternative safeguards 
approaches with a view to increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the 
safeguards system, which needed strengthening if unpleasant surprises were to 
be avoided in the future. The strengthened safeguards system should have an 
"early warning" capability for detecting anomalies in a timely manner. The 
technical elements of a modified safeguards system should be such that the 
system fully met the political objective: to give assurance of the peaceful 
nature of the nuclear activities of any State and to deter diversion. 
101. It seemed, however, that at the present time there was very little 
prospect of substantially increasing the funds available to the Agency. The 
safeguards system should therefore be made as cost-effective as possible, and 
extrabudgetary funds should be provided for that purpose. That was, at 
present, the only realistic way of strengthening safeguards. The basic study 
initiated by the Secretariat should continue. His delegation suggested, as it 
had done the previous year, that a small group of experts be created for that 
purpose. The group could be an expanded version of SAGS1, as had been 
proposed by the Director General. 
102. Greece had already agreed to the new regime for controlling the export 
of nuclear-related dual-use items and to the adoption of a policy of fullscope 
safeguards as a condition of nuclear supply. He called on all States to 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 31 


do the same. Also, his country had welcomed the Director General's suggestion 


regarding the voluntary reporting of nuclear material and was in the process 


of considering it. He believed that the dissemination of peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy on the one hand and safeguards commitments on the other were 
mutually reinforcing; the Agency's safeguards system could be regarded as a 
means of facilitating the transfer of peaceful nuclear technology. 


103. Greece attached great importance to environmental matters, and his 
delegation had noted with appreciation the report resulting from the Agency's 
participation in the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development 
contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1NF/31O. It had also noted that several of 
the "Agenda 21" programme chapters on conservation and the management of 
resources for development were relevant to the Agency. 
104. In conclusion, his delegation once again congratulated the Director 
General and the Secretariat on the excellent work done during the period under 
consideration. His Government recognized both the importance of the Agency's 
promotional role and the contribution which the Agency made to peace and 
security by giving its Member States confidence that nuclear energy was and 
would continue to be used for peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind. 
105. Mr. ROUVILLOIS (France) said that the past year had been a 
particularly eventful one in the nuclear field, with developments relating to 
the international non-proliferation regime, to disarmament and the fate of the 
resulting fissile material, and to safety. 
106. Major progress had been made with regard to non-proliferation. The 
accession to the NPT of the Baltic States and Slovenia, followed by China and 
France, had given a vital boost to the Treaty just when preparations were 
about to get under way for the 1995 Review Conference. The accession of all 
the CIS Republics, particularly Belarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan, was now 
eagerly awaited. France, like other countries, intended to pronounce itself 
in favour of an indefinite extension of the Treaty in 1995; it was to be hoped 
that as many as possible of the States party to the Treaty would do the same. 
There had also been important progress as regards the Tlatelolco Treaty; on 
24 August 1992, France had deposited its instrument of ratification of 
Additional Protocol I, as promised by President Mitterrand in the Security 
Council in January 1992. 

GG(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 32 


107. The cohesion of the nuclear supplier countries had increased 
appreciably, the 27 countries which adhered to the London Guidelines deciding 
to adopt the principle of comprehensive safeguards as a condition of export; 
that represented a very significant strengthening of non-proliferation 
policy. In addition, they had updated the existing lists of nuclear materials 
and technologies and had adopted a specific regime for potentially dual-use 
items. 
108. In February 1992, new measures had been adopted within the Agency with 
a view to increasing the effectiveness of international safeguards and 
ensuring that they were really applied to all materials and facilities which 
States had undertaken to use for peaceful purposes. The decisions in 
question, which involved the Agency's credibility, had been expected. Grounds 
for concern persisted, however, since some countries, such as India, Pakistan 
and Israel, were still opposed to the Agency's applying safeguards to aLl 
their nuclear facilities and some others were suspected of not complying with 
their obligations. France welcomed the fact that the Agency had destroyed a 
number of clandestine facilities in Iraq. However, Iraq was still withholding 
from the Agency certain information which it was required to provide under the 
terms of Security Council resolution 687 and it was sometimes obstructing the 
inspectors in their work. There was no way of knowing for sure at the present 
stage whether the Iraqi programme was known in its entirety. He hoped that 
the post-destruction monitoring plan would be implemented in accordance with 
Security Council resolution 715, without prejudice to any inspections which 
might still be necessary. 
109. Thus, there was greater cohesion among the main suppliers, more 
stringent export control measures had been adopted, international safeguards 
were being reviewed and the number of States participating in the non 
proliferation regime had increased. However, new problems were arising: the 
break-up of the Soviet empire; the delicate situation created by dual-use 
technologies; and the difficulty of uncovering even large-scale clandestine 
programmes. 
110. In the past year the two Superpowers had made great progress with 
regard to nuclear disarmament. However, the acceleration of the disarmament 
process was associated with new problems - regarding the fate of the fissile 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 33 


material contained in the nuclear weapons. The importance of those problems 
had quickly been appreciated, but solutions were hard to find and even harder 
to implement. Numerous discussions had taken place on the matter, notably in 
Washington in July 1992. 


111. In the immediate future and for several years to come, storage of the 
fissile material was the only realistic solution, but there was no indication 
that permanent storage was envisaged. Recycling of the nuclear material from 
the former Soviet Union's weapons in civil reactors was planned, but there was 
controversy about the timing and the general approach. Conversion of the 
highly enriched uranium into fuel for commercial reactors would offer 
substantial advantages, from the point of view both of non-proliferation and 
of safety. The plutonium - which was attracting even more public attention 
because of its properties - posed an extremely delicate problem. In theory 
there were two solutions: storage or recycling. One idea that had been put 
forward was to burn the plutonium in a "de breeder" (a breeder operated in 
such a way as to consume more plutonium than it produced) or to recycle it in 
MOX fuel. France was prepared to become actively involved in exploring the 
various approaches. 
112. Important developments had also taken place in nuclear safety. In 
September 1991 leading world experts had concluded that an international 
initiative was needed and, at its thirty fifth session, the General Conference 
had adopted a resolution recognizing the need to promote safety within the 
framework of a concerted international effort; the idea of a safety convention 
had been born. The idea had since taken on a clearer shape, and a decisive 
stage should be reached in October 1992. The international nuclear community 
now knew that safety was a global issue, for the consequences of a nuclear 
accidrnt extended beyond frontiers and safety matters played a major part in 
the acceptance of nuclear power by the general public. That was particularly 
true in Western and Eastern Europe. 
113. There had been no major accident since Chernobyl, but the incidents 
which had occurred - for example, in Bulgaria and near St. Petersburg - were a 
reminder for all Europeans of the problems associated with certain reactor 
types of Soviet design. Assessments had been made of the difficulties 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 34 


involved in dealing with those problems effectively and swiftly. There were 
approximately 25 first-generation reactors of the RBMK. and WWfclR types with 
design, maintenance and operating problems that the countries directly 
concerned could not easily solve by themselves. Most of those reactors would 
have to remain in service for several years to come in order to provide 
essential energy for those countries. Partial recourse to electricity from 
Western Europe could in time be facilitated by interconnecting the grids, and 
significant reductions in consumption could result from energy saving and the 
charging of normal prices for electricity. In the meantime, however, it was 
vital that action be taken and, although there was acute international 
awareness of the situation, the elaboration of a concerted plan by the various 
parties interested in helping was taking a great deal of time. The situation 
had been referred to by the industrialized countries (the G- 7) in 1991 at 
their London Summit, and in July 1992 - at their Munich Summit - the G-7 had 
offered the States directly concerned support within the framework of a 
multilateral action programme aimed at supplementing the bilateral assistance 
already being provided. However, the will to act had not yet been fully 
translated into action, and it was high time that practical decisions were 
taken. 


114. In France too, the past year had seen events with international 
repercussions in the nuclear field. The inauguration of the new reprocessing 
facility at La Hague had been an occasion for celebrating a major technological 
and industrial success, achieved in response to France's concern about 
ensuring responsible management of the nuclear material cycle and not leaving 
the problem for future generations to deal with. The facility had gone into 
operation on schedule and was functioning most satisfactorily; full-capacity 
operation should be reached in two years' time. With the processes being 
applied there, it was possible to reduce the radiological exposure of the 
staff, which was now on average about one thousandth of the ICRP's recommended 
limits. The example of La Hague showed that nuclear energy could be 
controlled throughout its industrial cycle and that it was considerate towards 
mankind and the environment. That should be publicized and explained in order 
to boost public confidence. 

GC(XXXVl)/0K.3Vi 
page 35 


115. In July 1992, the French Government had decided to postpone the restart 
of Superphenix. That in no way implied that the project had been abandoned. 
On the contrary, thought was being given to the role which it might play, once 
all the safety requirements laid down by the public authorities had been met, 
in studies and experiments relating to the consumption of plutonium and the 
incineration of long- lived waste. The current year had also seen Electricite 
de France deciding to order a new 1400 MW reactor, due to start up in 1999. 
Conscious of their responsibilities, the authorities were constantly 
endeavouring to improve the performance of facilities and to support the 
French research effort; as regards the back end of the fuel cycle, the aim was 
to reduce both the quantity and the harmfulness of the waste. A more thorough 
separation of long-lived radioisotopes, which could then be destroyed in 
reactors or accelerators, was a major objective, and for research in that area 
a new laboratory - ATALANTE - was about to go into service in France. 
116. The back-end of the fuel cycle - namely the management and final 
storage of the waste - was a particularly sensitive issue justifiably arousing 
the concern of the general public, which did not want to leave a "poisoned 
legacy" to future generations. The proposed technical solutions had to be 
infallible, and they should be explained fully and repeatedly. Ever since the 
inception of its nuclear programme, France had been determined that the 
resulting waste should be managed and stored within its own territory. 
In 1990 and 1991, the issue of high- level or long-lived radioactive waste 
storage had aroused concern in the population; the French Government had 
decided to respond by introducing more formal consultation procedures. That 
was the purpose of a bi11 passed in December 1991 which provided for more 
thorough research into the various ways of eliminating waste, and particularly 
the separation and transmutation of long-lived elements. Every year a report 
on the status of that research would be examined by Parliament and published. 
At the same time, decisions on the building of underground laboratories to 
investigate the burial of such waste in deep geological strata would be taken 
in consultation with the local populations and their elected representatives. 


117. With regard to low- and intermediate level waste, the first French 
repository, which had been in service for some 30 years, was reaching 
saturation and would finally cease operating in 1994. A new facility, the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 36 


Centre de L'Aube, had started operations in January 1992. During 
construction, special efforts had been made to keep the local population 
informed; those efforts had paid off, the facility going into service under 
conditions that were excellent from both a technical and a psychological point 
of view. 


118. Because of recent events, the Agency was faced with new problems, to 
which it had started to respond with effectiveness and a high level of 
competence. It was now making vital contributions to international 
initiatives in the key areas of safety, non-proliferation and nuclear power 
promotion. France would continue to lend firm support. 
119. Mr. WAGNER (Czechoslovakia) said that the changes in Europe and 
other parts of the world had increased the Agency's workload. The old world 
order seemed to be past, and efforts were being made to replace it by a system 
which responded better to the vital interests of the world's population. 
Unfortunately, some people might be tempted by the prospect of owning, or of 
having independent access to, nuclear weapons. That was why his delegation 
considered that the Agency's role in non-proliferation was vital and that its 
non-proliferation activities should have top priority. 
120. During the past year further progress had been made towards the 
universality of the NPT. France and China had acceded to the Treaty and 
signed safeguards agreements with the Agency - developments of very great 
importance in view of the forthcoming NPT Review Conference. In that 
connection, Czechoslovakia had always held that the NPT should be extended 
indefinitely beyond 1995. 
121. Similarly positive developments had taken place in the area of Agency 
safeguards. The conclusion of safeguards agreements with Argentina and Brazil 
was helping to strengthen security in Latin America, and the safeguards 
agreements concluded with the Syrian Arab Republic and the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea (DPRK) were also very welcome. His delegation was pleased 
that inspection activities had begun in the DPRK. Although no significant or 
objective conclusions could be drawn after such a short period, the compliance 
of the DPRK with its safeguards agreement gave grounds for some optimism. As 
regards South Africa, its approach to the implementation of its safeguards 
agreement could be considered exemplary. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 37 


122. Pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Agency had 
carried out inspections of Iraq's nuclear installations, with the resulting 
destruction of some of them. As the Director General had stressed, it was 
still too early to conclude that Iraq's military programmes no longer existed, 
and Czechoslovakia therefore believed that the Agency's inspection activities 
should continue. He took the opportunity to thank the Agency and its 
inspection teams. 
123. Czechoslovakia welcomed the announcements by the Governments of 
Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan that they had decided to accede to the NPT, 
and it appealed to those States which had not yet acceded to the Treaty or not 
yet concluded their NPT safeguards agreements to do so speedily in order that 
the non-proliferation regime could become really universal. 
124. During the time remaining before the next NPT Review Conference, 
measures should be taken to increase the effectiveness of the safeguards 
system. A number of proposals had been made by the Secretariat and by Member 
States, and discussions during recent meetings of the Board of Governors 
showed that the majority of Member States were in favour of strengthening 
safeguards even if there were still serious differences of opinion regarding 
some matters and the approach to be adopted. It was encouraging that the 
Board had confirmed the Agency's right to carry out special inspections when 
justified. Financing of the Agency's inspection activities should be the 
subject of further discussions. 
125. On the question of safeguards financing, he said that not all 
possibilities for rationalization had yet been exhausted. Recalling the 
"selective safeguards inspections" proposal which his country had put forward 
at the thirty-second session of the General Conference, he said that at the 
current session his delegation was presenting a modified version with emphasis 
on differentiation between levels of inspection where necessary. His 
delegation was convinced that implementation of the proposal would bring 
significant savings without reducing the effectiveness or credibility of 
inspections. He welcomed the resumption of the activities of the Nuclear 
Suppliers Group, and especially the measures taken during its last meeting, 
held in Warsaw. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 40 


community was pinning high hopes on the Agency and expected it to make further 
contributions to the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the 
prevention of nuclear proliferation. 


135. An objective review of the Agency's work in the past year showed that 
commendable progress had been made on several important issues. In 
particular, the Symposium on Electricity and the Environment held in Helsinki 
and the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development had opened up 
new prospects for the development of nuclear power. The effective measures 
taken by the Secretariat to facilitate the implementation of technical 
assistance projects had further enhanced the Agency's capacity to respond to 
the ever-increasing demand for technical assistance. A number of suggestions 
and measures had been proposed by the Secretariat for the prevention of 
nuclear proliferation and the strengthening of safeguards in response to 
concerns expressed by various countries. The Agency had taken action to 
implement Security Council resolution 687. Finally, preliminary results had 
been obtained in identifying the elements of an international nuclear safety 
convention. 
136. Although the results obtained were praiseworthy, however, there was no 
room for complacency; the Agency had still more to accomplish, and the Member 
States would have to facilitate the task by providing the necessary 
assistance. As everyone knew, since the latter half of the previous year the 
Agency had been experiencing unprecedented financial difficulties which 
prevented it from functioning normally. That situation could not but evoke 
the concern of Member States. So long as they attached importance to the work 
of the Agency and really did something to meet their financial obligations, 
the Agency would certainly be able to further improve and strengthen the 
performance of its functions. 
137. In the light of the new situation, thought was being given to the 
future orientation of the Agency and how the Agency should ensure a balance 
between its promotional activities and its safeguards functions. Experience 
showed that so long as the Agency adhered to the objectives and principles of 
the Statute it continued to make progress, and that whenever too much emphasis 
was placed on a particular function there was a risk of its foundations being 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 41 


weakened. Needless to say, every effort should be made to avoid such a 
situation. For that reason the Agency should maintain an appropriate balance 
between its safeguards functions and its promotional activities. 


138. Peace and development were the two major issues facing the world today, 
and energy was a precondition for development. The use of fossil fuels could 
cause serious environmental problems such as the greenhouse effect and, unless 
appropriate measures were taken, those problems would become more acute as 
industrialization continued. In contrast, nuclear energy was environmentally 
friendly. In most countries, nuclear energy was economically competitive and 
at present by far the best alternative energy source. The Agency should 
therefore concentrate more of its attention on ways of satisfying the nuclear 
energy needs of its Member States. His delegation hoped that the Agency would 
make greater efforts to assist developing countries in nuclear power planning, 
the development of infrastructures for nuclear power facilities, the training 
of specialists and the dissemination of experience in nuclear power plant 
design, construction and operation. In addition, the Agency should encourage 
exchanges of experience among the developing countries themselves. 


139. His Government, which had always attached importance and given high 
priority to co-operation in nuclear safety, believed that such co-operation 
would have an impact in the long term on the development of nuclear power and 
the protection of health and the environment. For a number of reasons, the 
developing countries lacked nuclear safety technology and experience. In 
order to bring their nuclear safety standards up to the international level, 
the Agency should do more in providing them with services and guidance, 
improving their management of radioactive waste and transferring advanced 
safety technology to them. His Government, which was paying great attention 
to the question of nuclear safety, had made safety and quality basic 
priorities in China's policy for the development of nuclear power. 
140. China was an active participant in international co-operation in the 
safety field. The International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power 
held in September 1991 had provided an opportunity for an exchange of views 
and experience on the promotion of international co-operation in that field. 
At that conference, a number of proposals for strengthening such co-operation 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.344 
page 42 


had been put forward, including the formulation of an international nuclear 
safety convention - a proposal which had received a positive response from 
many Member States. Believing that the primary responsibility for nuclear 
safety lay with individual States, China, which was in favour of such a 
convention, proposed that it deal essentially with the basic principles of 
nuclear safety. 


141. The sole objective of China's nuclear power programme was the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy for the benefit of the country's population. In 
December 1991 the 300 MW(e) pressurized water reactor at Qinshan, which had 
been both designed and constructed by Chinese enterprises, had been 
successfully commissioned and connected to the grid. The reactor, the first 
to go into operation in mainland China, opened a new chapter in the country's 
nuclear power development. Units 1 and 2 of the Daya Bay nuclear power 
station, jointly financed by China and Hong Kong, were to be commissioned 
in 1993 and 1994, respectively. The general and preliminary design work for 
Phase 2 of the Qinshan station (2 x 600 MW(e)) had been completed and 
preparatory site work was under way. 


142. In its nuclear power programme China was relying mainly on its own 
experience, which it had gained over a period of 30 years. At the same time, 
China felt it important to make use of advanced overseas expertise and promote 
international co-operation. He was convinced that the growth of China's 
nuclear power industry would contribute to the socialist modernization of 
China and to the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy in the world at large. 
143. The prevention of nuclear proliferation and the promotion of nuclear 
disarmament formed an important part of China's foreign policy. China had 
consistently upheld the principle of not encouraging or engaging in the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons; it did not help other countries to develop 
nuclear weapons. In its co-operation with other countries, China had always 
taken a responsible and prudent attitude. Regarding its nuclear exports, it 
required: that the importer give an assurance that the item in question was 
intended exclusively for peaceful purposes; that the item be subjected to 
Agency safeguards; and that there be no transfer of the item to a third party 
without China's consent. Regarding its nuclear imports, China undertook to 
ensure that the items in question would be used solely for peaceful purposes. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 43 


144. Under the voluntary-offer safeguards agreement concluded by the Chinese 
Government and the Agency in September 1988, Agency inspectors had conducted 
their first inspection in China from 14 to 19 September 1992. In 
January 1989, China had acceded to the Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material, thereby demonstrating that it attached great importance 
to the issue of physical protection of nuclear material and that it was 
willing to participate in international co-operation in that field. To 
facilitate the Agency's safeguards activities, China had in November 1991 
officially undertaken to notify on a continuous basis its nuclear material 
exports to and imports from non-nuclear-weapon States whenever the quantity 
exceeded one effective kilogram. In March 1992, China had formally acceded 
to the NPT. 
145. China was in favour of discussions within the Agency on measures to 
strengthen nuclear safeguards and supported in principle the conducting of 
special inspections. At the same time, it believed that the right to conduct 
special inspections should not be abused. From what he had said it was clear 
that China fully supported the objective of nuclear non-proliferation and 
would continue to work unremittingly towards that objective. 
146. Although discussions within the Agency on the strengthening of the 
safeguards system had made further headway, the legitimate aspirations of the 
developing countries for more extensive and in-depth international 
co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had yet to be 
accorded the attention they deserved and the significance and role of 
international co-operation in that field were often deliberately distorted or 
understated. The monopoly of the industrialized countries in nuclear science 
and technology remained essentially intact. Some of those countries had gone 
so far as to impose unreasonable restrictions on international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear trade under the pretext of the 
prevention of nuclear proliferation. In recent years in particular, there had 
been attempts to hamper co-operation among developing countries in that 
field. All those factors were detrimental to the advancement of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 44 


147. His delegation felt it necessary to reiterate that the countries 
concerned should take appropriate measures to prevent international 
co-operation from contributing to the proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
including nuclear explosive devices, but that such preventive measures should 
not hinder or restrict the promotion of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy nor jeopardize the legitimate right of any 
country, particularly a developing country, to utilize nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes. 
148. China had consistently attached importance to the dual role of the 
Agency in the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the prevention 
of nuclear weapons proliferation and had always adhered to and upheld the 
objectives and principles of the Statute. Over the past year, as in previous 
years, China had taken an active part in the work of the Agency and had made 
efforts to help promote international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. It had paid its assessed contribution to the Regular Budget 
in time, had fulfilled its financial obligations regarding technical 
assistance and co-operation and had done its best in providing contributions 
in kind. 
149. China had actively participated in consultations and discussions on the 
strengthening of safeguards and had put forward constructive suggestions and 
observations. In the field of technical co-operation, Chinese authorities had 
sponsored, either with their own resources or in co-operation with the Agency, 
nine regional training courses or international conferences held in China. 
The 8th International Meeting on Irradiation Processing, recently held in 
Beijing, had reviewed the latest progress made and had permitted an exchange 
of information on the industrial application of irradiation processing 
techniques. He hoped that the results of that meeting would help promote the 
commercialization of those techniques. 
150. Together with other interested countries, China had actively promoted 
multi-level and multi-form co-operation with other developing countries, 
especially regional co-operation in Asia and the Pacific, and had endeavoured 
to intensify that co-operation. Over the past year, numerous Chinese experts 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.344 
page 45 


had been invited to attend meetings of various Agency advisory or expert 
groups. At the same time, China had provided training and expert services for 
other developing countries. 


151. In the light of the volatile international situation, Member States 
expected the Agency to continue playing a positive role in the promotion of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the prevention of nuclear 
proliferation. China believed that, provided all Member States adhered to the 
objectives and principles of the Statute and followed the current overwhelming 
trend in favour of peace and development in the world, the Agency would be 
able to fulfil all expectations and accomplish the historic tasks with which 
it was entrusted. 
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
19 November 1992 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL CONFERENCE Original:


 ENGLISH 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1992, at 10.10 a.m. 
President; Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 
later: Mr. WAGNER (Czechoslovakia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
General debate and annual report 
for 1991 (continued) 1-1 4 
Statement by the delegate of: 
Russian Federation 1-1 4 
Arrangements for the Conference 15 20 
(a) Adoption of the agenda and 
allocation of items for 
initial discussion 15 18 
(b) Closing date of the session and 
opening date of the next session 18 20 


[*] GC(XXXVI)/1001. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI)/INF/313/Rev.2. 


92-3672 
0643n/0048n 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 2 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 
General debate and annual report 
for 1991 (resumed) 21 - 100 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Iraq 21 - 43 
Republic of Korea 44 -54 
Spain 55 - 65 
Tunisia 66 - 71 
Islamic Republic of Iran 72 - 82 
Zimbabwe 83 - 92 
Bangladesh 93 - 100 

Abbreviations used in this record 


ABACC 
Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials 


AFRA 
African Regional Co--operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology 


ASSET 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 


CIS 
Commonwealth of Independent States 


DPRK 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 


EC 
European Community 


IAEA 
International Atomic Energy Agency 


ICRP 
International Commission on Radiological Protection 


MESA 
Middle East and South Asia 


NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OSART Operational Safety Review Team 
RADWASS Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
RAPAT Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
RBMK High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
SAGS I Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Tlatelolco Treaty Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America 
US $ United States dollar 
WAMAP Waste Management Advisory Programme 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (GC(XXXVI)/1004) (continued) 


1. Mr. MIKHAILOV (Russian Federation), having welcomed those 
countries which had recently become Members of the Agency and noted that the 
current session of the General Conference was the first to be attended by a 
delegation from Russia, drew attention to the increasingly important role 
which was being assigned to international organizations in the wake of recent 
political developments following the ending of the Cold War. 
2. The Agency, for its part, had a wide range of extremely important 
programmes such as the study of current and future technology in the fields of 
nuclear energy and the nuclear fuel cycle, radioactive waste management, the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the physical protection of nuclear 
material, the comparative assessment of nuclear power and other energy 
sources, the evaluation of the consequences of the Chernobyl accident, the 
enhancement of nuclear and radiation safety, and technical assistance. His 
delegation supported those activities and regretted that Russia's economic 
problems had caused a number of financial difficulties within the Agency and 
disruptions to those programmes. However, he was pleased to announce that his 
country had just made an initial contribution payment and that subsequent 
payments would be made in accordance with the commitments which it had 
accepted. 
3. The serious economic difficulties faced by many countries made it all 
the more important to maintain zero real growth in the Agency's budget. 
Efforts to reduce non-productive administrative expenses and to enhance the 
effective use of the Agency's existing human and material resources should 
therefore be continued. In that connection, it should be noted that following 
the steps taken to convert parts of the Russian nuclear defence industry to 
peaceful purposes, over half of the country's former nuclear and military 
experts were now engaged in peaceful programmes, and could be made available 
to assist the Agency. 
4. Following the demise of the Soviet Union, worldwide concern had been 
expressed about the fate of its nuclear arsenal. Such concern was unnecessary 
since the foundation of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) had led 
to the establishment of a unified system of control for strategic nuclear 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 4 


weapons. Russia's decision to take over the functions of the former Soviet 
Union as signatory of the NPT, including its role as a depositary, had been 
recognized by the other parties to the Treaty and had been formally approved 
by a decision of the Heads of State of the countries of the CIS taken on 
6 July 1992. The CIS had recognized Russia as the only nuclear-weapon State 
of the former Soviet Union, and all the other members of the Commonwealth had 
undertaken to accede to the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States. By 1 July 1992, 
Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine had transferred their tactical nuclear weapons 


to Russia for dismantling. The radical changes in the international situation 


and growing climate of confidence between the nuclear-weapon States made it 
possible to agree on major cuts in nuclear arms and the decisions taken by 
Russia and the United States to cut their nuclear arsenals and the production 


of plutonium and highly enriched uranium for military purposes were 


particularly important. However, real nuclear disarmament would only be 


achieved when the colossal stocks of weapon-grade uranium and plutonium had 


been destroyed. Another important prerequisite was the establishment of a 


worldwide ban on nuclear testing, including underground testing. 


5. In view of the importance of the NPT, it was essential that the 
NPT Review Conference to be held in 1995 should extend the Treaty indefinitely 
and make it a genuinely universal international legal document. In that 
connection, he welcomed the increase in the number of parties to the Treaty, 
and was particularly pleased to note the recent accession of China and France, 
which meant that all the nuclear-weapon States had now become parties to 
the NPT. He also welcomed the accession to the NPT of the Baltic States, and 
expressed the hope that the other members of the CIS would soon follow that 
example. 
6. The international non-proliferation regime had also been strengthened 
by the measures taken by Argentina and Brazil to ensure full implementation of 
the Tlatelolco Treaty and by the joint safeguards agreements between 
Argentina, Brazil, the ABACC and the Agency. The Joint Declaration on the 
Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsular and the signing of the safeguards 
agreement between the Agency and the DPRK were other significant developments. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 5 


7. As far as the Middle East was concerned, peace and security in that 
region would be strengthened if all its nuclear facilities were to be placed 
under Agency safeguards, either following the accession to the NPT by all 
countries in the region or by the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. However, in the case of Iraq, the Agency's safeguards system had proved 
inadequate. The Iraqi Government needed to be made to comply strictly with 
the requirements of the relevant Security Council resolutions. Furthermore, 
it was clear that the Agency's control, verification and inspection mechanisms 
needed to be improved and that more sophisticated measures had to be 
developed. Russia was prepared to assist fully in that process by making 
available its highly qualified experts. The Russian authorities were also 
actively co-operating in the implementation of Agency inspections at Russian 
nuclear facilities, and in a whole range of tasks under the national programme 
of scientific support for Agency safeguards. 
8. All supporters of the nuclear non-proliferation regime should take 
joint action to prevent any further spread of nuclear weapons. In the case of 
his own country, a presidential decree of 27 March 1992 prohibited the export 
of nuclear material from Russia to non-nuclear-weapon States which had not 
placed all their nuclear activities under Agency control. Russia was also 
reviewing the agreement drawn up by a number of nuclear suppliers to introduce 
a unified control mechanism for the export of dual-use items. 
9. Turning to the current nuclear energy situation in Russia, he said that 
28 units, including 12 of the WWER type, were in operation at 9 nuclear power 
plants, with a total capacity of 20 000 MW. There were a further 15 units 
with uranium-graphite reactors and 1 with a fast neutron reactor. A careful 
watch was kept on the operation of the first-generation units and operating 
certificates were granted annually with the involvement of Agency experts. 
Four units had been taken out of operation - units 1 and 2 at Beloyarsky and 
units 1 and 2 at Novovoronezh. Three units were currently under construction 
at the Balakovo, Kursk and Kalinin plants. Work was also continuing on the 
construction of the Voronezh nuclear district heating plant. 
10. After the setbacks caused by the Chernobyl accident, the Russian 
Ministry for Nuclear Power now adopted a long-term view of the nuclear power 
industry in Russia, and looked forward to the further development of both WWER 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.345 
page 6 


and RBMK reactors, despite the Director General's comment in his opening 
statement that he did not think that any more RBMK-type reactors would be 
built. Russia thought it inadvisable to discontinue the development of a 
reactor which might well be capable of meeting the highest safety standards in 
the future. In its long-term planning, Russia was also giving consideration 
to fast-breeder reactors and the use of nuclear techniques for desalination 
purposes. 


11. Recently, a number of regions in the country had submitted applications 
for the construction of new nuclear power plants. Those would be a new 
generation of extremely safe units with passive defence systems. Considerable 
amounts of money had already been spent on redesigning existing plants, but 
that programme had been seriously affected by the country's present financial 
constraints. He therefore appealed to Member States to try to co-operate 
commercially with Russia by making use of the scientific and technical 
expertise within its Ministry for Nuclear Power. Such co-operation, which 
would be mutually beneficial, would help to improve the safety of Russia's 
nuclear power plants. His country was also interested in co-operating with 
the international community in areas such as fast neutron reactors and hybrid 
reactors using nuclear fusion and transmutation. 
12. One of the most important problems for the safe development of nuclear 
energy was radioactive waste management, another area where international 
co-operation was essential. Russia had established a comprehensive policy to 
deal with such problems at its operating plants, and also at those planned or 
under construction. 
13. A fine example of what could be achieved by international co-operation 
was the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor which had been 
developed under the auspices of the Agency, the EC, the United States and 
Japan. The experience of organizing such a large-scale project could perhaps 
be applied in other areas as well. 
14. In conclusion, his delegation joined other delegations in approving the 
Annual Report for 1991 and noted that the positive results achieved by the 
Agency were a tribute to the effectiveness of the work carried out by the 
Director General and the Secretariat. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 7 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXXVI)/1001) 
15. The PRESIDENT reported that the General Committee had recommended 
to the General Conference that the agenda for the current session should 
include all the items listed in document GC(XXXVI)/1001, with the sole 
exception of item 26 (Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee), the 
deletion of which had become necessary as all members presently serving on 
that Committee were available to continue. The General Committee further 
recommended that the items be allocated for initial discussion as indicated in 
the provisional agenda. 
16. During discussions on the matter, some members of the Committee had 
expressed reservations with regard to the inclusion of item 8 entitled 
"Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat", while others had expressed support 
for its inclusion. It had also been suggested that the Committee should defer 
making a recommendation on the item to the Conference until further discussion 
among interested Member States had taken place. 
17. With respect to the order of items, the Committee recommended that the 
order appearing in document GC(XXXVI)/1001 - adjusted as a consequence of the 
deletion of item 26 - be retained, on the understanding that the exigencies of 
the moment or the efficient conduct of business might well call for changes to 
be made both in the plenary session and in the Committee of the Whole. 
18. 
The General Committee's recommendations were adopted. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
19. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had recommended to 
the General Conference that Friday, 25 September 1992, be set as the closing 
date of the thirty-sixth regular session and Monday, 27 September 1993, as the 
opening date of the thirty-seventh regular session of the General Conference, 
which would be held in Vienna. 
20. 
The General Committee's recommendations were adopted. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.345 
page 8 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (GC(XXXVI)/1004) (resumed) 


21. Mr. GHAFOUR (Iraq) said that as the present occasion was the first 
opportunity provided to Iraq, since the imposition of the blockade on Iraq, to 
address the General Conference, he wished to comment on Iraq's nuclear 
programme and to present Iraq's views of all that had happened. Clarification 
was necessary since reports about the Iraqi nuclear programme had been 
exaggerated and distorted by official circles and the news media in certain 
countries and it had been claimed that the Iraqi nuclear programme was devoted 
to the development of weapons of mass destruction. 
22. Providing the historical context for the Iraqi nuclear programme, he 
said that Iraq had adopted, along with many other development projects, a 
programme to use atomic energy. In the early sixties, a contract was signed 
with the former Soviet Union to build a 2 MW(th) research reactor in the 
vicinity of Baghdad devoted to scientific research and to the production of 
radioisotopes for medical and industrial uses. 
23. At a later stage, following the signing and ratification by Iraq of 
the NPT, agreements were concluded with France, Italy and other countries. 
Those agreements related to: experimental laboratories for the fabrication of 
nuclear fuel for nuclear power plants; research laboratories for spent fuel 
reprocessing; extraction of uranium from phosphates; the Tammuz 1 reactor 
complex for materials research and its related facilities; the upgrading of 
the Soviet research reactor from 2 MW(th) to 5 MW(th); and the first stages of 
the nuclear power plant project. 
24. Although that programme had been quite open and was covered by IAEA 
safeguards, certain countries had not wanted to see Iraq achieve any 
technological or industrial progress. For many years, the Israelis planned 
and perpetrated acts of sabotage against the programme and assassinated Iraqi 
scientists and engineers. Israel then carried out an air raid which destroyed 
the Tammuz 1 reactor. When Iraq appealed to the international community to 
punish Israel for its flagrant aggression, Iraq received no redress and the 
Agency's only response was to introduce a routine item on the agenda of the 
Agency's General Conference and to condemn the Israeli action in terms which 
became increasingly weak as time passed. Israel continued its threats 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 9 


undeterred, While the Agency's safeguards system failed to provide Iraq with 
any protection. As a result, Iraq was forced to adopt new formulas in order 
to acquire nuclear knowledge and technology, by resorting to self-reliance. 
Such a move was particularly necessary in view of the reluctance shown by 
foreign companies to co-operate with Iraq. Iraq had also adopted a policy of 
not disclosing the results of its efforts until they were advanced enough to 
minimize the effects of the kind of abortive acts that were perpetrated by the 


Israelis. 


25. That stage of the Iraqi nuclear programme included extraction of 
uranium from carbonates, purification and conversion of uranium, enrichment of 
uranium using the electromagnetic isotope separation method, enrichment of 
uranium using the gas diffusion process, enrichment of uranium by the 
centrifuge method, chemical enrichment of uranium isotopes, reprocessing of 
spent nuclear fuel, and the nuclear power plant project. 
26. Following the Israeli aggression and the loss of the Tammuz 1 reactor, 
which had served as the basis for the planned nuclear power reactor programme, 
Iraq had concentrated on the enrichment programme and activities related to 
the nuclear fuel cycle to keep in line with international technological 
developments in the nuclear field and to spare it from being dependent on 
foreign sources of nuclear fuel. It was clear to the inspection teams which 
visited Iraq that Iraq had never been in any hurry to achieve any part of its 
programme or to produce any particular quantity of enriched uranium or 
Plutonium. There had been no timetable for the programme, whose main 
objective had been to develop the most appropriate technologies for enrichment 
and other stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. Those who criticized Iraq for not 
disclosing its programme should not forget that Iraq was the only country in 
the world where nuclear installations had been subjected to military attack 
and aggression repeatedly since 1980. It should also be recalled that Iraq 
was given no guarantee that the aggression perpetrated against its nuclear 
programme would not be repeated. 
27. On 28 November 1990, the Security Council had adopted resolution 678, 
which the United States and its allies had then interpreted as being a licence 
for them to use military force against Iraq to implement resolution 660. Only 
five days after resolution 678 had been adopted, the United Nations General 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 10 


Assembly had adopted a resolution prohibiting armed attacks against nuclear 
installations. However, the United States and its allies failed to comply 
with that resolution and made the Iraqi nuclear installations their first 
target during the aggression which they inflicted upon Iraq from 17 January 
to 28 February 1991. As the Iraqi reactors were operating at the time of the 
first attack on Baghdad, a major nuclear accident might have occurred. 
Thousands of tonnes of bombs and explosives were dropped by allied aircraft on 
the Iraqi nuclear installations and the Al Tuwaitha site alone was subjected 
to more than 3000 tonnes of explosives. 


28. Although the conditions for an official cease-fire laid down in 
resolution 687 were unprecedented in the history of the United Nations, his 
Government had accepted the resolution in order to spare the Iraqi people any 
further harm. At the time of implementation of the resolution, Iraq was 
suffering the bitter aftermath of the comprehensive destruction of all its 
economic sectors, its power plants, its transport and communications networks, 
and its civilian industries. No understanding had been shown for Iraq's 
terrible, tragic situation. On the contrary, certain members of the 
inspection teams had behaved arrogantly and provocatively, with complete 
disregard for the realities of life prevailing in Iraq at the time and 
indifference to the feelings of the Iraqi scientific staff who were treading 
over the remains of their scientific endeavour and technological achievements. 
29. Security Council resolution 707 prohibited Iraq from any effective 
nuclear activities. Despite that and other unfair resolutions subsequently 
adopted, Iraq continued to co-operate fully with the inspection teams. Those 
teams had encountered no problems, despite the difficult and sensitive nature 
of some of their tasks and of the material destruction and psychological 
damage they inflicted upon Iraq. On the contrary those teams had praised the 
co-operativeness of the Iraqis. 
30. By 7 September 1992, 14 nuclear inspection teams had visited Iraq and 
spent a total of 3449 inspection days in Iraq, conducting 279 inspection 
visits, including 106 visits to sites related to the Iraqi nuclear programme, 
over 60 visits to support sites, and 47 visits to locations unrelated to the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 11 


programme, including such places as the Mosul Prison, the Baghdad Sewage 
Department, a civilian shelter and a private farm. The teams also conducted 
40 surprise visits and took back with them more than 600 samples together with 
hundreds of radioactivity tests and samples. 


31. 
The teams removed all fresh nuclear fuel containing enriched uranium 
235 
totalling 18 kg of U and 5.26 g of plutonium. The teams also made an 
inventory of and sealed 543.284 tonnes of various types of natural uranium. 
The inspection teams oversaw the destruction of more than 2000 items of 
machinery and equipment, blasted and destroyed buildings covering a total area 


2 


of 4 7 750 m , placed their seal on nearly 900 different items, machines and 
equipment, and destroyed more than 4000 tonnes of iron used in the electromagnetic 
isotope separation programme. Prior to that, the Iraqi side had 


itself destroyed more than 260 000 items, the remains of which had then been 
checked by the inspection teams. Huge quantities of raw materials had also 
been destroyed. 


32. By August 1991, Iraq had handed over thousands of pages of documents 
and drawings, and provided, either at meetings or through lectures and 
seminars, detailed presentations concerning its nuclear programme. All that, 
together with what was subsequently submitted at the request of the inspection 
teams, provided sufficient information to enable the true picture of the Iraqi 
nuclear programme, as it was now known to the Agency, to be drawn. The 
so-called full, final and complete declaration had been submitted to the 
Agency and the Special Commission on Iraq. 
33. Twenty-nine inspection teams had also visited Iraq in connection with 
Section C of resolution 687 relating to chemical and biological weapons and 
ballistic missiles and had carried out a total of 243 inspection operations, 
including 142 surprise visits. Those inspection teams oversaw the destruction 
of missile systems, chemical weapons, equipment and their accessories. A 
total of some 14 862 items had been destroyed. Iraq had itself destroyed more 
than 23 470 items, the remains of which had then been examined by the 
inspection teams. Iraq no longer possessed any weapons, munitions, systems or 
subsystems prohibited under resolution 687. The Special Commission had also 
received a full, final and complete declaration pertaining to those weapons. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 12 


34. For its part, Iraq had honoured all its obligations in the nuclear 
field under resolution 687. There was still one paragraph in resolution 687 
which had not yet been implemented, but the Agency, not Iraq, was responsible 
for not implementing it. Despite the 14 inspection visits and the speedy 
response of the Agency in moving fresh fuel and destroying buildings, 
installations and equipment, the Agency was slow to remove the spent fuel. 
The spent nuclear fuel cells from the Tammuz 2 reactor had been kept in a 
specially designed pit, in accordance with the required safety standards and 
had been under constant surveillance until exceptional measures were taken 
during the military operations to remove them to a provisional open-air site 
near the Al Tuwaitha Nuclear Centre. Since then, Iraq had been waiting for 
the Agency to remove the spent fuel from Iraq. Immediately after the 
cease-fire, Iraq took the necessary measures to build a new well where the 
spent fuel could be stored. However, those measures were halted after the 
inspection team had said that the fuel would be removed in three months. The 
spent fuel had not yet been removed and was in poor condition. There was a 
danger that some of the fuel cells would rupture causing a radiation accident 
and serious consequences for the environment. 
35. The Security Council resolutions allowed Iraq to use radioisotopes 
for the purposes of medical diagnosis and treatment, but the Agency had 
established a very complicated procedure for enabling Iraq to obtain radioisotopes. 
Iraq had requested some radioisotopes for medical purposes 
10 months previously, but had still not received any. Since Iraq had 
fulfilled all its obligations, it was time for the Agency to lift all 
sanctions on technical assistance, particularly in the medical and 
agricultural fields. 
36. During the war, which far exceeded the scope of Security Council 
resolution 660, more than 135 000 tonnes of bombs and explosives had been 
dropped on Iraq paralysing all the industrial and economic sectors. Only 2 of 
the 20 electrical power stations in operation before the war remained safe and 
they were producing only 3% of the electrical power produced before the war. 
In the communications sector, 400 000 of the 900 000 telephone lines were 
destroyed and all the local and international communication centres and 
networks came to a halt as a result of the air attacks. Furthermore, 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 13 


133 bridges were destroyed, as well as railways and roads. As a result, 
communication and transport systems had been completely paralysed. The 
destruction of oil refineries had caused the stoppage of most of the drinking 
water pumping stations and irrigation systems. As a result, crops had been 
damaged and soil salinity had increased. 


37. The destruction during the war of hospitals, clinics and medicine 
stores had resulted in large quantities of medical supplies and instruments 
being damaged. A study conducted by a research team of Harvard University in 
May 1991 on the general health of Iraq after the Gulf War indicated that 
170 000 children under the age of five were expected to die during 1992 from 
the effects of the war, in other words an increase of 100%. In fact, the 
number of deaths of children under five years of age rose to 3500 per month 
during the first half of 1992, compared with an average of 712 in 1990. 
Furthermore, the number of major surgical operations performed in Iraq 
decreased in the first half of 1992 by 63% as compared to 1989, because of 
the lack of basic necessities and medicines. In the education sector, 
universities, technical institutes, and hundreds of primary and secondary 
schools were damaged or destroyed by the heavy bombardment. Even mosques, 
churches, museums, cultural centres and food depots had not escaped 
destruction. 
38. The report on humanitarian needs in Kuwait and Iraq, dated 
20 March 1991, by the United Nations mission headed by Mr. Martti Ahtisarri, 
Under-Secretary-General for Administration and Management, stated that most 
means of modern life support had been destroyed or rendered tenuous and that 
Iraq had, for some time to come, been relegated to a pre-industrial age. 
39. Iraqi technicians, including those working on the nuclear programme, 
had started to reconstruct what had been destroyed during the war. They faced 
great difficulties since no machines, instruments or equipment had been 
imported to Iraq since August 1990 because of the economic sanctions. Many of 
the reconstructed factories faced the threat of having to stop at any moment 
because of the shortage of spare parts. The Iraqis were struggling to use all 
the available local materials. Repeated calls had been made to the Special 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 14 


Commission and to the IAEA to stop the unnecessary destruction of buildings 
and equipment, pointing out that they could be placed under continuous 
monitoring instead. 


40. The Iraqi nuclear programme was currently at zero and the Agency's 
monitoring plan would ensure that Iraq would be incapable of producing what 
had been prohibited by the provisions of resolution 687- Deputy Prime 
Minister Tariq Aziz had announced to the Security Council on 11 March 1992 
that Iraq was ready to continue co-operating with the Special Commission and 
the IAEA in fulfilling the tasks specified in resolution 687, including the 
inspection and future verification operations based on respect for Iraq's 
sovereignty and national security, and with a view to arriving at practical 
arrangements that did not go beyond the purposes identified by the Security 
Council. 
41. In a letter dated 10 October 1991, the Foreign Minister informed the 
United Nations Secretary-General that Iraq had abandoned its nuclear 
programme. All those who had been working on that programme were now working 
on the country's reconstruction and on research and development to find local 
alternatives to imported items in the agricultural, industrial, and medical 
sectors. The Agency should help those scientists, engineers and technicians 
in their new work and give them the opportunity to communicate with their 
counterparts in the rest of the world. 
42. Operative paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 687 called for 
the establishment of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the 
Middle East. Although that resolution had been passed a long time ago, no 
steps had been taken towards implementing that important paragraph. It was 
time for the Agency to take action in that area. It should, as a matter of 
priority, subject all Israel's nuclear installations and institutions to 
comprehensive control and inspection and should work towards removing all that 
country's nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. Without such 
steps, the region would remain an arena of permanent conflict and turmoil. 
43. For more than two years, the people of Iraq had been suffering from 
great shortages of food and medicine and the scarcity of other basics of 
everyday life. It was now time to lift the sanctions imposed on Iraq and 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 15 


allow the Iraqi people to import tractors to plough their lands and pumps to 
provide water for drinking and irrigation. Iraq had fulfilled its obligations 
under resolution 687 and the Agency should, for its part, recognize that fact 
and respond appropriately. 


44. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea) welcomed the Republics of Croatia, 
Slovenia and Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency, and noted with 
satisfaction the accession of France and China to the NPT. 
45. The Agency's recent steps to strengthen its safeguards system, 
particularly with regard to the early submission of design information and 
the reaffirmation of the Agency's right to conduct special inspections, were 
important developments. As inspection techniques improved, the Agency's 
performance had become more effective despite the increasing number of 
facilities which had to be inspected. The results of studies by expert 
groups, such as SAGSI, should be used to improve still further the 
effectiveness and efficiency of inspections to ensure that nuclear energy was 
being used exclusively for peaceful purposes by all signatories of the NPT. 
His delegation endorsed the basic concept and broad objectives of the 
universal reporting system and hoped that an efficient regime based on the 
principles of transparency and non-discrimination would be set up in the near 
future. 
46. The increase in nuclear materials, in particular plutonium and enriched 
uranium which were being recovered from dismantled nuclear weapons or produced 
from spent fuels, was cause for concern. Serious thought would need to be 
given to the possibility of finding new ways of managing those materials at 
international level or of involving the Agency to ensure the peaceful use or 
storage of those materials. It was also essential that appropriate methods of 
radioactive waste management be found in order to protect present and future 
generations. As a result of the expansion of nuclear power activities in a 
number of countries, including his own, there had been a substantial increase 
in the quantities of low-level radioactive waste and spent fuel and the safe 
disposal and storage of such material had become a matter of grave international 
concern. The time had come to consider seriously international 
standardization and close monitoring of measures for the safe disposal and 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 16 


storage of radioactive waste. Commendable progress had been made so far under 
the RADWASS programme and it was to be hoped that phase I would be completed 
by 1994 as scheduled. A solution to the problem of radioactive waste 
management was crucial in order to improve public acceptance of nuclear energy 
and the Agency should focus increased attention on providing Member States 
with the necessary assistance and co-operation in that area. 


47. Nuclear safety was one of the most important aspects of the promotion 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Although individual States were 
ultimately responsible for the safety of their own nuclear facilities, 
international co-operation was equally important in ensuring the implementation 
of more effective and efficient nuclear safety measures. His 
Government shared the concern expressed by several Member States about the 
safety of reactors in some Eastern European States and welcomed the programme 
on the safety of RBMK reactors which the Agency had recently launched. 
48. It was expected that, by the early years of the next century, most of 
the world's new nuclear power plants would be constructed in north-east Asia. 
At the same time, since the region was one of the most densely populated in 
the world, accounting for one third of the world's total population, a major 
accident at a nuclear power plant in one country could cause serious radiation 
problems, both in the country concerned and in neighbouring countries, and 
impede the expansion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. There was 
therefore an urgent need for a regional co-operation regime, under the 
auspices of the IAEA, to guarantee the nuclear safety of the region as a whole. 
49. As one of the founders of the RCA, the Republic of Korea attached great 
importance to projects which promoted regional co-operation and noted with 
satisfaction that substantial progress had been achieved in the industrial, 
medical and agricultural applications of nuclear techniques. His country had 
contributed to that progress and would continue to share its technology and 
experience with other Member States in the region. 
50. The Republic of Korea, which had built its first commercial nuclear 
power plant in 1978, currently had nine units operating. In terms of the 
proportion of total national electricity production accounted for by nuclear 
power, the Republic of Korea ranked fourth in the world and was planning to 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 17 


expand its nuclear power programmes still further. At the end of the 
preceding year, construction had started on Wolsung Unit 2, a pressurized 
heavy water reactor, and in May 1992 work had begun on Ulchin Units 3 and 4, 
which were both pressurized light water reactors. Two more units would be 
added by the end of the year. Ulchin 3 and 4 would be the first Korean 
standardized nuclear power plants designed and built with local technology. 
By 2006, it was expected that 60% of the country's electricity needs would be 
met from nuclear energy. 


51. Given its scarcity of natural resources, nuclear power was seen as the 
key to self-sufficiency in energy and the Republic of Korea had accordingly 
embarked upon a long-term nuclear research and development programme to be 
implemented over the next decade. In implementing that programme, it was as 
determined as ever to adhere to its policy of promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy in full compliance with the NPT and based on close 
international co-operation. In that context, it was pleased to be able to 
host the 1993 IAEA International Symposium on Advanced Nuclear Power Systems 
in Seoul. As one of the newly emerging developing countries with a 
significant nuclear development programme, his country should be given the 
opportunity of playing a more important role in the Agency and of making a 
greater contribution to the Agency's work. It was therefore following closely 
the discussions on the amendment of Article VI of the Statute. 
52. In the recent Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula, South and North Korea had solemnly pledged that nuclear energy 
would be used for peaceful purposes only, that no nuclear weapons would be 
tested, manufactured, produced, received, possessed, stored, deployed or used, 
and that neither party would possess reprocessing or enrichment facilities. 
That declaration was an important step towards ensuring the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons on the Korean Peninsula. 
53. However, his country was concerned at the fact that following the entry 
into force, on 10 April 1992, of the safeguards agreement between the Agency 
and the DPRK, a visit to that country by the Director General and three ad hoc 
inspections had revealed that the DPRK's nuclear facilities were more 
extensive than was required to meet its current nuclear energy requirements. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.345 
page 18 


It had been constructing a full-scale reprocessing plant and had also been 
engaged in unsafeguarded plutonium extraction activities. His delegation 
again urged the DPRK to halt the construction or operation of reprocessingrelated 
facilities and to dispose of them in compliance with the Joint 
Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. Only through the 
full implementation of the IAEA safeguards agreement and of the denuclearization 
agreement, based on a comprehensive mutual inspection regime, would 
the DPRK be able to gain international confidence and clear itself of 
suspicion. 


54. The Republic of Korea was also worried about the safety of the nuclear 
power reactors which were either in operation or under construction in 
the DPRK. There was concern that those reactors, which had been developed 
indigenously, might fall far below international safety standards. The Agency 
and countries in the region should therefore devote special attention to the 
safety of the nuclear facilities in the DPRK and consider the development of 
appropriate measures to improve safety. 
Mr. Warner (Czechoslovakia) took the Chair. 


55. Mr. CLAUDIO ARANZADI (Spain), having welcomed Slovenia and Croatia 
as Members of the Agency, said that his country fully subscribed to the 
statement made by the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Community. 
56. In 1991 nuclear power in Spain had accounted for 55 578 GWh, or 
34.8%, of total national electricity production. With an installed capacity 
of 7400 MW(e) and more than 7000 operating hours per year at full power, the 
performance of the Spanish nuclear power plants had improved satisfactorily 
over the past nine years and reached an average load factor of 86.1% in 1991. 
Alongside the Spanish nuclear programme, a significant industry had developed, 
ranging from nuclear and fuel-cycle component manufacture to engineering 
companies and support services for the power plants. 
57. One of the priorities of the National Energy Plan, ratified by the 
Spanish parliament in April 1992, was to continue promoting efforts to ensure 
that nuclear power plants were being operated under optimal conditions of 
safety and reliability. Achievement of such conditions required both 
continued reliance on the industrial and service network which provided 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 19 


high-quality support to the nuclear sector, and also continual updating of the 
knowledge of nuclear power plant staff to meet the increasing demands of 
safety and operational efficiency. That point was of particular importance 
since with the construction of new power plants in most European countries at 
a standstill, there was a danger that technological and human capability would 
be lost and that it would be difficult to maintain the safety of existing 
power plants or cope with future nuclear programmes which foresaw the design 
of advanced and intrinsically safe reactors. His Government therefore 


supported participation by national industry in international programmes on 
such reactors. Although the average age of Spain's nuclear power plants was 
one of the lowest in the OECD (eight years), his country was also paying 
particular attention to the decommissioning of nuclear installations and was 
actively co-operating in international programmes on the subject, especially 
European Community research and development programmes. A major task was the 
decommissioning of the Vandellos I power plant, which was shut down in 1989, 
and ecological recovery of defunct uranium mines. 


58. Turning to radioactive waste management, he said that expansion of the 
El Cabril intermediate- and low-level solid waste storage facility had reached 
completion and the facility would receive an operating licence later in 1992. 
It would provide adequate capacity for the safe and reliable storage of all 
such waste produced by Spain up to the year 2010. 
59. The Agency's activities in the field of nuclear safety and radiological 
protection were very useful and Spain particularly welcomed the development of 
the RADWASS programme, which would set down internationally agreed radioactive 
waste management standards and would become a reference point in the same way 
as the NUSS code had set standards for the safe operation of nuclear power 
plants. 
60. His country also supported initiatives to improve operational safety 
through the OSART, ASSET and RAPAT missions, as well as missions to review 
regulatory structures, which were particularly useful for countries going 
through a period of major structural change. In connection with the 
restructuring process taking place in Central and Eastern Europe, it had 
become evident that there were safety problems associated with the design of 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 20 


certain reactors and that there was a need to revise nuclear safety legislation 
and regulations and the way in which they were applied. An extensive 
programme of international assistance, both bilateral and multilateral, had 
been launched to solve those problems. His country was participating in that 
assistance, mainly through European Community programmes and the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme. The Agency had a fundamental role to play 
in helping to resolve the safety problems in those countries by acting as a 
technical advisory body to determine What was required and to assess the 
efficacy of the solutions proposed. Given the number of activities in that 
field, it was absolutely vital that co-ordination mechanisms, such as those 
being set up by the G-24 Group, be established to avoid duplication and 
overlapping of the assistance given. 


61. The time had now come to set up an international nuclear safety 
convention. Such a convention should not merely be a declaration of intent 
and it should also cover all fuel cycle installations and radioactive waste 
facilities. While upholding the principle of the responsibility of the 
individual Member State for the safety of its nuclear facilities, that 
convention should establish basic safety principles and peer review 
verification mechanisms. His country also attached importance to the basic 
safety and radiological protection standards soon to be published. The 
incorporation of the new ICRP recommended dose limits and the definition of 
criteria for the extension of regulatory control would serve as a guide in the 
updating of Spanish regulations. Spain also found that the Agency's public 
information activities, in particular the International Nuclear Event Scale, 
were an effective supplement to efforts at the national level. 
62. In the area of safeguards, positive progress had recently been made in 
the common task of improving the present safeguards system. His country 
approved the various proposals to strengthen the safeguards system made by the 
Director General and welcomed the Board's decisions on the implementation of 
special inspections and on the provision of information to the Agency 
regarding new nuclear projects in Member States. Spain, in co-ordination with 
the other members of the European Community, intended to provide detailed 
information on inventories and transfers of nuclear material and equipment, 
and he trusted that other Member States would do likewise. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.345 
page 21 


63. His country, in conjunction with a group of nuclear supplier countries, 
had recently adopted revised guidelines on nuclear transfers, endorsed 
guidelines on transfers of dual-use material, equipment and technology, and 
announced the application of comprehensive safeguards as a prerequisite for 
nuclear exports. Those decisions would help strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation 
system and prevent the development of clandestine nuclear 
programmes in violation of international agreements. 
64. Turning to technical co-operation activities, he noted that there had 
been a drop in the implementation rate of the approved programme as compared 
with 1990, the first year of the biennial cycle. He would like the 
Secretariat to analyse the reason for that drop and, if necessary, to 
introduce suitable corrective measures. In 1991 Spain had more than doubled 
its total voluntary contributions for technical assistance as compared 
with 1990. As to the Director General's concern about the drop in the 
percentage of the TACF target met, his delegation felt that the present system 
of financing was inappropriate. Voluntary contributions to the TACF were the 
first to suffer the effects of the restrictive budgetary policies in force and 
significant increases each year in the targets for the TACF merely led to a 
growing gap between those targets and reality. His delegation was interested 
in participating in the discussions of the working group on the financing of 
technical assistance in order to help develop a new, more appropriate, system. 
65. In conclusion, his country was convinced of the absolute necessity for 
continuing to operate nuclear power plants. The necessary conditions for the 
development of a new generation of nuclear power plants were the maintenance 
of a high level of safety in existing plants and the finding of a definitive 
solution to the problem of the disposal of high-level waste. 
66. Mr. SAFRA (Tunisia), having welcomed those countries which had 
recently joined the Agency, expressed his delegation's concern that the 
Agency's financial difficulties would disrupt its programmes and impair its 
achievements. He therefore urged those Member States which had not so far 
fulfilled their financial obligations to do so at the earliest opportunity. 
Tunisia, for its part, had always paid its regular contributions on time and 
intended to make a further voluntary contribution of US $16 000 early 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 22 


in 1993. His country had also undertaken to clear all its arrears to the TAGF 
and had taken steps to ensure that future contributions to the Fund would be 
paid in a timely manner. 


67. Tunisia had established a National Atomic Energy Commission to provide 
the framework for all nuclear activities in the country and to co-ordinate 
with the Agency. It was also currently finalizing the nuclear safety 
legislation which it had been developing since the early 1970s. 
68. His country set great store by co-operation between Arab States in the 
development of nuclear science and technology for peaceful application and had 
become the host country of the Arab Atomic Energy Agency, which had already 
co-operated successfully on many occasions with the Agency. It was hoped that 
the Agency would also co-operate in the proposed establishment of an Arab 
centre for the peaceful applications of nuclear science. 
69. Tunisia had also been one of the first countries to ratify the 
AFRA Agreement, and was currently involved, together with other African 
countries, in seven regional projects. The Governments of France and Spain, 
in particular, were to be commended for the support they had given to the 
AFRA programme. One very serious problem faced by the African continent was 
chronic water shortages coupled with a population increase of some 3% per 
year. He therefore urged the Agency to intensify its efforts to develop 
nuclear desalination techniques, in line with the provisions of resolution 
GC(XXXIV)/RES/540, and to support regional seawater desalination programmes. 
70. With regard to the situation in the Middle East, Israel's refusal to 
comply with Security Council and General Conference resolutions by placing its 
facilities under Agency safeguards increased tensions in that region and 
hampered efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone. The region had had 
enough of the horrors of war, and now needed to concentrate on growth and 
development. His delegation therefore called upon all Member States to try to 
convince Israel of the need to comply with all the relevant resolutions. 
71. In conclusion, with reference to safeguards, he drew attention to the 
difficulties faced by developing countries which were parties to the NPT and 
called upon the industrialized nuclear countries to offer greater assistance 
to the poorer countries in order to help them meet their safeguards 
obligations. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.345 
page 23 


72. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), after welcoming the new 
Agency Member States, expressed his condemnation of the tragic ethnic war 
being waged, and the atrocities being perpetrated, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
and deplored the inadequate responses of the Security Council, the European 
Community, and even human rights activists and organizations. 
73. One of the very few reassuring signs among the disorder that was 
breaking out in various parts of the world was the concerted effort to prevent 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The crusade against the 
proliferation of such weapons and their means of delivery was a noble cause to 
which his country fully subscribed, both on humanitarian grounds and for the 
simple reason that Iran was the only State which had suffered the deployment 
of chemical weapons against its people during the recent past, and thus had 
first-hand experience of the tragedies caused by the use of such weapons. The 
present justified concerns about proliferation of such weapons were clearly a 
direct consequence of misguided policies of certain regimes, although the 
industrialized States which had knowingly, or unwittingly, assisted the 
development of "parallel" programmes under those regimes were also to blame. 
In any event, restrictions were now being imposed to compensate for the lapses 
of the past, and policies to that end, however belated, would have his 
country's full support if they were indeed effective in stemming the 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. 
74. The current non-proliferation initiatives focused on: (1) State, 
intergovernmental and supplier-imposed restrictions on the export of material, 
equipment and technologies; (2) new international conventions, treaties and 
agreements, as well as the strengthening of existing instruments, to control, 
implement and enforce restrictions on the transfer of direct or dual-use 
materials, equipment and technologies; (3) the development of inventory 
control and accounting systems, special inspection programmes and 
intelligence-gathering networks; and (4) stronger support for international 
organizations with control and verification mandates. Thus, the scope and 
extent of non-proliferation initiatives and efforts were clearly immense. 
However, his country believed that two major criteria must be applied if those 
efforts were to succeed, as he sincerely hoped they would: firstly, any 
enhanced control and verification mechanism, and all conventions and treaties 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 24 


to enforce them, should be implemented and enforced without discrimination; 
and secondly, they should not impede legitimate and peaceful development 
programmes. 


75. As far as the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was concerned, three 
major instruments were currently available, namely the NPT, the Agency's 
full-scope safeguards system and nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties. Iran had 
on various occasions proclaimed its support for the extension of the NPT. It 
was also, in principle, in agreement with various proposals aimed at 
strengthening the safeguards regime. Furthermore, it had been the first State 
to propose the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East 
and it continued to promote that cause. However, there had always been 
obstacles to the successful implementation of the three instruments just 
mentioned. The NPT had not been entirely successful because the nuclearweapon 
States party to it had never completely fulfilled their obligations 
under the Treaty, be they related to technical support of peaceful nuclear 
programmes in the developing States or, on the opposite side of the spectrum, 
to preventing the transfer of nuclear materials and technology to States 
suspected of aspiring to "parallel" programmes. In particular, neither 
sufficient pressure nor any form of sanctions had ever been brought to bear to 
persuade States with well-known "parallel" nuclear programmes to accede to 
the NPT. There had also been cases of regimes with well-known and entirely 
non-peaceful nuclear programmes being allowed to proceed unimpeded. 
76. In that context, well-researched and authoritative documents based on 
credible sources were available which described how Israel had developed its 
nuclear weapons with the full knowledge and tacit approval of some, if not 
all, of the nuclear-weapon States. As a result, States not party to the NPT 
had never felt obliged to accept the full-scope safeguards regime of the 
Agency, although they had in some cases agreed to voluntary-type safeguards 
agreements which had only served to overburden the Agency's already strained 
budgets. Moreover, ironically, Israel and other States not party to the NPT 
and thus beyond the verification mandate of the Agency had been allowed to 
remain IAEA members and even to benefit from its technical assistance. 
77. Thus, as a direct consequence of mishandling of the NPT and of IAEA 
safeguards, nuclear weapons programmes had been permitted to bear fruit in 
certain States, and the noble idea of establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 25 


as an effective non-proliferation option had been undermined, for no region 


could reasonably be expected to become free of nuclear weapons as long as some 
States within the region already possessed nuclear weapons clandestinely and 
persistently refused to relinquish that option. More specifically with 
respect to the Middle East region, who was going to force Israel to forfeit 


its nuclear-weapons capability if the nuclear-weapon States were prepared to 
tolerate the constant threat posed by that capability? Clearly, if the NPT 
Depositaries neglected to prevent the-clandestine acquisition of nuclear 
weapons, whether from pure political negligence or out of some sort of 


favouritism, that could not but provide an incentive for neighbouring States 
to seek weapons parity. 


78. It was his country's belief that the proliferation issues in South 
America, South Asia and the Korean Peninsula could be resolved politically, 
whereas the situation in the Middle East was far more complicated. For years 
the Israeli regime had arrogantly defied all internationally recognized 
instruments of nuclear control and verification, while an increasing number of 
States, including Middle Eastern ones, had recently sought adherence to those 
instruments. As a result, Israel's position on the proliferation issue had 
become much more isolated and its negative stance in the face of current 
trends even more unacceptable and inexplicable. In seeking a way out of that 
isolation, the Zionist-dominated news media and institutions, as well as the 
officials of the Israeli regime, had embarked on a propaganda campaign, highlighting 
alleged weaponization programmes in certain Middle Eastern States including 
the Islamic Republic of Iran - in a bid to focus public concern on 
such fictitious threats and thus to justify the maintenance of Israel's own 
nuclear weapons arsenal. 
79. However, the February 1992 visit of an IAEA mission to Iran, and the 
subsequent Agency reports, had proved that Iran's nuclear programmes were 
entirely peaceful. His country's authorities had invited the Agency mission 
to visit Iran on their own initiative, and the invitation remained open since 
Iran did not intend to hide anything. Unfortunately, that openness and 
transparency, instead of being rewarded by support for the implementation of 
peaceful programmes, was being met by the imposition of ever more stringent 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 26 


restrictions. For example, the Government of Germany had refused to issue the 
required export licences for the completion of Iran's Bushehr nuclear power 
plant, in which billions of dollars had been invested so far and the 
maintenance costs of which represented an ongoing financial burden. Such 
restrictions were imposed despite the decision of the International Chamber 
of Commerce that the supplier should complete the plant or hand over the 
outstanding components and documents to Iran - which after all was an 
NPT signatory under full-scope Agency safeguards, supported strengthened 
safeguards regimes and nuclear-weapon-free zone initiatives, accepted Agency 
missions on an open-invitation basis, and had indicated its willingness to 


leave the spent fuel handling process for Bushehr to the supplier. 


80. Given the adverse environmental consequences of utilizing fossil fuels, 
his country believed that hydroelectric and nuclear energy were the only 
practicable alternatives for generating electrical power on large scales, and 
that developing States having accepted all the required control and 
verification mechanisms should not be deprived of any of those options through 
unfair and arbitrary restrictions. 
81. In view of the biased attitude of the Government of Germany on the one 
hand, and the chronic need for additional electricity generating capacity on 
the other hand, his country had inevitably been forced to look elsewhere for 
alternative sources of supply of nuclear technology. While intending to 
continue to maintain the partly completed Bushehr plant, Iran also planned to 
purchase nuclear power plants from the People's Republic of China and the 
Russian Federation, and it would very much welcome the assistance of the 
Agency in attaining optimum standards of safety and reliability for those 
projects. Co-operation agreements on the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy had recently been signed between the Government of the Islamic Republic 
of Iran and the Governments of the People's Republic of China and the Russian 
Federation, with due respect of all the relevant international rules and 
standards, including the safeguards regime of the IAEA. Iran therefore 
expected the Agency's full support in implementing those peaceful projects 
intended solely for the production of electrical power. 



GC(XXXVI)/0R.345 
page 27 


82. During the past two years his country had had the honour of serving on 
the Board of Governors of the Agency, and it felt its contributions had been 
positive and constructive at a time when the Agency had had quite a number of 
complex issues to deal with. Iran believed that each and every Member State 
should do its utmost to help the Agency fulfil its mandate through such 
demanding times. It hoped, however, that there would be no undeclared changes 
in that mandate, since recently the impression had been given that even 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy were questionable undertakings. The 
Agency's mandate must remain the promotion of peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy without in any way compromising non-proliferation objectives, and the 
Islamic Republic of Iran would co-operate with the Agency by whatever means 
were necessary as long as that noble aim was upheld. 
Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria) resumed the Chair. 


83. Mr. MOYO (Zimbabwe) pointed out that at a time when the Agency's 
role was being enhanced through the strengthening of safeguards, the 
implementation of new safeguards agreements and the elaboration of an 
international convention on nuclear safety, it was essential to reassess the 
13% reduction in its budget, which could seriously affect one of its most 
important programmes, namely technical assistance. Also, when considering 
cases in which Member States had failed to fulfil their financial obligations, 
the Agency should make allowances for the political, economic and environmental 
conditions prevailing in those countries. 
84. The Agency could help drought-prone African countries by means of 
co-ordinated research programmes to improve food production and agriculture, 
in particular through irrigation scheduling to increase the effective use of 
scarce water resources. The Agency deserved special praise for initiating a 
programme for the development of water resources, as a result of which it was 
hoped that the disappointing performance of many irrigation projects could be 
improved. 
85. It was pleasing to note that in the course of the year four RAPAT and 
five WAMAP missions had been carried out. Zimbabwe had benefited greatly from 
such missions, especially with respect to regulatory provisions for the 
handling, use and disposal of spent radiation sources, and also from 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 28 


scientific visits to other developing countries with established national 
radiation protection services. Zimbabwe would be establishing its own 
national radiation protection service in the near future and thanked the 
Agency for its assistance with regard to the recent workshop on radiation 
protection and quality assurance in diagnostic radiology held in Zimbabwe. 
His country would also be represented at a workshop to take place in Kenya in 
connection with the recently established regional technical co-operation 
project entitled "X-ray fluorescence laboratory network in Africa". 


86. The Agency also deserved praise for setting up the spare parts service 
for technical equipment launched in Latin America in 1987. Shortages of spare 
parts were also a constant problem in Africa, and in dealing with that problem 
it was important to encourage local manufacturing capacity as far as possible. 
87. Turning to the issue of public opinion in relation to nuclear power, he 
noted that nuclear power now provided a considerable portion - around 17% 
according to one report - of the world's electricity, a contribution on a par 
with hydroelectric power and in the absence of practical alternatives it would 
be short-sighted for the world to abandon the nuclear power option. To do so 
would not in any case result in the elimination of nuclear weapons or the 
technology responsible for them. 
88. The signing by the major powers of numerous treaties to limit or ban 
certain categories of nuclear weapons were welcome developments, but while 
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction still existed, efforts to eliminate 
them should not be allowed to slacken. The best way forward was to reduce 
nuclear arsenals drastically in the nuclear-weapon States and to encourage 
universal adherence to the NPT by non-nuclear-weapon States. The Agency's 
inspection system must be strengthened accordingly and the staff of the 
inspectorate should be drawn from developing countries as well as developed 
countries and the Agency. 
89. As in any other sphere of human activity, incidents and accidents could 
not be avoided entirely, no matter how sophisticated the protection mechanisms 
in place. The lessons learned from such incidents or accidents should 
therefore be made widely known to prevent their repetition and to improve 
safety levels for the future. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.345 
page 29 


90. Efforts must also be directed towards further improving the simplicity 
and inherent safety of the present generation of nuclear reactors. Without 
the long-term option of safer, simpler reactors, developing countries would 
find themselves in dire straits when fossil fuel sources finally ran out. 
The Conventions on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and on Assistance 
in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency drawn up after the 
Chernobyl accident had been widely adhered to. It was to be hoped that the 
Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive 
Waste adopted in 1990 and the international nuclear safety convention which 
was being prepared would be made legally binding upon all Member States. In 
that connection, Zimbabwe supported the establishment of a body of international 
nuclear law combined with international review and advisory services. 
91. Zimbabwe intended to conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency in 
the near future and it was his country's fervent hope that, with South 
Africa's conclusion of a similar agreement following its accession to the NPT, 
Africa would gradually be able to move towards becoming a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. While on the subject of South Africa, he stressed that the 
international community should continue to press for more radical change in 
that country. It was also to be hoped that, as in Angola, the conflict in 
Mozambique could soon be resolved, since meaningful development could only 
take place in an atmosphere of peace and trust. 
92. Finally, there was still a need for continued vigilance to prevent the 
dumping of toxic waste. It was an unfortunate side-effect of scientific and 
technological activities that, while enhancing standards of living and life 
expectancy, they also brought about undesirable environmental changes. As the 
world population continued to grow, pressure on the environment was mounting 
at a corresponding rate and the need to manage the environment intelligently 
and responsibly was becoming ever more critical. It was imperative that the 
nations of the world learned to act in such a way as to minimize damage to the 
environment, if not to prevent such damage completely. 
93. Mr. SIRCAR (Bangladesh), having welcomed Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan as new Member States of the Agency, noted that although there had 
been recent positive changes in the international political situation, 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.345 
page 30 


environmental problems affecting the future of the planet still remained 
unresolved. The recent United Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development which had been held in Rio de Janeiro had come to the conclusion 
that action programmes needed to be developed to save the planet from the 
threat of the greenhouse effect. Were the sea level to rise as a result of 
the greenhouse effect, Bangladesh would be one of the worst sufferers and it 
was therefore understandably concerned about environmental problems. The 
priorities and problems of socio-economic development had to be restructured 
and redefined on a global basis, since the lack of physical and human 
resources and inadequate national infrastructures made it difficult for 
developing countries to deal with those problems. 


94. The NPT had played a major role in enhancing peace and security in the 
world and with the recent changes in the political situation, there was reason 
to hope that nuclear arsenals would eventually be totally eradicated. While 
reiterating his country's commitment to the use of nuclear energy solely for 
peaceful purposes, he pointed out that the signatories to the NPT should also 
benefit from their commitment to non-proliferation. In particular, the 
developing countries which had acceded to the HPT should have easier access to 
nuclear technologies which might help them solve their national problems more 
economically and effectively. 
95. The Agency's activities in the field of the transfer of nuclear 
technology had benefited many developing countries, including his own. In 
Bangladesh, nuclear technology was being used in many areas such as in 
medicine, food preservation, the sterilization of medical products, agriculture, 
industry, non-destructive testing, radioisotope production, elemental 
analysis, electronics, hydrology, prospecting for and exploitation of heavy 
minerals, radiation protection services, and the development, adaptation and 
use of computer software. 
96. Bangladesh was also actively involved in various programmes under 
the RCA, including research projects and the development of much-needed human 
resources. It had begun to provide training opportunities in some fields and 
had started hosting regional activities with the support of the Agency. 
Activities under the RCA were of great benefit and should be widened even 

GCCXXXVI)/OR.345 
page 31 


further to include areas such as groundwater surveying, and studies on international 
rivers and problems associated with their flow and sedimentation 
using tracer technology. However, although he did not wish to undervalue the 
role of such peripheral uses of nuclear technology, he stressed that most 
developing countries were still waiting to benefit from the use of nuclear 
power to generate electricity. 


97. The role of energy, and in particular electricity, in promoting socioeconomic 
development could hardly be over-emphasized. The demand for 
electricity was increasing rapidly and it had been predicted that world 
electricity demand would double by the year 2010. Consumption in the 
developing countries was expected to increase by 150% over that period. The 
particularly high rate of growth in those countries was due to the fact that 
their current level of consumption was very low. Bangladesh needed electrical 
power for its development programmes and, as it did not have adequate supplies 
of conventional fuels, nuclear power was an attractive option. He hoped that, 
as Bangladesh was already committed to non-proliferation and IAEA safeguards, 
the Agency would assist it in obtaining a medium-size nuclear power plant. 
98. The lack of indigenous primary energy resources made it increasingly 
difficult for many developing countries to ensure even modest growth in the 
energy sector. Consequently, the gap in energy consumption, and therefore in 
economic activities, between the developing and developed nations was 
increasing. The known reserves of fossil fuels in the world were inadequate 
to meet such a growing; energy demand. There was therefore an urgent need to 
introduce and promote alternative power generation technologies on a global 
basis. 
99. Problems associated with safety and the management of radioactive waste 
were frequently cited as reasons for discouraging the expansion of nuclear 
power. However, the technologies for solving those problems were available. 
It was difficult to understand why such obstacles were placed in the way of 
developing countries wishing to embark upon nuclear power programmes, when 
reactors even of older designs were still being operated and new reactors were 
being built in the developed countries. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.345 
page 32 


100. In conclusion, while appreciating the Director General's efforts to 
achieve an appropriate balance between the Agency's promotional and regulatory 
activities, he noted that a balance had not yet been achieved as far as 
representation within the Agency's Board of Governors was concerned. Changes 
were particularly necessary in the case of the representation of the areas 
of MESA and Africa. Bangladesh therefore supported the revision of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and hoped that the resolution which was before 
the Conference on that issue would receive a favourable response from all. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
24 February 1993 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 
Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1992, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


General debate and annual report for 
1991 (continued) 1 - 181 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Cuba 1 13 
Bulgaria 14 22 
India 23 41 
Ukraine 42 66 
Romania 67 77 
Brazil 78 89 
Germany 90 102 
Turkey 103 113 
Hungary 114 125 
Yugoslavia 126 133 
Sweden 134 143 
Thailand 144 149 
Italy 150 166 
Poland 167 171 
Australia 172 181 


[*3 GC(XXXVI)/1027 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI)/INF/313/Rev.2. 


92-03689 


0861n/066n 



GC(XXXVI)/0R.346 
page 2 


Abbreviations used in this record 


ARGAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of 
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America 
ASCOT Assessment of Safety Culture in Organizations Teams 
ASSET Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
CEC Commission of the European Communities 
CIS Commonwealth of Independent States 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
EURATOM European Atomic Energy Community 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
G-7 Group of Seven 
G-24 Group of Twenty-Four (countries) 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
NUSS Nuclear Safety Standards 
OSART Operational Safety Review Team 
PHARE Poland, Hungary: assistance for economic reconstruction 
PHWR Pressurized heavy water reactor 
R&D Research and development 
RBMK High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
RIA Radioimmunoassay 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 
WAHAP Waste Management Advisory Programme 
WANO World Association of Nuclear Operators 
WHO World Health Organization 
World Bank (IBRD) International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 

ABACC Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear 

Materials 
CSCE Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe 
OF ANAL Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 

Caribbean 


GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (GC(XXXVI)/1004) (continued) 


1. Mr. GARCIA DE LA CRUZ (Cuba), having welcomed the Republics of 
Croatia, Slovenia and Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency, said that Cuba 
had made considerable progress in the use of nuclear science and technology in 
areas such as public health, industry, agriculture and other socio-economic 
sectors. Over 180 institutions in Cuba were now using nuclear techniques in 
their work. In the area of medicine, Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, 
radiation was being used for sterilization purposes and for the activation of 
polymers. National production of labelled compounds and radiophamaceuticals 
was meeting a proportion of the requirements of Cuba's hospital and research 
institutes and, with the start of operation in the near future of a 
specialized centre, production would be increased. Radiometry and spectrometry 
equipment and other specialized nuclear medicine equipment were also 
being designed and manufactured locally. The high-technology low-cost systems 
developed would undoubtedly be of interest to many other developing countries 
and could be used in Agency technical co-operation projects. 
2. In the area of food and agriculture, work was being intensified on the 
production of new plant varieties using radiation-induced mutation in 
conjunction with advanced propagation techniques. Progress had also been 
achieved in the optimization of fertilizers as a result of studies using 
nitrogen-15 and phosphorus-32 and in the application of the sterile insect 
technique to control the sugar cane borer. Furthermore, a start had been made 
on the manufacture of counters and kits to extend the use of RIA in livestock 
reproduction studies. 
3. Some success had also been achieved in designing nucleonic equipment 
for use in the nickel industry and X-ray fluorescence and beta backscattering 
systems for use in the engineering industry and metallurgy. 
4. Research and development work relating to nuclear power and nuclear 
sciences had continued to expand, with significant progress in such areas as 
reactor calculations, the development of software for probabilistic safety 
assessment, research into nuclear reactions, and studies of reactor structural 
materials. Much of that work had been conducted under research contracts with 
the Agency. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page A 


5. Physical and biological dosimetry studies had successfully been 
conducted on 5000 children from areas affected by the Chernobyl accident. 
Studies on environmental background radiation in Cuba had been performed and 
Cuba currently had a network of more than 50 monitoring stations. Cuba, which 
recognized the State's responsibility for environmental protection, had gained 
valuable experience in that field and was ready to make it available to the 
Agency and interested countries. 
6. Nuclear power had an essential role to play in Cuba's development and 
Cuba was endeavouring to overcome problems hindering the expansion of its 
nuclear programme. It had been forced to suspend work on the Juragua nuclear 
power plant as a result of the changes that had taken place in the supplier 
country and the new unacceptable conditions which had been imposed for the 
continuation of the initial assistance provided. Nevertheless, his Government 
intended to do everything it could to complete the plant and put it into 
operation. 
7. His country attached great importance to international co-operation in 
nuclear safety. It supported and was actively involved in the work on the 
revision of the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection and believed 
that the revised document could serve as a useful basis for countries 
preparing their own regulations. The document would be taken into account by 
Cuba when it updated its basic safety regulations for radiation protection. 
Cuba had set up a centre for radiation protection and hygiene in 1985 and a 
national nuclear safety centre in 1991. A radioactive waste processing plant, 
designed entirely by Cuban experts, was close to completion and would play a 
crucial role in the management of the low-level waste generated by some 
40 users of radiation sources in the country. 


8. His country was also following with interest the preparation of a 
nuclear safety convention, which it believed should strengthen the 
international nuclear safety regime through the harmonization of binding 
principles and criteria. However, such a convention should not constitute an 
obstacle for countries with a lower level of development. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 5 


9. Training was another very important aspect of nuclear safety and 
radiation protection. His delegation highly appreciated the Agency courses 
which were held each year in the Latin American region and believed that 
similar courses should also be organized in other regions of the world. 
10. Despite Cuba's desire to co-operate openly with all other countries in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the United States continued to obstruct 
the Cuban programme: its powerful media had recently been disseminating more 
and more distorted information to mislead international public opinion and to 
create anti-nuclear feeling among the Cuban population and mistrust in the 
region with regard to Cuba's nuclear programme. Also, some politicians and 
institutions had instigated investigations of the supposed danger from Cuba's 
nuclear activities and efforts had been made to hamper the exchange of 
information between Cuban and North American scientists. For example, entry 
visas had been refused to a Cuban technical delegation invited by the American 
Nuclear Society to participate in a meeting held in California at the end of 
August. Such a policy by the United States contradicted the fundamental 
principles of co-operation on which the Agency was based. 
11. With regard to safeguards, his country continued to believe that there 
should be a fair balance between the Agency's promotional and regulatory 
activities. A solution must be found to the problem of the financing of 
safeguards, and any future formula should continue to give preferential 
treatment to developing countries. As to the strengthening of the safeguards 
system, it would be better to review the system as a whole rather than to 
analyse and discuss separate aspects in a piecemeal fashion. All Member 
States should be involved in that process. Cuba had no objection to special 
inspections being carried out in Member States whose safeguards agreements 
provided for such inspections, but found it unacceptable that the Agency 
should carry out such inspections on the basis of information provided by any 
other Member State. 
12. Cuba welcomed the trend towards the greater integration of the Latin 
American region. Although its reasons for not signing the Tlatelolco Treaty 
remained valid, his Government had stated that, when all Latin American 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 6 


countries had assumed their responsibilities under the Treaty, Cuba would also 
be prepared to sign it in the interests of regional unity. 


13. As to the financing of technical assistance, his delegation considered 
the present mechanism of indicative planning figures to be suitable, provided 
that the needs of developing countries were met, that there was a systematic 
increase in indicative planning figures approved and that donor countries 
fulfilled their pledges. For its part, Cuba would pay in full its assessed 
share of the target for the TACF. Finally, his Government wished to express 
its appreciation of the technical assistance it had received from the Agency 
and its support for the ARCAL programme. 
14. Mr. JANEV (Bulgaria) said that the profound social and political 
changes that had occurred in his country in recent years had led to a major 
reconstruction of the economy. Electricity production, which was one of the 
main branches of Bulgaria's economy, relied heavily on nuclear power. While 
that was cause for satisfaction, Bulgaria faced major operational safety 
problems resulting from design deficiencies in some of the older units at its 
Kozloduy plant. 
15. In response to the concern expressed by the Bulgarian public and 
parliament, all aspects of safety at the Kozloduy plant had been thoroughly 
analysed by the national authorities and a number of international organizations, 
notably the Agency. Under its WWER-440 Model 230 project, the Agency 
had sent missions to assess plant-specific design deficiencies and the overall 
conduct of operations at Kozloduy. The issues of radioactive waste treatment 
and seismic resistance of the Kozloduy plant had also been considered. In 
addition, Agency OSART missions had made various important recommendations 
which his Government had done its best to comply with, despite their adverse 
effect on an already difficult economic situation. For example, it had closed 
down Units 1 and 2 at Kozloduy in order to take the steps needed to ensure 
their further safe operation. 
16. He wished to thank the CEC, WANO, the World Bank and the consortium of 
mainly Western European nuclear regulatory authorities and technical support 
organizations for the financial and technical assistance they had provided 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 7 


with the Kozloduy plant. He hoped that that co-operation would continue and 
looked forward to the Agency's taking the leading role in co-ordinating the 
assistance being provided to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to 


improve the safety of their nuclear reactors. 


17. His delegation attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
assistance programme and was gratified to note the considerable increase both 
in resources allocated under that programme to equipment purchase and in the 
number of specialists trained through Agency courses. It was a matter of 
concern, however, that some countries had consistently failed to contribute to 
the TACF. Despite its economic difficulties, Bulgaria had continued to pay 
its voluntary contribution. 
18. As one of the first signatories of the NPT, Bulgaria had always 
believed that the Agency's safeguards system had a key role to play in 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and in monitoring the 
international exchange of nuclear material, equipment and technology. It took 
part in the Nuclear Suppliers Group and actively supported the policy 
agreement reached by the Group which required comprehensive Agency safeguards 
to be applied to all current and future nuclear activities as a necessary 
condition for new nuclear exports to non-nuclear-weapon States. His country 
considered that a system for informing the Agency of the import and export of 
nuclear and certain non-nuclear materials and equipment would help to promote 
transparency in States' nuclear activities and demonstrate their peaceful 
character. 
19. Bulgaria had applied to become a full member of the Zangger Committee. 
The procedures for nuclear exports applied by countries belonging to that 
Committee had already been incorporated in the export control policy of the 
Bulgarian Government. 
20. His delegation noted with satisfaction the Director General's visits to 
South Africa and the DPRK. South Africa's accession to the NPT, its signing 
of a safeguards agreement and the verification of the completeness of the 
inventory of South Africa's nuclear installations and material were vitally 
important for the consolidation of peace and the promotion of co-operation in 

GC<XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 8 


that region. He noted also the Agency's active role in exploring various 
options for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 


21. He welcomed the ratification of the NPT by France and China. The fact 
that all the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council had now 
acceded to that Treaty would undoubtedly facilitate the monitoring of 
compliance with it through the safeguards system. 
22. Bulgaria was giving careful attention to the problems of the physical 
protection of nuclear material. It was looking forward to the forthcoming 
Review Conference on the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material and considered that the Convention had a crucial role to play in 
promoting international co-operation in that area. 
23. Mr. IYENGAR (India) said that the Agency was at a crossroads and 
that its Member States had to give the appropriate signals and provide the 
necessary thrust if their collective interests were to be realized. In 1990, 
there had been 426 power reactors in operation and 96 under construction; by 
the beginning of 1992, those numbers had dropped to 420 and 76. It was 
distressing to see very important facilities being abandoned for reasons other 
than scientific or technological ones. The facilities in question were of 
various kinds - ranging from small research reactors through nuclear power 
stations and fast reactors to reprocessing plants - and were located in 
countries belonging to different continents and at different stages of 
economic development. 
24. Why had that happened? Had the original planning been wrong, or were 
there external influences which made it appear so? In India, it was felt 
that - in view of the long gestation periods for nuclear projects - investment 
in the nuclear field needed to be consistent and steady; frequent changes in 
the support for nuclear projects were counter-productive. At the present 
stage, the most important factor in developing nuclear technology was 
manpower - scientists and engineers whose commitment could not be switched on 
and off at will. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 9 


25. The events which he had in mind had been taking place at a time of 
significant re-orientation in world politics and within the Agency. In 
addition, it should be borne in mind that even now only about a fourth of the 
Agency's Member States were engaged in nuclear power programmes. Such was the 
present state of nuclear power, despite the fact that all those familiar with 
it still - he hoped - believed that it was a clean, safe and economically 
viable source of electricity. 
26. It was political and economic factors - and to some extent problems of 
acceptability - that had constrained the growth of nuclear power, which was 
needed most by developing countries. It was a cause for immense concern that, 
owing to the constraints on nuclear power growth, the Agency was drifting away 
from its primary role - which was to devise and implement plans for enhancing 
the use of atomic energy. It was time to arrest the drift and to assist the 
Agency in stepping up its efforts to ensure the free flow of technology, to 
devise innovative schemes for the financing of nuclear projects and to promote 
the public acceptance of nuclear power. That called for collective political 
will in ensuring the Agency had the necessary financial resources, and he 
urged Member States to display such political will. 
27. Some developing countries were still not benefiting from nuclear 
technology - even in such areas as radioisotope applications in medicine, 
industry and agriculture. The availability of radioisotopes was being 
affected by the closure of high-flux research reactors due to difficulties in 
obtaining fuel and financial support. If the momentum was lost in training 
personnel to operate and utilize research reactors, there would eventually be 
a tapering-off of nuclear science and its applications. He therefore urged 
the Agency to highlight the importance of training in research reactor 
operation and utilization through new programmes. 
28. Besides the well-known applications of nuclear techniques in industry, 
medicine and agriculture, there were several applications in mining, 
environmental engineering and process control. The Agency should hold many 
more scientific meetings in developing countries in order to propagate the 
latter applications. The Agency's technical assistance programmes were very 
important in that context - hence the importance of assured funding for those 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 10 


programmes. As a first step towards achieving assured funding, Member States 


should pledge their shares of each year's TACF target and pay in a timely 
manner. He pledged India's share of the TACF target for 1993. 


29. Food preservation by irradiation in tropical countries was a good 
example of a new technology capable of displacing an older, more expensive and 
energy-intensive one - refrigeration. However, problems of public acceptance 
constituted an important obstacle which had to be overcome. He welcomed the 
food irradiation action plan prepared by the Secretariat and hoped the Agency 
would be able to develop standardized low-cost food irradiators with different 
capacities which could be installed in developing countries. His delegation 
looked forward to further vigorous action by the Agency in that field. 
30. When one talked about enhancing the promotional activities of the 
Agency, an obvious question was where the funds were to come from. The 
logical answer was: from prioritizing the Agency's activities. In that 
context, he wished to emphasize that safeguards were an important and legitimate 
function of the Agency. However, extensive and intrusive safeguards 
monitoring in a large number of countries on the basis of suspicion was 
neither a feasible nor a desirable option. It would require vast manpower and 
financial resources, and that would ultimately hamper the utilization of 
atomic energy itself. To avoid such a waste of scarce resources, the Agency 
should adopt innovative approaches to safeguards, use random sampling 
techniques and concentrate on nuclear material of safeguards significance. 
31. That raised the fundamental question of what the objective of 
safeguards was. If it was to prevent the diversion of nuclear material for 
non-peaceful purposes, why did the international community not face the issue 
of proliferation in a more serious and effective manner? As the Indian Prime 
Minister had stated to the United Nations Security Council summit meeting in 
January, the proliferation issue had assumed a qualitatively and frighteningly 
new dimension, and the only logical road available was to pursue a global 
approach based on international consensus on non-proliferation. The Prime 
Minister had stressed that, to be effective, such a global non-proliferation 
regime must be universal, comprehensive and non-discriminatory and linked to 
the goal of complete nuclear disarmament. The Indian delegation considered 
that, as non-proliferation and disarmament did not fall within the purview of 
the Agency, they should be dealt with in other international fora. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 11 


32. Where was the world heading with regard to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy? The picture was discouraging. Various pressures were being applied 
to developing countries, which were unable to pursue their peaceful nuclear 
programmes. The growing list of dual-use items subjected to export 
restrictions was preventing developing countries from making technological 
progress - not only in applications of atomic energy, but also in fields such 
as health, industry and communications. In fact, a form of total technology 
denial was being introduced. For example, there was a growing, vocal demand 
to stop reprocessing, although certain countries needed to pursue the 
reprocessing route in order to fully exploit their nuclear material resources; 
moreover, there was a strong school of thought that the best way to dispose of 
Plutonium was to burn it in a reactor and thereby generate power. In the 
short term, technology denial could undoubtedly slow down the technological 
growth of developing countries, leading to "technological apartheid". Even 
accession to the NPT did not seem to make any difference. 
33. What should the role of the Agency be in that context? In India's 
view, the Agency should consider the particular needs of developing countries 
and take steps to ensure that all Member States had unhindered access to - and 
be free to acquire - technology, equipment and materials on a nondiscriminatory 
basis for the peaceful uses of atomic energy. That view had 
been endorsed at the recent summit of the non-aligned countries. 
34. During the past year, thanks to its indigenous capabilities India had 
made significant strides in the peaceful applications of atomic energy. Two 
pressurized heavy water reactors (PHWRs) had gone critical since the 
1991 session of the General Conference - one at Narora and the other at 
Kakrapar. The Kakrapar unit was the first PHWR with thorium bundles in the 
initial fuel charge. In contrast to the long gestation periods experienced 
with India's earlier nuclear power projects, the Kakrapar unit had taken only 
eight years to complete. He hoped that the experience gained with the 
Kakrapar unit would enable India to build future reactors in even shorter 
times. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.346 
page 12 


35. India was continuing to strengthen the infrastructure of its nuclear 
power programme: heavy water plants had been successfully commissioned; 
programmes for producing Zircaloy and natural uranium fuels were being stepped 
up; and new mining, exploration, processing and production facilities were 
being completed. A nuclear power programme was absolutely essential for a 
country of India's size and population and with such limited non-nuclear 
sources of energy. Its three-stage implementation - (i) PHWRs, (ii) fast 
breeder reactors for burning plutonium and (iii) the use of thorium - was 
firmly on course. 
36. An advanced system for carrying out in-service inspections of coolant 
channels had been developed and successfully implemented at India's PHWRs. 
Work was proceeding on the design of an inherently safe advanced heavy water 
reactor system which would permit the extraction of a large fraction of the 
energy of thorium with minimum consumption of the plutonium driver fuel; it 
was expected that the design and the associated feasibility study would be 
completed within a few years. 
37. In the safety area, India's regulatory mechanisms were functioning in 
such a manner as to permit speedy decision-making in the implementation of 
nuclear projects and the operation of nuclear facilities. India was following 
the major recommendations of the Agency's safety standards. Insistence on 
quality control and the inspection of operating systems, especially of PHWRs, 
ensured full protection against possible malfunctioning. He had full 
confidence in the safety and reliability of the power reactors that had been 
built and were being operated with Indian expertise. The radiation doses 
received by operating staff were well under control, and research into the 
effects of low-level radiation was continuing. Nevertheless, news media 
sponsored from outside India had attempted to create confusion by highlighting 
health problems which were unrelated to the operation of India's nuclear 
facilities. 
38. India had developed sophisticated facilities for R&D relating to 
radioisotope applications and was continuing to meet its own requirements for 
radioisotopes, radiopharmaceuticals, radiographic equipment, nucleonic gauges 
and irradiators for a wide range of uses in industry and health care. A plant 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 13 


for sewage treatment using irradiation - the first of its kind in Asia - had 
been set up and others were expected to follow. The emphasis on R&D had led 
to the development of new nuclear fuels, special-purpose machines, electronic 
equipment, high-yield varieties of pulses and cereals, etc. Indigenous 
know-how was being continuously generated in the areas of lasers, plasma 
physics, accelerators, high-temperature superconductivity, robotics and 
computer science. 


39. India had always endeavoured to share its expertise with other Member 
States. In the past year a number of fellows had received training in India, 
which had also made available to the Agency the services of its experts. In 
addition, India had been offering training facilities and expertise on a 
bilateral basis to various developing countries. It appreciated the Agency's 
role in fostering technical co-operation through the regional co-operative 
agreement for Asia and the Pacific region (RCA), to which India was 
contributing by conducting training programmes and by providing equipment and 
experts' services. 
40. India would continue to support the Agency in achieving its 
objectives. Special attention should be devoted to some of the issues 
mentioned by the Director General in his statement - for example, safety in 
nuclear operations and the question of nuclear materials from dismantled 
weapons. 
41. Reverting to one of the earlier themes of his statement, he said that 
there seemed to be a great deal of anxiety in some developed countries about 
the widespread use of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. The founders 
of the Agency had believed - and had made it clear - that nuclear power was 
the only alternative to energy famine. Unfortunately, even though 40 years of 
effort had proved that the use of nuclear technology could result in enhanced 
productivity and economic development in some advanced countries (where 
nuclear power accounted for 15-75% of the electricity produced), orchestrated 
policies were being pursued whereby the benefits of nuclear technology were 
being denied to developing countries. Every step taken in the name of 
preventing nuclear proliferation had resulted in a policy of preventing growth 
in the peaceful applications of atomic energy, especially among the under

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 14 


privileged. It was time that policy-makers found ways of achieving such 
growth while at the same time meeting the concern for self-preservation. 
There lay salvation for humanity at large, and all Member States should work 
together towards it. 


42. Mr. SHTEYNBERG (Ukraine) said that Ukraine had recently celebrated 
the first anniversary of its independence. In that connection, he recalled 
that, in accordance with the provisions of the Declaration of Sovereignty of 
Ukraine and of the act proclaiming Ukraine's independence, his country 
intended to pursue a policy of strict neutrality and of non-participation in 
military blocks and to abide by three principles: not to accept, not to 
produce and not to acquire nuclear weapons. Ukraine had embarked resolutely 
on the path leading to non-nuclear status, systematically taking steps towards 
that objective. The withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons from Ukraine's 
territory had been completed in May, and Ukraine had carefully monitored the 
dismantling process. 
43. Having signed the Protocol to the Treaty on the Reduction and 
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms in Lisbon on 23 May, Ukraine had 
undertaken to ratify that Treaty and to accede to the NPT in the near future 
as a non-nuclear-weapon State. 
44. The Ukrainian Government had submitted those legal texts to the Supreme 
Council of Ukraine for consideration, and it was expected that the decisions 
to ratify and accede would be taken during the current session of the 
Ukrainian Parliament. 
45. The Agency was playing an important part in the implementation of 
the NPT, and Ukraine favoured the strengthening and further expansion - on the 
basis of the NPT - of the international non-proliferation regime, in which 
there was a special place for the Agency. 
46. Ukraine greatly appreciated the Agency's activities in the safeguards 
area. Those activities were of particular importance in the context of 
nuclear disarmament, and Ukraine supported the efforts of the Agency to 
enhance the comprehensive safeguards regime. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 15 


47. At present, Ukraine was establishing a State system of accounting for 
and control of nuclear material and a nuclear export control system and making 
improvements in the physical protection area. Thus, intensive efforts were 
being made in all areas comprising the non-proliferation regime. Ukraine was 
aware that the international community was hoping for the early submission of 
all of Ukraine's peaceful nuclear activities to Agency safeguards - something 
which Ukraine also desired. It would be grateful to all States and to the 
Agency's staff for any support leading to the early creation, in Ukraine, of 
the organizational and technical conditions necessary for the signing of 
the NPT and the conclusion of a safeguards agreement. As that would take some 
time, his Government had declared its willingness to submit Ukraine's nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. He was pleased that the matter had been 
resolved during the most recent session of the Board of Governors. 
48. The member countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States had 
signed an agreement on fundamental principles for co-operation in the 
utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. The agreement, which was 
based on the principles of nuclear non-proliferation, had already entered into 
force. 
49. As the present session of the General Conference was the first one in 
which Ukraine was participating as a truly independent State, he wished to 
present some information about the prospects for nuclear power in Ukraine and 
the problems existing in that connection. 
50. Five nuclear power stations were at present in operation in Ukraine. 
They comprised 15 units with a total capacity of about 14 000 MW. Three units 
were of the RBMK-1000 type, two of the WWER-440 type and ten of the WWER-1000 
type. Pursuant to a decision of Ukraine's Supreme Council, the two last units 
of the Chernobyl plant were to be closed down for good in 1993. Unit 2 had 
been closed down the previous year. Six 1000 MW units were at the 
construction stage, but construction work had been frozen until 1995 under a 
moratorium proclaimed by the Supreme Council. 
51. In 1991, nuclear power had accounted for 27% of the electricity 
generated in Ukraine. In the first quarter of the current year, it had 
accounted for 40% on certain days. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.346 
page 16 


52. With regard to safety, Ukraine's power reactors could be divided into 
three groups. The RBMK-lOOOs fell furthest short of modern requirements. 
Large-scale reconstruction work had been done on those reactors following the 
1986 accident. However, it was virtually impossible to bring them up to 
present safety standards at an acceptable cost. Their operation entailed 
higher-than-normal risks, and the Ukrainian Parliament had therefore decided 
to close down the Chernobyl plant for good. 
53. The power stations with WWER-440 reactors had been designed in 
the 1970s. Numerous evaluations, including some carried out by Western 
experts, had shown that the safety of these units could be raised to an 
acceptable level. Ukraine was currently engaged in efforts to that end. 
54. The power stations with WWER-1000 reactors came closest to meeting 
present safety standards. They accounted for 72% of the nuclear electricity 
produced in Ukraine - a figure which would rise to 92% after the final 
shutdown of the Chernobyl plant. 
55. Ukraine was carrying out safety studies on its operating power reactors 
in co-operation with Russian, German, French and other experts. 
56. In addition to power reactors, Ukraine had two research reactors in 
service. Also, uranium ore was mined and underwent initial processing in 
Ukraine. The country's uranium resources were sufficient to meet its nuclear 
fuel needs. Ukraine produced heavy water and a wide range of equipment for 
nuclear facilities. 
57. It had to be admitted, however, that the nuclear sector in Ukraine was 
in a difficult situation. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, many 
long-standing scientific, technical and industrial links had been disrupted. 
The centralized system for nuclear safety control and monitoring had 
disintegrated. It was essential to establish a national system for ensuring 
the safe transport of radioactive items - a matter also of great importance 
for Russia, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, as many such items passed through 
Ukraine on their way to and from those countries. Ukraine had inherited 
numerous difficult problems relating to radioactive waste management and the 
creation of an independent fuel cycle. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 17 


58. Ukraine was having serious difficulties in resolving those problems and 
others relating to the utilization of atomic energy. The situation was 
exacerbated by deficiencies in the current laws and regulations and by a 
shortage of sufficiently qualified experts. 
59. Ukraine was aware of its responsibility to the international community 
for the safety of its nuclear facilities and realized that the placing of 
those facilities under Ukrainian jurisdiction must not jeopardize their 
safety. Ukraine ought to close down a number of units in the near future, but 
it could not close them all down simultaneously as that would lead to a 
serious energy crisis. Some time would be needed in order to establish a 
legally sound regulatory basis, but Ukraine hoped to complete the task in the 
not too distant future with the help of foreign experts. 
60. A State committee for nuclear safety and radiological protection had 
been set up in Ukraine to deal with nuclear regulatory matters. Administrative 
structures for the nuclear power sector had been created, and 
scientific resources were being brought together. Also, considerable work 
was being done on the development of research programmes for enhancing nuclear 
safety and resolving radioactive waste management problems. 
61. Ukraine greatly appreciated the Agency's efforts to strengthen 
international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological protection. At 
the General Conference's previous session, attention had rightly been drawn to 
the need to transform existing international activities in the field of 
nuclear safety into an international nuclear safety regime. Clearly, a 
serious accident at any nuclear facility would immediately discredit the very 
idea of the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. The Agency's efforts to 
develop basic principles of nuclear safety and radiological protection and to 
establish a co-ordinated programme for co-operation in that area were 
therefore well justified. He commended the Agency on its efforts relating to 
the drafting of a nuclear safety convention and to the revision of the Basic 
Safety Standards for Radiation Protection; he hoped that the work in question 
would be completed soon. Ukraine supported current efforts to introduce 
improvements in the field of liability for nuclear damage - a matter which 
would be covered in Ukraine's nuclear legislation. Also, it appreciated the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 18 


Agency's work in establishing a set of standards and guidelines for 
radioactive waste management. His delegation was sure that international 
practice and the Agency's activities would together ensure a very high level 
of safety worldwide and dispel public mistrust of nuclear power. Also, 
Ukraine considered it essential to reach international consensus on approaches 
to evaluating the safety and prospects of "old" power reactors and to 
determining the safety requirements to be met by the new ones which would 
constitute the basis for the development of nuclear power generation in the 
next century. 


62. To the extent of its means and possibilities, Ukraine was participating 
actively in efforts to create an international nuclear safety regime. There 
had been several Agency missions to facilities in Ukraine. A week before, a 
regional seminar on the ASSET methodology had been concluded at the 
Khmelnitski nuclear power station. A seminar on reactivity accidents at 
nuclear power stations was to be held the following week in Kiev with the 
support of French and Russian specialists. 
63. For the Ukrainian population, nuclear safety and radiological 
protection were not something abstract, but a harsh practical aspect of the 
everyday life of many people. Ukraine was still feeling the consequences of 
the Chernobyl tragedy, from which the population of Ukraine and its 
neighbouring countries had suffered to a greater or lesser extent. His 
Government was doing a great deal to overcome the consequences of the 
accident. Admittedly, its efforts were at present somewhat less effective 
than they had been, but Ukraine was going through a period of political and 
economic transition. However, Ukraine hoped to make up for lost time. It 
thanked the international community for its understanding and for the support 
it had given. 
64. The results of the International Chernobyl Project had aroused great 
interest in Ukraine and elsewhere in the world. Admittedly, they had produced 
differing reactions, but he wished to acknowledge the enormous effort put in 
by the Agency in executing a project of very great scope within a very short 
time. Work was continuing at the Chernobyl Centre for International 
Research. Scientists and other specialists from various countries were 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 19 


clearly attracted by the possibility of testing their skills in helping to 
resolve the safety problems associated with Unit 4 at the Chernobyl plant, 
better known as the "Sarcophagus". 


65. The Agency's programme and budget for 1993 was generally well 
balanced. The structure of the budget in subsequent years should be based on 
the results of a comparative evaluation of projects aimed at focusing the 
Agency on activities of highest priority. Flexibility in the implementation 
of financial policy would significantly increase the effectiveness of the 
Agency's work. Unfortunately, the difficult economic situation in Ukraine had 
prevented his country from paying its contribution to the Regular Budget on 
time. His Government was examining ways of discharging its debt to the Agency 
the following year and was taking measures to that end. 
66. Ukraine appreciated and supported the Agency's varied activities 
directed towards strengthening international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy and would help in every way possible to resolve the extremely 
important problems facing the Agency. 
67. Mr. BALANESCU (Romania) said that, despite competing priorities 
and scarce financial resources, his Government continued to attach great 
importance to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Nuclear power was at the 
forefront of his country's efforts to assure a diversified energy supply which 
posed no danger to the environment. The nuclear option was a realistic and 
inevitable choice for Romania, which would be seeking to exploit fully 
partnership arrangements with foreign companies and to use its own industrial 
capacity to produce certain items of equipment, fuel and heavy water. 
68. His delegation approved the draft programme for 1993-94 and the Regular 
Budget for 1993. It also endorsed the indicative planning figures for 
voluntary contributions to the TACF and was pleased to announce that Romania 
would pay its full assessed share of the TACF target for 1993. 
69. His Government attached particular importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities. In view of the close link between those activities 
and the safeguards and nuclear safety programmes, any expansion in those areas 
should apply equally to all three. Only in that way could fruitful international 
co-operation and a rapid advance of the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy be guaranteed. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 20 


70. His country gave high priority to the Agency's efforts to improve the 
operation of the safeguards system, which was the key to preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons and facilitated international co-operation 
and trade in nuclear material, equipment and technology. Recent events had 
shown that a sustained effort was needed in order to strengthen the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime and make the NPT a universal instrument. Some 
progress had been made in that respect in the past year, the most notable 
development being the accession of France and China to the NPT. Romania was 
convinced that the safeguards measures adopted by the Board of Governors since 
the previous session of the General Conference, together with other measures 
yet to be adopted, constituted a clear deterrent to any attempt at 
proliferation. 
71. Romania urged all States to accede to the NPT and to accept 
comprehensive safeguards, which it regarded as a precondition for any 
co-operation or supply of material in the nuclear field. In that connection, 
Romania and the other adherents to the nuclear suppliers guidelines had 
circulated a statement on full-scope safeguards in May (INFCIRC/405). Also in 
1992, Romania had subscribed to the Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers and the 
Guidelines for Transfers of Nuclear-Related Dual-Use Equipment, Material and 
Related Technology (INFCIRC/254/Rev.1/Part 1 and Part 2). 
72. The Agency was to be commended for the competence it had demonstrated 
in implementing the mission entrusted to it by the Security Council under 
resolution 687. The results of the Agency's work had confirmed the need to 
strengthen the safeguards system and to make available to the Agency the 
necessary means to ensure that nuclear energy was not diverted from peaceful 
purposes. 
73. In a world which needed energy but was concerned about pollution and 
the deteriorating environment, it was vitally important that the Agency 
continue to accord high priority to nuclear safety and radiation protection, 
which were prerequisites for the widespread use of nuclear power. The Agency 
had already done a great deal to promote co-operation in nuclear safety, and 
further efforts should be made, particularly in respect of reactors of older 
design which did not meet current safety standards. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 21 


74. Romania was participating actively in the preparation of an international 
nuclear safety convention. It intended to ensure that the safety of 
the Cernavoda nuclear power plant complied with international standards. His 
Government was planning to strengthen the national regulatory body in line 
with the recommendations of an Agency expert mission which had recently 
analysed the country's regulatory procedures with particular reference to the 
Cernavoda plant. Romania considered that an international nuclear safety 
convention would provide a suitable framework for tackling the problem of 
radioactive waste and that the Agency could play a vital part in co-ordinating 
a co-operative effort in that sphere. 
75. Romania was deeply concerned at the poor condition of certain older 
nuclear reactors in the region. The Agency was to be commended for its 
efforts to evaluate and improve the safety of WWER-440/230 reactors and for 
its recent initiatives concerning the operational safety of other older types 
of reactor - for example, RBMKs. A shutdown of such reactors for good would 
undoubtedly create serious energy problems for the countries in question, but 
any accident would bring disastrous consequences. 
76. The Romanian Parliament had recently ratified the Vienna Convention on 
Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Joint Protocol Relating to the 
Application of the Vienna Convention and the Paris Convention. 
77. The Agency had shown an exceptional capacity to assist Member States in 
all areas of the peaceful application of nuclear energy. His country appealed 
to the Agency for its help and advice in establishing national legislation and 
regulatory bodies on the basis of experience in countries with advanced 
nuclear programmes. 
78. Mr. SANTANA CARVALHO (Brazil) warmly welcomed Croatia, Slovenia 
and Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency. 
79. His delegation was glad to note the change in attitude of countries 
whose significant nuclear activities had long been a source of concern to 
their neighbours and the international community. The recent submission of 
relatively advanced nuclear programmes to comprehensive safeguards and the 
early implementation of safeguards agreements were gratifying developments. 
However, any decision to undertake additional bilateral reciprocal safeguards 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 22 


inspections should remain the prerogative of individual countries. The 
non-proliferation measures taken recently by various Member States showed that 
there was a growing political will to strengthen world security. 
Nevertheless, recent dramatic changes in the world - and in particular the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union - had aroused deep anxiety over the control 
of existing nuclear arsenals. 


80. With regard to the control of nuclear exports, his Government's 
standpoint was that every country should adopt internal measures for the 
effective control of exports of sensitive technology, equipment and material 
related to weapons of mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons. Moreover, 
such controls should be applied universally. The Brazilian Congress was in 
the process of examining and updating comprehensive legislation on the 
matter. Stricter national control over exports, together with the application 
of comprehensive safeguards, should pave the way for closer co-operation 
between suppliers and importers and facilitate the access of the latter to 
sensitive technologies and equipment. In a wider context, his Government was 
also evaluating the Nuclear Suppliers Group's guidelines and its list of 
sensitive items. 
81. The Agency had an important contribution to make to global security, 
co-operation and development. In the light of the Agency's many years of 
safeguards experience and the considerable advances made in safeguards methods 
and technologies, a general review of the entire safeguards system was called 
for. 
82. Brazil and Argentina were continuing their co-ordinated efforts to 
strengthen non-proliferation and had attained all the objectives of the Joint 
Declaration of Foz do Iguacu of November 1990. A bilateral agreement on the 
exclusively peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in force since December 1991, 
had led to the creation of the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accountancy and 
Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC). A safeguards agreement which the two 
Governments, ABACC and the Agency had signed in December 1991 was currently 
being considered by the Brazilian Congress. Good progress was being made 
towards the achievement of the last goal established by the Joint Declaration, 
namely the entry into force of the Tlatelolco Treaty. At its General 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 23 


Conference in August 1992, OPANAL had adopted by acclamation the amendments to 
the Treaty proposed by Argentina, Chile and Brazil, and the quick and full 
entry into force of the Treaty for those countries therefore seemed likely. 
With that step and the signing by France of Additional Protocol 1 to the 
Treaty, the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America was 
now closer to becoming a reality than ever before. 


83. Brazil welcomed the work being done on an international nuclear safety 
convention. Such a convention should be based on the non-mandatory 
application of the NUSS safety principles and leave overall responsibility for 
safety with individual countries. Cumbersome details that would result in 
inflexibility and a low level of adherence should be avoided, and the 
convention should be such that small nuclear programmes could also reach the 
desired level of safety. 
84. With reference to the work of the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage, his delegation felt that regional interests should be taken 
into consideration in the matter of supplementary funding: the differing 
characteristics of regions could not be reflected in a single global 
mechanism. With respect to the settlement of disputes, preference should be 
given to proven mechanisms of international law. Innovations in that area 
might lead to conflict with existing constitutions and national legal 
frameworks. As to procedure, a more systematic and objective approach was 
desirable. Specific terms of reference should be given both to the working 
groups and the drafting committee, and proposals by Member States should be 
given priority. 
85. Serious financial constraints were limiting the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities. Brazil was willing to make available to the Agency 
its facilities for training and education, as well as other non-financial 
assistance. Brazil was one of several developing countries now supplying 
equipment for Agency technical co-operation projects. The Secretariat's 
proposal for the promotion of commercial food irradiation was opportune and of 
relevance to his country. 
86. As to the financing of technical assistance, his delegation was of the 
opinion that the traditional formula of funding through voluntary contributions 
was still the best approach. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 24 


87. The revision of Article VI of the Statute hinged on the concept of a 
geographical balance among Member States. That was very difficult to define 
at present, owing to the changes taking place in the world and the fact that 
several new countries were applying for membership of the Agency. Under the 
circumstances, it would be advisable to continue monitoring developments 
before proceeding with the matter. 
88. He appealed to the Director General to look into the question of the 
late distribution of Agency documents. That practice left insufficient time 
for proper analysis and should not be allowed to become a habit. 
89. Finally, he wished to refer to the United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, where two 
important international conventions on world climate and biodiversity had been 
signed. The Conference had called the world's attention to the need to 
reconcile the availability of energy for development with the necessity of 
reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Since conservation and the exploitation of 
carbon-dioxide-free renewable sources would not be sufficient to solve the 
world's energy problems, nuclear power, and the Agency, would undoubtedly have 
an important role to play in the future. 
90. Mr. ZILLER (Germany) said that the current nuclear energy 
situation in Germany was characterized by two fundamental trends: the process 
of integrating the two parts of Germany, and a growing awareness that the 
peaceful and safe use of nuclear energy was a matter of worldwide 
interdependence. 
91. The amount of electricity generated by nuclear power plants in Germany 
had increased by about 10% during the first six months of 1992 compared with 
the same period in 1991. The number of installed nuclear units had remained 
unchanged. His Government was convinced that nuclear power would have to 
continue making a substantial contribution to electricity generation. No 
other energy source was as environmentally compatible and cost-effective while 
offering comparable security of supply. Nuclear power was needed to combat 
the greenhouse effect. His Government had set a target for reducing carbon 
dioxide emissions in the country by 25% by the year 2005. The Conference on 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 25 


Environment and Development had confirmed that there was a growing consensus 
on the need to take joint action quickly to protect the global climate and 
that nuclear energy, used responsibly, could make an important contribution. 


92. Important progress had been made in pursuit of a long-term energy 
source - nuclear fusion. He welcomed the agreement on the initiation of a new 
phase in the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor project and was 
pleased that a team of experts would again be working in Germany as part of 
that project. 
93. A serious nuclear accident would have grave consequences for the future 
of nuclear power. All countries shared the risk and should therefore work 
together to overcome the problems. The participants in the Munich economic 
summit had agreed on a comprehensive programme to improve the safety of 
Soviet-type nuclear power stations. Priority had been given to short-term 
measures to improve operational and technological safety and to the 
strengthening of supervisory authorities. Bilateral measures were to be 
intensified, a supplementary aid fund was to be set up and the co-ordination 
of existing and planned measures was to be enhanced. The G-24 had approved 
that programme and its implementation had begun in July. It was crucial that 
clear aid measures be established and that there be a successful transition 
from analysis to effective action. He called on all those able to do so to 
assist in attaining that goal. 
94. Germany considered nuclear safety a priority area for the Agency and 
one which ought to be developed further in close co-operation with other 
international organizations. 
95. Germany urged all countries using nuclear energy to intensify their 
efforts to establish an international convention on nuclear safety, which 
would be an important tool for achieving the highest possible level of nuclear 
safety worldwide. With respect to the form and substance of a convention, it 
might be possible to dispense with detailed technical annexes but the 
convention should be broad in scope and should cover all nuclear reactors, 
facilities and activities in the civil nuclear fuel cycle. Requirements would 
have to be specified and, if the convention's goals were to be attained, peer 
review mechanisms would have to be enhanced. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.346 
page 26 


96. Germany attached great importance to the improvement of international 
nuclear liability systems. The question of supplementary funding had given 
rise to some problems, and his delegation felt that the next step should be to 
discuss the principles involved on the basis of the draft prepared by the 
Secretariat. 
97. The shock of discovering Iraq's secret nuclear weapons programme had 
helped bring about an international consensus on the urgent need for an even 
more effective international control mechanism. Germany therefore welcomed 
both the confirmation by the Board of Governors of the Director General's 
right to conduct special inspections aimed at detecting undeclared activities 
and the tightening of the obligation to provide early design information on 
planned nuclear facilities. However, those measures alone were not 
sufficient. The Agency's human and financial resources should be concentrated 
on those areas where there was the greatest need for confidence-building. His 
delegation therefore strongly encouraged the Agency and EURATOM to implement 
their new partnership approach without delay in order to avoid unnecessary 
duplication of safeguards activities. Full account should be taken of the 
fact that the far-reaching EURATOM safeguards system had proved effective and 
reliable over many years. 
98. The past year had seen encouraging progress towards a strengthening of 
the non-proliferation system, notably the conclusion of a full-scope 
safeguards agreement with Argentina and Brazil and the speedy implementation 
of a safeguards agreement with South Africa. The full implementation of the 
agreement with the DPRK remained an important task. 
99. At the same time, it was a matter of concern that some countries with 
major nuclear potential remained outside the non-proliferation system. Swift 
accession by the countries that had emerged from the dissolution of the Soviet 
Union was needed to build confidence. Germany therefore welcomed the 
announcements by the Governments of Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan and 
Azerbaijan that they would accede to the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States. It 
was important that accession procedures and the corresponding safeguards 
agreements be implemented without delay in order to facilitate co-operation 
in, for example, the field of reactor safety. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 27 


100. With the inspections carried out in Iraq in the past months, the Agency 
had given impressive proof of its unique competence and experience. The close 
and effective co-operation between the Agency and the United Nations Special 
Commission should continue. 
101. The Agency's technical assistance programme demonstrated the important 
contribution made by nuclear science and technology to the economic and social 
development of a large number of Member States. Germany would continue its 
substantial support for the TACF, but felt that the level of the Fund needed 
to be brought in line with the ability of contributors to pay. 
102. His Government remained committed to the principle of maintaining zero 
real programme growth in all international organizations. That principle was 
not the cause of the Agency's recent financial difficulties, which would be 
overcome only if all Member States paid their contributions to the Regular 
Budget in full and on time. Reliance on additional financial support from 
some Members was not a sound basis for the Agency's regular activities. 
103. Mr. SANALAN (Turkey) warmly welcomed the admission of Croatia, 
Slovenia and Uzbekistan to the Agency. 
104. The Agency had a paramount role to play in preventing the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, and his country therefore welcomed all the initiatives 
taken by the Agency in the past year to strengthen the safeguards system. It 
also supported the Director General's efforts to achieve maximum effectiveness 
and efficiency in safeguards operations at a time of increasing demands and 
budgetary constraints. Clearly, wider accession to the NPT would contribute 
to the attainment of world peace. Regional approaches which included 
additional safeguards measures to suit local conditions and meet specific 
requirements would also serve non-proliferation objectives. However, those 
objectives could not be achieved through the verification of political 
commitments alone: tighter controls on nuclear exports were also needed. 
105. The past year had been very eventful, with growing expectations and 
demands in the area of safeguards and new challenges in nuclear safety and 
radiation protection. Unfortunately, increasing financial constraints had 
made it more difficult for the Agency to discharge those new responsibilities. 
He therefore appealed to all Member States to give the Agency the 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.346 
page 28 


financial support it needed both to cope with its expanding workload in those 
areas and to meet the growing needs of developing countries for technical 
assistance. 


106. In recent years more attention had been given to the safe operation of 
nuclear facilities in general and of nuclear power plants in particular. 
Nuclear events with transboundary radiological consequences, and especially 
the Chernobyl accident, had raised complex issues with economic, political, 
technical, social and legal aspects, some of which required international 
action and co-operation. One of the Agency's major tasks in that respect was 
to offer assistance in ensuring the safe operation of nuclear plants in the 
new republics of the former Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe. His 
Government urged the new republics to join the Agency so that they could 
benefit from its wide experience in that field. Nuclear safety was of such 
importance that it should be included among the Agency's statutory objectives. 
107. He welcomed the progress made by the Standing Committee on Liability 
for Nuclear Damage. The Committee should be further encouraged to devise a 
contractual system of international nuclear liability which was acceptable not 
only to the parties to the relevant conventions but also to non-participating 
States. His Government remained convinced that a State liability regime could 
provide the solution to the important liability problems which would arise in 
the case of a nuclear accident causing damage in more than one jurisdiction. 
108. He was pleased to note from the annual report that, as in previous 
years, the Agency had not detected any diversion of a significant amount of 
safeguarded nuclear material from peaceful activities in 1991. His country 
was conscious of the impact on the Agency of the increasing number of 
facilities coming under safeguards and commended the Department of Safeguards 
for the measures it had taken to increase its efficiency. There were, 
however, limits to what such measures could achieve, and budgetary constraints 
should not be allowed to cause a deterioration in the safeguards system. 
109. The question of nuclear waste disposal should continue to receive 
careful attention. Nuclear waste technology had reached an advanced state of 
sophistication, yet much remained to be done. Public confidence in the 
nuclear industry could not be firmly established until mechanisms were in 
place for the safe and effective disposal of radioactive waste. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 29 


110. His country had taken an active part in the recent technical committee 
meeting on the physical protection of nuclear material and considered that a 
conference to review the implementation and adequacy of the convention on that 
subject should be convened as soon as possible. 
111. His Government attached a great deal of importance to the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities and welcomed the increased attention being 
paid to the special needs of developing countries. His country had already 
pledged its voluntary contribution to the TACF for 1993. The Secretariat was 
to be commended for its efforts in implementing the major part of the 
technical assistance programme for 1991, despite the financial problems it had 
had to face. 
112. In recent years, environmental problems had escalated to the level 
where they constituted a global threat. The crucial issue of environmental 
protection had been discussed at the United Nations Conference on Environment 
and Development and the Helsinki summit meeting of the Conference on Security 
and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE). In the final documents of both meetings, 
reference had been made to the need to develop efficient systems for 
monitoring and evaluating compliance with existing environmental commitments. 
It had also been emphasized that the integration of environmental protection 
in other policies and in the economic decision-making process was an essential 
condition both for sustainable economic development and for the prudent use of 
natural resources. It had been recommended that more States sign the relevant 
Agency conventions and that States actively support the early elaboration of 
an international convention on nuclear safety within the framework of the 
Agency. His delegation felt that those points could serve as a useful guide 
for future activities in that field. 
113. In conclusion, his delegation believed that Member States could take 
pride in the Agency and its work. Despite its limited financial resources, 
the Agency was successfully transferring valuable knowledge and technologies 
to Member States through its technical assistance and other programmes, and 
thereby contributing to the technical, economic and social development of the 
world. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 30 


114. Mr. VIGASSY (Hungary) observed that significant political changes 
which affected the work of the Agency had been taking place all over the 
world. Despite the increase in political tensions in some regions of the 
world, in particular in the immediate neighbourhood of his own country, and 
also in the Middle East and Asia, indications were emerging of an overall 
strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime: the accession of China 
and France to the NPT; the conclusion of a comprehensive safeguards agreement 
with Argentina and Brazil; the speedy conclusion and good start to the 
implementation of the safeguards agreement with South Africa; the declaration 
by supplier countries of their commitment to a policy of requiring full-scope 
safeguards as a condition for nuclear exports; and the ratification by the 
DPRK of its safeguards agreement with the Agency and the concrete steps 
already taken to implement it. With the NPT Extension Conference scheduled 
for 1995, those steps towards a genuine and universal non-proliferation regime 
were very heartening. In that context, he urged all States which had not yet 
done so - and especially the new independent States emerging from the former 
Soviet Union and former Yugoslavia - to accede to the NPT as non-nuclearweapon 
States and to conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with the 
Agency without delay. The safeguards agreements concluded with Estonia and 
Lithuania were an encouraging sign. 
115. The call for resolute international action in response to Iraq's noncompliance 
with its safeguards obligations had been supported by Hungary in 
the United Nations Security Council, and his Government fully endorsed the 
action taken by the Agency to implement the relevant Security Council 
resolutions. The long-term monitoring of Iraq's compliance - a task entrusted 
to the Agency by the Security Council - was of vital importance. His 
Government continued to believe that the Agency's detection capabilities 
should be further strengthened in order to make the non-proliferation regime 
more credible. 
116. An important element of the overall non-proliferation regime was the 
establishment of a properly functioning export control mechanism for nuclear 
material and technology and related dual-use commodities. The new control 
regime being introduced by the countries of the Nuclear Suppliers Group would 
fill a significant gap and help reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation. 
Hungary would participate fully in that regime. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.346 
page 31 


117. Global interest in nuclear non-proliferation had been renewed in the 
aftermath of the Gulf conflict and the disintegration of the Soviet Union, and 
yet there seemed to be a lack of confidence in the Agency's safeguards system 
in its present form. That situation would have to be remedied. He commended 
the initiatives taken by the Director General to encourage Member States to 
reflect on that issue: the recent brainstorming session on safeguards, for 
example, had provided a valuable forum for discussing possible ways of 
strengthening the present safeguards system and reducing its costs. His 
country would continue to support the Agency's safeguards programme, notably 
by making Hungarian nuclear facilities available for testing and training 
purposes. With regard to short-term steps, Hungary had supported the Board of 
Governors efforts to improve the existing safeguards system through such 
measures as the early provision of design information, special inspections, 
universal reporting, and acceptance of information from Member States. It was 
in that context that the Hungarian Atomic Energy Commission was voluntarily 
offering to supply information to the Agency on all of its nuclear exports and 
imports, including ore concentrates. He hoped that offer would contribute to 
the establishment by the Agency of a universal register of exports and imports 
of sensitive nuclear equipment and materials. 


118. An effective national and international accounting and physical 
protection regime for nuclear materials and equipment was of fundamental 
importance for the safe and peaceful use of nuclear facilities. His country 
would do what it could to ensure that the outcome of the forthcoming Review 
Conference on the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 
would further strengthen that regime. His Government would also do everything 
possible to prevent Hungarian territory from being used for the illegal 
transit of nuclear materials. 
119. Hungary's energy needs could not be met without nuclear power. 
In 1992, the net electricity output of the four units of Hungary's nuclear 
power plant had accounted for almost half the country's total net electricity 
generation. That plant had an excellent operational record, having achieved 
an average load factor of over 86% in the past three years. Nevertheless, in 
the light of modern internationally recommended criteria and in accordance 
with the recommendations made by the Agency, the Hungarian Atomic Energy 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.346 
page 32 


Commission had decided to reassess the facility's safety and had launched a 
project for that purpose. The final report on the project would contain 
detailed analyses and documentation on the design basis accident, 
probabilistic safety assessment, and strategies for severe accident 
management. It would be submitted to the relevant national and international 


organizations, which would verify its conclusions. 


120. His country would continue to rely on the Agency's services, including 
OSART and ASSET missions, to improve operational safety. The new ASCOT 
methodology would also be used to assess the safety culture of the regulatory 
body and the plant operating organization. 
121. One of the most sensitive issues in terms of public acceptance of 
nuclear power was the management of spent fuel and the disposal of radioactive 
waste. He noted with satisfaction the positive experience of the Agency's 
WAMAP missions and urged the Secretariat to expand its services to Member 
States in that field. 
122. The G-7 summit meeting in Munich in July 1992 had again stressed the 
urgent need to provide assistance to Eastern and Central European countries in 
improving nuclear safety. An extensive set of international and bilateral 
programmes had been launched with the participation of various international 
organizations and developed countries. Those programmes dealt mainly with 
generic studies, safety assessment, exchange of information and experience, 
and the overview of regulatory activities and training. 
123. It was of vital importance that recipient countries participate 
actively in those programmes in order to ensure that assistance was focused on 
their interests and that their technical capabilities were used to the full. 
Recipient countries such as Hungary had valuable knowledge and expertise in 
areas such as the efficient and safe operation of WWER-213 plants and were 
willing to share it. 
124. He welcomed the establishment of a co-ordination mechanism within the 
framework of the G-24 working group on nuclear safety intended to avoid 
duplication of effort and to enhance the effectiveness of technical 
assistance. However, greater efficiency in international efforts could be 
achieved by making more use of the Agency's experience and technical 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 33 


information. Hungary had made a cost-free expert available to the Agency to 
strengthen those co-ordination efforts, and it strongly supported the Agency's 
active participation in the work of the CEC Secretariat in Brussels. 


125. Hungary was deeply appreciative of the Agency's technical assistance 
activities, which had benefited its nuclear industry and nuclear research. In 
that connection, he was pleased to announce that his Government had decided to 
pledge its full voluntary contribution to the TACF for 1993. 
126. Ms. DJURICKOVIC-TUVIC (Yugoslavia) expressed the hope that the membership of 
Croatia and Slovenia in the Agency would help to rebuild the co-operative relations which were 
so much needed after the tragic events that had occurred in the former Socialist Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia. 
127. With regard to the situation in her country, she wished to emphasize 
her Government's determination to end the civil war and free the country of 
sanctions and international isolation. In doing so, it would act in 
accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter and the Helsinki 
Final Act. Her Government was fully committed to the decisions of the 
international conference on the former Yugoslavia held in London, and in 
particular to its decision that all outstanding issues should be resolved by 
peaceful means, on the basis of existing borders, and in a process of urgent 
and continuing negotiations. Her Government had pledged its co-operation in 
advancing the peace process, reducing the level of violence and curbing the 
flow of arms. 
128. Her delegation felt it was vitally important for the current session of 
the General Conference to adopt measures which would enable the Agency to meet 
new demands at the international level for improved nuclear safety and 
radiation protection. The Agency also had a crucial role to play in the 
promotion of sustainable socio-economic development and in environmental 
protection through its technical co-operation programme. 
129. In order to attract universal support for its programme and budget for 
the coming two-year period, the Agency should seek to establish a balance 
between its two main activities - safeguards and technical co-operation. Her 
delegation was able to support the budget proposed for 1993. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 34 


130. As a developing country with limited financial means, Yugoslavia paid 
close attention to the financing of technical co-operation. It stressed the 
need to secure predictable and assured resources for that programme and felt 
that those resources should be included in the Regular Budget. 
131. With regard to the financing of safeguards, her country could support 
the recommendation that the present system should be extended for three years 
and that the contributions of Member States which qualified for partial relief 
in respect of their assessments for the safeguards component of the Regular 
Budget should continue to increase in step with inflation. 
132. Yugoslavia had long enjoyed excellent co-operation with the Agency in a 
wide range of nuclear activities and was keen to continue that co-operation. 
It therefore deplored the sanctions which had been imposed on technical 
assistance to it and which had adversely affected existing projects and caused 
financial and other losses. The safe operation of its nuclear facilities was 
at risk. Her Government had expressed its firm resolve to fulfil all the 
requirements stipulated in the relevant Security Council resolutions, and she 
therefore hoped that the Agency and all the parties involved would soon see 
fit to lift sanctions, which were contrary to the spirit of the Agency. 
133. Owing to its current financial difficulties, aggravated by the 
aforementioned sanctions, Yugoslavia had been unable to pay its outstanding 
contributions to the Agency before the General Conference, nor was it able at 
present to announce its contribution to the TACF. However, it intended to 
honour those obligations at the earliest opportunity, although that, too, was 
a matter on which the embargo had a bearing. 
134. Mr. HOGBERG (Sweden) said that there had been a further 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime over the past few years, a trend 
which his Government was confident would continue. With the accession to 
the NPT of China and France, all nuclear-weapon States were now parties to the 
Treaty. Sweden also welcomed the accession of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Slovenia and Zimbabwe to the NPT and the recent progress made towards bringing 
the Ttalelolco Treaty into force. His country looked forward to the full and 
timely implementation of the safeguards agreement between the DPRK and the 
Agency. It urged all parties to the NPT which had not yet done so to conclude 
and implement the required safeguards agreements with the Agency without delay. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 35 


135. Iraq's failure to honour its commitments under the NPT and its 
safeguards agreement with the Agency had aroused grave concern in the 
international community. It was vital that the resolutions adopted by the 
Security Council be fully complied with. He commended the Secretariat for its 
strenuous efforts in carrying out the task entrusted to it by the Security 
Council. 
136. A legally binding commitment to exclusively peaceful use was a 
prerequisite for the utilization of nuclear energy. All partners in 
international co-operation and trade should give an undertaking to ensure the 
full transparency - through comprehensive Agency safeguards - of all their 
nuclear activities. The recent decision by the 27 adherents to the Nuclear 
Suppliers Guidelines to adopt a policy of requiring full-scope safeguards as a 
condition for supply was an important step in that direction. Nuclear-weapon 
States had a special responsibility in that respect. For its part, Sweden was 
prepared to accept stricter regulations in the nuclear sphere and hoped that 
all other countries would adopt the same stance. 
137. The strengthening of both the effectiveness and efficiency of Agency 
safeguards was of fundamental importance. He noted with satisfaction that the 
Agency's right to carry out special inspections had been reaffirmed and that 
significant improvements in efficiency had been achieved. The work begun on 
alternative safeguards approaches should be intensified with a view to 
supplementing the present safeguards regime. All elements which clearly 
contributed to increased transparency and flexibility should be considered, 
since greater openness would lead to improved effectiveness and efficiency. 
The question of the financing of safeguards remained unresolved and he urged 
all Members to approach that issue with an open mind and a determination to 
achieve results. 
138. Welcome progress had been made towards a nuclear safety convention. 
The success of such a convention would depend largely on appropriate 
mechanisms for demonstrating compliance. Peer reviews could be an important 
instrument in that respect. There appeared to be a broad consensus on the 
fundamental safety and radiation protection principles on which the convention 
should be based, and he urged Member States to strive for its rapid 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 36 


completion. The convention should cover not only the safety of nuclear power 
reactors "but also radioactive waste management and the final disposal of 
nuclear waste. Furthermore, it should be designed in such a way that it could 
be extended in stages to other types of nuclear installation and activity. 


139. Every effort should be made to improve the safety of power plants built 
to earlier standards, particularly those in Eastern and Central Europe. If an 
acceptable safety level for the long-term operation of such plants could not 
be achieved, they should be shut down. Sweden supported and looked forward to 
the rapid implementation of the strategy approved at the G-7 summit meeting in 
Munich in July 1992 and later adopted by the G-24 working group on nuclear 
safety. 
140. In the field of civil liability for nuclear damage, Sweden was 
gratified that the Joint Protocol linking the Vienna and Paris Conventions had 
entered into force earlier in 1992. However, several States with nuclear 
plants had still not acceded to either convention. International efforts to 
upgrade the safety level of nuclear reactors built to earlier safety standards 
would benefit from the clarification of liability issues that would result 
from such accession. It was also important that States without nuclear power 
plants accede to one of the conventions, especially States located in regions 
where there was a high density of such plants. He hoped that work on the 
revision of the Vienna Convention and on the elaboration of a convention on 
supplementary funding would be accelerated to enable a diplomatic conference 
to be held in 1993. 
141. Sweden looked forward to further progress with regard to resolution 
GC(XXXIV)/RES/532 on the important question of the safety of nuclear-powered 
vessels. 
142. His country assigned high priority to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities and noted the strong demand for assistance in such 
areas as food and agriculture, physical and chemical sciences, radiation 
protection, the safety of nuclear installations and the management of radioactive 
waste. The system of financing those activities needed to be put on a 
firmer basis given the uncertain nature of pledges and payments to the TACF. 
Sweden had pledged its share of the TACF target for 1993 and, in view of the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 37 


competence and efficiency with which technical co-operation activities were 
carried out, customarily made extrabudgetary contributions which exceeded its 
pledged share. He welcomed the broader co-operation between the IAEA and 
other agencies of the United Nations system, in particular FAO, WHO and UNEP. 


143. Sweden attached great importance to the Agency's activities in 
safeguards, nuclear safety and technical assistance. In view of the financial 
constraints facing the Agency and most of its Members, the limited resources 
available should be used for high-priority tasks. 
144. Mr. SANGIAMBUT (Thailand) said that his country attached 
particular importance to the Agency's technical co-operation activities, which 
benefited all developing countries and had contributed significantly to 
Thailand's development. As his country moved rapidly towards industrialization, 
the role of nuclear technology was expanding and co-operation with the 
Agency was proving of great value in the areas of industry, agriculture, 
health care and research. 
145. He noted with concern that the rate of voluntary contributions paid to 
the TACF had continued to decline in the past year. He therefore urged all 
Member States, particularly those which were in a better position to do so, to 
contribute generously to the Fund. He was pleased to announce his 
Government's pledge of US $61 050 as its voluntary contribution to the TACF 
for 1993. 
146. His delegation fully supported the Agency's proposal to assist 
developing countries in the field of food irradiation. In view of the 
imminent ban, for environmental reasons, on some widely used food fumigants 
such as methyl bromide, food irradiation could offer a much-needed alternative 
to fumigation. As one of the few developing countries where irradiated food 
had been marketed successfully, Thailand urged the Agency to increase its 
efforts to promote the public acceptance of that technology. 
147. Over the past year, considerable progress had been made towards 
strengthening the safeguards system. His country believed that the early 
submission of design information on nuclear facilities and the exercise of the 
Agency's right to conduct special inspections would significantly increase the 
effectiveness of the safeguards system. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 38 


148. His delegation noted with satisfaction the report on the progress made 
in implementing the safeguards agreement with the DPRK. It also welcomed the 
joint declaration issued by the Republic of Korea and the DPRK on the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. That declaration would complement 
Agency safeguards and further strengthen the stability of the Korean Peninsula 
and the region as a whole. He therefore called on both countries to implement 
that bilateral arrangement as soon as possible. 
149. In the light of their increasing need for energy to meet development 
requirements, many countries were seriously considering nuclear power as an 
energy option. Improved nuclear safety was a prerequisite for winning public 
support for nuclear power, and he therefore commended the Agency on its 
contribution to the progress made in that field in the past year. 
150. Mr. TALIANI (Italy) said his delegation fully endorsed the 
statement made by the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Community and 
its member countries, 
151. His Government welcomed the recent accession to the NPT of China, 
Namibia and Uzbekistan and viewed the ratification of the Treaty by France as 
confirmation of the constructive attitude always shown by that country in the 
field of nuclear non-proliferation. It also noted with satisfaction the 
recent decision of the Ukrainian Government to place under Agency safeguards 
all nuclear facilities under its jurisdiction or control pending the 
completion of the preparatory work for its accession to the NPT as a 
non-nuclear-weapon State. 
152. The important agreements reached by the United States and the Russian 
Federation in the field of nuclear disarmament suggested that the remarkable 
changes which had taken place in the former Soviet Union had created a new 
co-operative environment which would lead to a better and safer world. The 
recent agreement on the use of highly enriched uranium was especially 
welcome. In the past few years his Government had encouraged studies on the 
peaceful use of military nuclear materials which had been carried out by a 
group of Italian scientists and supported by leading Italian corporations. An 
international gathering on that subject had taken place in Rome in June 1991, 
attended by representatives of the political and scientific worlds. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 39 


153. His Government was also conducting preliminary talks with the Russian 
authorities concerning the most suitable way of offering technical assistance 
to the Russian Federation for the dismantling and safe storage of nuclear 
warheads, in full accordance with the NPT. A further meeting on that subject 
was scheduled for the beginning of October. 
154. The decisions taken by France and the Russian Federation concerning a 
moratorium on nuclear tests and also the decision of the United States to 
limit the total number of such tests per year would have great political 
impact and would pave the way for a more consistent approach to nuclear 
non-proliferation in the run-up to the NPT Extension Conference to be held 
in 1995. 
155. The uncontrolled movement of sensitive materials - presumably, although 
not necessarily, originating in the former Soviet Union - was a matter of deep 
concern to his Government. The Agency had a specific role to play in that 
area, and he invited every country which was able to do so to provide the 
Agency with all relevant information in order to put an end to such illegal 
activities. 
156. His Government noted with satisfaction the progress made by the Agency 
in implementing the measures required under Security Council resolutions 687, 
707 and 715. Italy would continue to support the Agency's activities in Iraq 
by providing, inter alia, the services of the leader of the action team 
established for that purpose. 
157. His Government continued to assign high priority to nuclear safety and 
radiological protection and fully supported the numerous initiatives taken and 
services introduced by the Agency over the years to enhance the safety of 
nuclear facilities worldwide. The unfortunate and drastic curtailment of 
those essential activities as a result of the Board of Governors decision to 
cut the 1993 budget was a matter of great concern to his delegation. Savings 
had been made in the worst possible areas, indicating the short-sightedness of 
some members of the Board. 
158. A number of initiatives had been launched with the aim of improving 
safety levels at nuclear facilities in the countries of Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS. The G-7 had approved a programme of action on the safety 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.346 
page 40 


of Soviet-designed nuclear power plants at its recent summit meeting in 
Munich. Responsibility for co-ordinating that programme had been assigned to 
the G-24, and a workable and effective structure must now be established if 
the programme was to succeed. 


159. His country was currently assessing how it could best participate in 
the programme. Its present lack of a national nuclear power programme should 
by no means be viewed as limiting its ability to make an effective contribution 
in that area, since its technical knowledge and industrial capabilities 
were fully adequate for the purposes of the G-7 programme. Italy intended to 
play an active role through both bilateral initiatives and active involvement 
in programmes funded by the European Community. 
160. The importance of the Agency's role in that context could not be overestimated. 
The Agency had been analysing the safety problems of Sovietdesigned 
reactors for some years. The recently completed comprehensive safety 
assessment of first generation WWERs showed how much the Agency's activities 
- particularly its OSART, ASSET and engineering safety review missions - had 
contributed to the identification not only of deficiencies but also of 
urgently needed corrective actions. The Agency had built up a wealth of data 
and experience that should be exploited to the utmost and further enhanced by 
extending the assessment work to the other types of Soviet-designed reactor. 
The G-7 programme would be effective only if it had a sound base of technical 
information to draw on, and the Agency's experience was essential to extending 
that base. The programme's success also depended on the extensive participation 
of the beneficiary countries, which bore ultimate responsibility for 
the safety of their facilities. Those countries should contribute to the 
G-24 co-ordination mechanisms; the Russian Federation, which had developed 
the technology on which all those plants were based, would have a particularly 
important role to play. 


161. Despite the valuable efforts of the Agency and some of its Member 
States, the creation of an international safety regime remained a distant 
objective. The elaboration of a convention on nuclear safety would be an 
important step in the right direction, provided that it did not turn out to be 
merely a compendium of good intentions. The convention should establish 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 41 


precise safety standards, and all signatory countries should give an undertaking 
to observe them. Furthermore, it should assign to the Agency a welldefined 
role in verifying compliance with those freely undertaken obligations. 


162. Unfortunately, that did not appear to be the direction being taken in 
the expert group set up to prepare the convention. Negotiations would not be 
easy, nor could they be concluded rapidly, but success was much more important 
than speed. The aim was to create a comprehensive international instrument 
that would meet the expectations of the public worldwide. Hopes for 
relaunching nuclear power rested largely on the Agency's ability to meet the 
strong and growing demand for internationally agreed and verified safety 
standards. 
163. His delegation had the same concerns with regard to the protocol on 
nuclear safety currently being drawn up for inclusion in the European energy 
charter. The protocol was essential for strengthening nuclear safety in 
Central and Eastern European countries and the CIS. 
164. The Agency's international regulatory review service was of special 
importance among the various initiatives to strengthen national infrastructures. 
It was unfortunate that only two Member States had thus far made 
use of that important tool, and he urged all Member States to take advantage 
of that service. 
165. With regard to the activities of the Standing Committee on Liability 
for Nuclear Damage, his country felt that it would be counterproductive to 
speed up negotiations with a view to convening a conference to review the 
Vienna Convention in 1993. Member States were still far from agreement on 
some essential points that would add new and more forward-looking elements to 
the present outdated instrument - in particular, the international liability 
of States and the creation of an international tribunal with mandatory 
jurisdiction. Once again, obtaining good results was more important than 
speed. 
166. Finally, many speakers had rightly pointed out that the main responsibility 
for the Agency's serious financial situation lay in the non-payment or 
late payment by Member States of their assessed contributions. However, the 
Secretariat should consider streamlining its structure, which had scarcely 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 42 


changed over the past two decades. It might be more efficient, for example, 
if the transfer of technology was the responsibility of a single department 
instead of the three that currently dealt with technical assistance. That 
situation had arisen as a result of historical developments, and it was time 
for the Director General to tackle the matter. 


167. Mr. NIEWODNICZANSKI (Poland), having welcomed Croatia, Slovenia 
and Uzbekistan as new members of the Agency, noted with satisfaction the 
accession of China and France to the NPT and, in Latin America, the imminent 
entry into force of the amended Ttaleloco Treaty. Despite those positive 
developments, which augured well for the 1995 NPT Extension Conference, it was 
important not to lose sight of the new security problems and threats that had 
arisen in some regions. The case of Iraq had alerted the world community and 
prompted it to take action. Poland commended the Agency for its highly 
successful contribution to the implementation of Security Council 
resolution 687 and supported the Secretariat's initiatives to strengthen the 
safeguards system and achieve greater transparency through enhanced reporting, 
wider use of special inspections and the early provision of design information. 
168. Poland noted with satisfaction the recent decision of two of its 
neighbours, namely Ukraine and Lithuania, to invite the Agency to inspect 
their facilities, even before concluding safeguards agreements with the 
Agency. It also noted the progress made in implementing the safeguards 
agreements with South Africa and the DPRK and supported the Director General's 
intention to step up efforts to bring about the application of comprehensive 
safeguards in the Middle East. 
169. Although Poland had no nuclear power plants of its own, it was 
surrounded by countries where a large proportion of energy needs was met from 
such plants. That was one of the reasons why problems of nuclear safety and 
emergency procedures in the event of a severe accident were of interest to 
Poland. It therefore supported all Agency activities aimed at strengthening 
nuclear safety, particularly in Central and Eastern Europe. 
170. Poland's own nuclear power programme had been deferred for 10 to 
20 years. However, there was reason to believe that environmental 
considerations would cause it to be revived earlier. The poor state of the 
environment in Poland resulted largely from the burning of coal to produce 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 43 


electricity. If environmental protection costs were included in the price of 
energy and nuclear safety was assured, nuclear power plants might well be a 
viable alternative to coal. Poland was already considering creating research 
and development programmes in the field of new-generation reactors and would 
appreciate Agency assistance in that connection. 


171. Because of its environmental problems, Poland was very interested in 
the use of electron beam technology to remove sulphur dioxide and nitrogen 
oxides from flue gases. The pilot installation constructed near Warsaw with 
the Agency's technical assistance had been very successful and had become a 
centre of intensive international co-operation involving Japan, the United 
States and Germany. As a result of that co-operation, preparations were now 
being made for the full-scale industrial application of the installation, 
which was also being used as a training centre. Other technical assistance 
projects of importance to Poland were those relating to nuclear methods for 
coal seam identification, for the evaluation and control of coal quality and 
for the study of the environmental impact of coal mining and processing, and 
to radioactive waste disposal technologies and methods. Finally, as in the 
past, Poland would continue to do its best to contribute to the Agency's 
technical assistance programme. 
172. Mr. WILSON (Australia), after welcoming Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency, drew attention to the difficulties 
faced by the Agency as a result of the late payment or non-payment of 
contributions by a number of Member States. There were two ways to deal with 
the problem. The most desirable way was for all Member States to pay their 
contributions to the Regular Budget in full and on time. The alternative was 
to cut Agency programmes. If that proved necessary, priorities should be 
established, since across-the-board cuts of the kind made in 1992 were 
unsatisfactory. His delegation was making its own analysis of Agency 
programmes in preparation for its consideration of the 1994 budget and it 
urged other delegations to do likewise. It would also like to see the Board 
of Governors resume consideration of the Medium-Term Plan soon. 
173. Australia's commitment to the Agency's technical co-operation programme 
remained firm. In the past year, it had hosted and funded two Agency training 
courses on the use of computers in nuclear medicine imaging and on the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 44 


development of training methods for ensuring radiation protection. It had 
also held a workshop on nuclear instrument maintenance. Places had also been 
provided for some 30 Agency fellows for on-the-job training on such topics as 
industrial tracers, radiation protection, nuclear medicine and neutron 
activation analysis. Australian scientists had undertaken 15 expert missions 
for Agency technical assistance projects and his country had supplied a range 
of equipment for such projects. In addition to its annual payment to 
the TACF, his country would continue to contribute substantial extrabudgetary 
funding for technical co-operation programmes, including 1.5 million 
Australian dollars for the next three years to the RCA programme and about 
300 000 Australian dollars to a co-ordinated research programme on the use of 
nuclear and isotope techniques in studies on coral reefs, climate and global 
environmental change. 


174. An independent nuclear safety bureau had recently been established in 
Australia, underlining the importance which Australia attached to nuclear 
safety. His country strongly supported the Agency's involvement in nuclear 
safety and the expansion of certain of its safety-related activities - subject 
to a thorough examination of the budgetary implications. If the Agency's 
resources were not adequate to meet its responsibilities in the area of 
safety, extrabudgetary funding should be provided. Australia was actively 
involved in work on the proposed international convention on nuclear safety 
and was also making a significant contribution to the revision of the Basic 
Safety Standards for Radiation Protection. The revision of the Standards 
required careful and thorough consideration and an unrealistic deadline should 
not be set for the completion of that work. 
175. Australia welcomed the recent initiatives to reduce nuclear weapon 
stockpiles. However, it was essential that the resulting nuclear material be 
managed in such a way as to ensure that it was not used again for weapons. 
Also, the availability of the highly enriched uranium from dismantled weapons 
must not be allowed to disrupt nuclear trade. The nuclear industry relied on 
stable and secure supplies of fuel which should not be put at risk. 
176. It was a matter of satisfaction that the NPT continued to attract 
growing international support and that, following the accession to the NPT of 
China and France, all permanent members of the United Nations Security Council 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 45 


were now parties to the NPT. His country also welcomed the accession to 
the NPT of the Baltic States and the commitment to early accession of Ukraine, 
Belarus and Kazakhstan, and looked forward to the accession of other States 
which had recently become independent. 


177. While it was desirable for those countries which had not yet done so to 
accede to the NPT, it was also important that all parties to the Treaty should 
fulfil all their obligations under it. It was therefore a matter of concern 
that some 50 States party to the NPT had still not concluded the required 
safeguards agreement. Since controls on nuclear exports formed part of the 
non-proliferation obligations of nuclear suppliers, the agreement reached by 
nuclear suppliers regarding controls on nuclear-related dual-use items and the 
requirement that full-scope safeguards be a precondition for the supply of 
significant nuclear items was an important development. He urged the few 
suppliers which had not yet done so to adopt the same position. 
178. Australia commended the co-operation shown by South Africa and the DPRK 
in implementing their NPT safeguards agreements. In the latter case, the 
process was not yet complete, and questions concerning spent fuel, the future 
of a reprocessing plant and the possibility of a pilot reprocessing plant 
remained unresolved. Australia looked forward to the early and full 
implementation of the safeguards agreement with the DPRK. It would be helpful 
if countries like South Africa and the DPRK which had previously operated 
unsafeguarded advanced fuel cycle programmes went beyond the strict 
requirements of the safeguards system and afforded greater transparency by 
providing whatever additional information they could. In that context, there 
was widespread interest and support among the international community for the 
early implementation of the joint bilateral nuclear inspection regime agreed 
upon by the DPRK and the Republic of Korea. 
179. The Agency was to be commended for its work on the application of 
full-scope safeguards in the Middle East. The attainment of that goal would 
have major positive implications for the security of the region. 
180. His country continued to be concerned by Iraq's attitude to inspections 
and urged Iraq to co-operate completely with the Agency and comply fully with 
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Since questions remained 
unanswered about the Iraqi nuclear programme, it was important for the Agency 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.346 
page 46 


to maintain a monitoring role in Iraq. Iraq's extensive clandestine nuclear 
programme had demonstrated shortcomings in the Agency's safeguards system. 
There was a need to strengthen the Agency's ability to deal with undeclared 
nuclear activities. In that connection, he welcomed the action taken in the 
past year with regard to special inspections and the earlier provision of 
design information and the examination - still in progress - of a comprehensive 
reporting system. Nevertheless, much remained to be done. 


181. In addition to strengthening safeguards, it was also important to 
improve the efficiency of the system. In doing so, care should be taken to 
ensure that savings did not damage the system's integrity and that the funding 
required to enable the Agency to meet its international safeguards obligations 
was assured. Involvement in safeguards research and development activities 
was one way in which Member States could contribute to a more cost-effective 
system. For its part, Australia remained committed to providing such support 
to the Department of Safeguards. 
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 


8 January 1993 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1992, at 10.10 a.m. 


President: Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


General debate and annual report for 
1991 (continued) 1 - 126 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Belgium 1 - 11 
Venezuela 12 - 20 
Holy See 21 - 26 
Mauritius 27 - 33 
Indonesia 34 - 38 
Chile 39 - 50 
Ireland 51 - 61 
Pakistan 62 - 78 
Guatemala 79 - 87 
Viet Nam 88 - 91 
Finland 92 - 104 
Israel 105 - 115 
Switzerland 116 - 126 


[*] GC(XXXVI)/1O27. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI)/INF/313/Rev.2. 


92-3738 
0760n/0060n 



GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 


page 2 


Abbreviations used in this record 


ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 


Science and Technology in Latin America 
ASSET Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
GANDU Canada deuterium-uranium [reactor] 
DGEN General Directorate for Nuclear Energy (Guatemala) 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
EURATOM European Atomic Energy Community 
ICRP International Commission on Radiological Protection 
INSAG International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group 
KANUPP Karachi Nuclear Power Plant 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
OPANAL Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 


and the Caribbean 
OSART Operational Safety Review Team 
RADWASS Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
RBMK High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 


Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 


(for Asia and the Pacific) 
SAGS1 Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
START Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive 


Arms 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
WAMAP Waste Management Advisory Programme 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (continued) 


1. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium) said that during the past year the 
Agency had demonstrated its ability to adapt to the changing world situation 
and to play the role assigned to it. That was clear from its efforts to 
implement the Security Council's resolutions on Iraq, the Board of Governors' 
decisions concerning the strengthening of safeguards, and the work being done 
to elaborate a convention on nuclear safety. 
2. The statement made by the representative of the United Kingdom on 
behalf of the European Community accurately reflected the basic position of 
the Belgian Government. He wished to expand on only two points, namely 
safeguards and nuclear safety. 
3. Over the past year, the safeguards system had once more been at the 
centre of attention. The recent decisions by the Board of Governors on 
special inspections and the provision and use of design information 
represented an important step towards strengthening safeguards. Those 
measures should significantly enhance the Agency's ability to detect any use 
of nuclear energy for purposes other than peaceful ones and should thus 
increase the international community's confidence in the commitment to the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy made by States that had signed a comprehensive 
safeguards agreement. 
4. The international consensus on non-proliferation had also made headway 
during the past year. The accession of B'rance and China to the NPT, the 
implementation of safeguards agreements in South Africa and the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and the accession of additional countries to the 
Tlatelolco Treaty had brought the world closer to a universal safeguards 
regime. In that connection, Belgium attached special importance to efforts to 
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and to the role the 
Agency could play in that area. 
5. Certain commitments entered into by States were also encouraging. In 
particular, the European Community countries had worked out a common approach 
to providing the Secretariat with supplementary information, on a voluntary 
basis, concerning the production of uranium ore concentrate, inventories of 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 4 


nuclear material, and international transfers of sensitive equipment. He 
appealed to all Member States to participate in that initiative, since the 
provision of such information would be fully effective only if a large 
majority of Member States agreed to do so. 


6. He welcomed the Director General's proposal to conduct a comprehensive 
review of major developments of relevance to safeguards over the past few 
years. It was now more important than ever to re-examine the safeguards 
system as a whole, in the light of its fundamental objectives and the changes 
that had occurred on the international scene. The purpose of the exercise 
should be to reform the safeguards system with a view to improving its 
efficacy and ensuring its viability. Efforts to strengthen safeguards must go 
hand in hand with efforts to rationalize safeguards criteria and the working 
methods and structure of the Department of Safeguards in order to optimize the 
use of available resources. The geographical coverage of safeguards and the 
Agency's safeguards duties were constantly expanding, but there was little 
prospect of a corresponding expansion of resources. A significant reduction 
in costs was therefore imperative and, he was convinced, perfectly feasible. 
7. The basic text for comprehensive safeguards agreements, namely 
INFCIRC/153, needed no amendment. However, it should be reinterpreted in such 
a way that certain provisions which had remained inoperative could be 
implemented. He was thinking in particular of those provisions that allowed 
the Agency to engage in qualitative verification and to pass judgement on 
qualitative aspects of national safeguards systems. Without prejudice to 
quantitative verification efforts (in the level of verification), greater 
attention should be paid to qualitative analysis (risk of detection and 
probability of diversion), which was more relevant to the current threat of 
nuclear proliferation. 
8. His delegation attached great importance, for budgetary reasons among 
others, to the constructive partnership being developed between the Agency and 
EURATOM. Since July 1992, technical discussions had been under way and an 
initial technical agreement on many of the activities to be carried out 
jointly by the two inspectorates had been reached. The practical implementation 
of that agreement could lead to a significant streamlining of the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 5 


inspections undertaken by the Agency in European Community countries. The 
coexistence of two independent and highly qualified inspectorates was clearly 
a unique situation that should permit significant savings. Those savings 
should help to keep the growth of the safeguards budget under control and the 
co-operative arrangements created could serve as a model for Agency activities 
in other regions. 


9. Belgium, which had a large nuclear power programme, was greatly 
interested in international co-operation in nuclear safety. The deficiencies 
in nuclear safety which had come to light over the past decade in facilities 
in certain Member States called for an appropriate response from the 
international community. Belgium was actively involved in multilateral and 
bilateral efforts to improve the level of safety in Eastern European nuclear 
power plants. 
10. Nuclear safety was certainly not a new subject for the Agency. Since 
its inception, the Agency had enjoyed an enviable reputation as a universal 
meeting place where specialists in nuclear safety could exchange their 
experience and knowledge. The convention on nuclear safety that was now being 
prepared should promote such exchanges through regular meetings of parties to 
the convention. Through its OSART and ASSET missions, the Agency was in a 
position to sound the alarm about greater or lesser deficiencies in nuclear 
safety. The thrust of the efforts of the Group of 24 must now focus on the 
high-risk areas where the most urgent problems arose. A redirection of 
efforts would be appropriate in some cases, while in others an increase in 
financial and human resources seemed to be necessary. 
11. The Agency could take on the onerous responsibilities involved only if 
the Secretariat was able to preserve its independence in relation to the 
nuclear safety authorities in Member States and operators of nuclear 
facilities. It should not become involved in providing technical assistance 
on reactor safety or participate in the selection of safety strategies and 
priorities. To do so would be to forfeit its impartial role in OSART 
missions, for example. The Agency should therefore limit its safety 
activities to fields in which it possessed substantial experience and complete 
independence of judgement. That was the way in which it could best serve the 
international community. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 6 


12. Ms. DOMBROWSKI (Venezuela) said that her country had always taken 
a special interest in the Agency's technical co-operation activities, which 
should continue to be an essential part of the Agency's mission. In that 
connection, she wished to stress the importance of achieving a better balance 
in the distribution of the Agency's budgetary resources between the various 
programmes. It was a matter of deep concern that technical co-operation 
continued to depend on voluntary contributions to the TACF. Although it was 
true that the level of the TACF had increased significantly over the years, 
there was no guarantee that it would continue to show real growth. The slow 
but steady decline in the percentage of the target pledged and paid clearly 
demonstrated that timely, assured and predictable resources were needed to 
ensure the delivery of an effective technical co-operation programme to meet 
the growing socio-economic needs of developing Member States. 
13. The technical assistance that Venezuela had received from the Agency 
had enhanced the understanding and safe use of nuclear technology in priority 
sectors such as health, agriculture and livestock breeding, radiation 
protection, industry and the environment. However, problems still remained 
which could only be solved through further co-operation with the Agency. 
14. Her delegation had noted with great satisfaction that in 1991, the 
first year of the biennial cycle, the implementation rate for technical 
co-operation activities had reached 63.6%. However, it must be emphasized 
that the success of technical co-operation could not be measured by 
implementation statistics alone: a qualitative assessment of projects and 
activities was also essential. 
15. She wished to reiterate her country's support for the ARCAL programme, 
which was a highly valuable instrument for furthering the goals of the Latin 
American region. She urged the Agency to continue its efforts to provide the 
necessary funding for ARCAL projects and regional co-ordinators' meetings. 
Her Government wished to thank those countries and institutions from outside 
the region which had supported the ARCAL programme: such financial assistance 
was vital to the success of the programme. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 7 


16. Venezuela, which had signed the Tlatelolco Treaty in 196 7 and acceded 
to the NPT one year later, had always striven for the creation of a zone free 
of weapons of mass destruction in Latin America and the Caribbean. It had 
actively supported the work of OPANAL and had done its utmost to get those 
countries in the region which had not acceded to the Tlatelolco Treaty to 
become members of the organization. In that connection, it had supported the 
amendment of the OPANAL charter to allow Guyana and Belize to join OPANAL. 
17. At the international level, Venezuela had welcomed the disarmament 
initiatives taken by the superpowers, contributed to discussions on the 
elimination of chemical and bacteriological weapons, and vigorously supported 
initiatives aimed at establishing a comprehensive nuclear test ban. 
18. As a party to the NPT, Venezuela attached particular importance to the 
Agency's safeguards system, which had helped prevent the horizontal 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. However, it was concerned at the persistent 
imbalance in the Agency's budget between safeguards and non-safeguards 
activities. While her country was in favour of strengthening the safeguards 
system, it was convinced that that could be achieved without having to 
increase the financial burden on Member States, and especially those whose 
nuclear programmes were small or in their early stages. A review should be 
made of the safeguards system with a view to rationalizing costs and criteria 
and to increasing reliance on Member States' safeguards support programmes, 
which were funded from extrabudgetary contributions and could absorb growth in 
the safeguards programme. 
19. Another area of great importance was nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. The Agency's activities in that sphere benefited all mankind, 
since they helped establish the technical basis for the safe operation of 
nuclear power plants and other facilities which employed nuclear technology in 
industry, medicine, research and agriculture. However, some of those 
activities brought greater and more direct benefit to developing countries 
than others. She would therefore like to see activities directly related to 
the safety of power reactors, in particular those concerning design and siting 
to be financed from extrabudgetary resources. Also, the Agency should take 
into account the work being done in that area by other organizations. That 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 8 


might release financial resources that could be used to improve the safety of 
nuclear applications in medicine, agriculture, industry, and research and to 
strengthen radiation protection infrastructures in developing countries. 


20. Although Venezuela considered that each State was responsible for the 
safety of the nuclear facilities on its territory, it supported the 
development of internationally accepted basic principles, standards and guides 
that would promote the safe use of nuclear technology. Her delegation 
intended to examine carefully the results of the work being done to draw up a 
nuclear safety convention, in particular the implications for developing 
countries and the financial consequences for the Agency. 
21. Mr. SQUICCIARINI (Holy See) said that one of the Agency's most 
important tasks was to protect and promote life through the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. To achieve that goal, it was essential to work together and 
deal constructively with the complex and many-faceted sectors of human life. 
His Holiness Pope John Paul II, on the occasion of his visit to the Vienna 
International Centre in 1983, had stressed that the first obligation was that 
of working together, sharing expertise and building up a consensus through 
common effort and commitment, and that the overriding characteristic of the 
organizations' work should always be to unite, not to divide. That 
characteristic stemmed from the spirit that had called the organizations into 
existence. 
22. Generally speaking, in every sphere of science and technology the 
highest standards of safety should always be observed in the interests of 
mankind. Nature, understood as a creation of God for the benefit of man, was 
not meant to be irresponsibly exploited but rather to be wisely cultivated, 
protected and preserved for the good of mankind. It was thus extremely 
important to maintain the primacy of man as the criterion for judgements and 
decisions and the consequent obligations of stewardship and solidarity. The 
Holy See had expressed that view clearly during the United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Development held in June 1992. 
23. Man was, under God, the measure and end of all the projects attempted 
in the world. In scientific and nuclear programmes designed for the benefit 
of society, the human person was the guiding criterion. No project, however 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 9 


technically perfect or industrially sound, was justifiable if it endangered 
the dignity and rights of the persons involved. Every initiative of the 
Agency and its Member States should satisfy moral demands: did it contribute 
to the preservation and improvement of human life? Did it advance the cause 
of humanity? Today, one of the most important ecological problems facing 
mankind was global warming. Scientists should be focusing their research on 
seeking feasible solutions to that serious problem. 


24. The commitment and effort of the Agency and its Member States in the 
technological and scientific field must always be matched by a sensitivity and 
dedication to the cause of man, who was formed in the image of God and was 
worthy of total dignity and respect. Man, however, lived in a society, and it 
should be the concern of all to provide for the well-being of society. A 
successful technological project, whether launched by the Agency or by a 
government, should be seen as a positive contribution that was of benefit not 
only to a particular nation, but to all the people of the world. Its worth 
could be measured by its impact on the cultural, social, economic and human 
values of peoples. 
25. As his Holiness Pope John Paul II had stated in his address to the 
international organizations in Vienna, the promotion of the common good 
demanded respect for the cultures of nations and peoples coupled to a sense of 
the solidarity of all peoples and nations under the guidance of a common 
Father. The advancement of one nation could never be realized at the expense 
of another. The advancement of all through the equitable exploitation of the 
expertise available was the best guarantee of the common good that ensured 
that all peoples had what they needed and deserved. 
26. Historical events in Europe and in the world since 1989 provided a 
great opportunity for international bodies such as the Agency to work together 
for the welfare of humanity. Genuine partnership and co-operation could lead 
to solutions to complicated global problems, and the Holy See would encourage 
any initiatives in that direction. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 10 


27. Mr. UTCHANAH (Mauritius) said that the increasing number of 
signatories to the NPT, while welcome, raised the question of how safeguards 
agreements could be implemented effectively. In a world of rapidly evolving 
technology, it was essential for the Agency to have the capacity to adapt to 
the changing requirements of its safeguards duties. He therefore welcomed the 
proposals put forward by the Agency for improving the information basis for 
its safeguards activities and for carrying out special inspections under 
safeguards agreements. 
28. In the light of recent geo-political changes, there was a need to take 
a close look at Article VI of the Statute with a view to bringing it more into 
line with the changing world. That task would not be an easy one, but he was 
confident that an objective attitude on the part of States would lead to good 
results. 
29. With regard to measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
matters relating to nuclear safety and radiation protection, his delegation 
considered the foremost requirement to be the establishment of appropriate 
standards. He was therefore pleased to note that Basic Safety Standards for 
Radiation Protection were due to be published the following year. In 
Mauritius, the legislation on radiation protection had been passed in 1991 
and, once they became available, the Basic Safety Standards would be 
incorporated into national regulations. For developing countries, however, 
safety standards on their own had little value unless the required trained 
personnel were available. Progress in the field of safety could only be 
achieved if there were a sustained, worldwide effort to meet the education and 
training needs of developing countries. A long-term training programme 
organized by Member States and the Agency would go a long way towards 
satisfying those needs. 
30. Nuclear damage knew no political frontiers, and an operational 
framework for liability for such damage was therefore urgently needed. He was 
pleased to note the action taken by the Agency in that regard, and the entry 
into force of the Joint Protocol Relating to the Application of the Vienna and 
Paris Conventions. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 11 


31. Technical co-operation with the Agency had been the main vehicle 
through which developing countries had benefited from new developments in 
nuclear science and technology. It was thus a matter of concern that the 
level of funding for the technical co-operation programme - and especially the 
development of human resources - had not kept pace with the requirements of 
developing countries. A joint effort by the Agency and advanced countries 
could help to resolve the growing problem of the lack of trained manpower in 
developing nations. 
32. Regional co-operation agreements were a highly cost-effective mechanism 
for providing training. He greatly appreciated the Agency's contribution to 
Africa's regional co-operation programme, which had been set up recently and 
which included many projects concerned with the development of technical and 
human resources. 
33. Finally, at a time when some countries were facing severe financial 
difficulties and others were engaged in major structural adjustments, the 
Agency was to be commended for having managed to keep its Regular Budget 
for 1993 to a minimum level of growth. 
34. Mr. LOUHANAPESSY (Indonesia), after welcoming Croatia, Slovenia, 
and Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency, said that the world had arrived 
at a juncture in its history unmatched since the end of the Second World War. 
The global political situation was changing, and there was a transition 
towards new patterns in international relations portending greater 
opportunities as well as greater challenges in mankind's constant search for a 
better and more peaceful world. In facing those challenges, the principle of 
multilateralism had to be upheld, for the building of world peace was a task 
which had to be undertaken by all nations and could not be left to the major 
powers alone. For its part, the Agency should make the adjustments needed to 
meet the challenges of a changing world, notably through the formulation of a 
medium-term plan. 
35. Despite financial difficulties, the Agency had demonstrated its 
capacity to carry out its functions in an efficient and effective manner. 
Substantial progress had been made during 1991, particularly in the field of 
safeguards. As a party to the NPT, Indonesia attached great importance to the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 12 


further strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system. The programme of 
technical assistance to developing countries had also been intensified 
in 1991. He expressed his gratitude to the Agency for the continuous support 
which it had extended to the Government of Indonesia. His Government hoped 
that in the future Agency assistance to developing countries would keep pace 
with the expected increase in safeguards activities. 


36. With regard to nuclear safety, his Government considered that the 
preparatory work on the establishment of a nuclear safety convention should 
continue and would make every effort to contribute to those efforts. 
37. Nuclear technology had become an important element in Indonesia's fiveyear 
development plan, the establishment of a modern multipurpose research 
reactor, nuclear laboratories and other facilities at Serpong, Jakarta, having 
already contributed substantially to national development. Although the main 
purpose of those installations was to support Indonesia's nuclear power 
programme, his Government was willing to share them with other Member States 
as part of its efforts to foster co-operation between developing countries. 
When setting up those laboratories and facilities, very careful attention had 
been paid to environmental protection measures, in accordance with current 
legislation, so as to ensure that there would be no negative impact on the 
environment. 
38. As an agricultural country with a large population, Indonesia had a 
strong interest in maintaining a steady increase in food production. His 
delegation therefore appreciated the Agency's efforts in the area of food 
preservation and was very much looking forward to the preparation of a 
detailed project proposal for Agency assistance in the practical utilization 
of food irradiation in developing countries. 
39. Mr. GUTIERREZ LEYTON (Chile) said that it was a matter of great 
regret that the deterioration of the Agency's financial situation in the past 
year had necessitated the postponement of a number of important activities. 
His delegation believed that it was essential to develop a balanced strategy 
to optimize the use of the Agency's restricted financial resources for all its 
statutory activities. The agreement reached in the Board of Governors in 
relation to the 1993-94 programme and budget clearly showed that all Member 
States shared that view. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 13 


40. His delegation welcomed the Board's decision in 1991 to continue the 
system of biennial programming for technical co-operation activities. The 
results of the first biennial period had been good, especially in respect of 
the programme implementation rate. 
41. His delegation was pleased to note the completion of the International 
Chernobyl Project, which was a valuable contribution to the study of the 
effects of radiation on human beings, and also the Agency's continuing efforts 
to promote safety at nuclear facilities and in the management of radioactive 
waste. The latter efforts were essential to the safe development of nuclear 
energy in all spheres and to widespread public acceptance of the nuclear 
option. 
42. However, his country was concerned that the absence of international 
standards regarding the timely and universal notification of accidents during 
the transport of radioactive waste and materials could hamper the timely 
communication to States of information on the impact of such incidents. He 
would therefore like to see a study made of arrangements which would respond 
to the growing concern of countries over that matter and which would respect 
both the right of free passage and State sovereignty over national territory, 
seas and air space. 
43. His delegation had been pleased to note the technical competence and 
efficiency with which the Agency had carried out the mission entrusted to it 
under Security Council resolution 687. The events which had given rise to 
that resolution had triggered a debate which had led to proposals for 
strengthening the safeguards system. In pursuing those proposals, however, 
the Agency must seek solutions which did not conflict with its statutory 
powers. There was a danger in interpreting the Statute too broadly and, from 
the legal point of view, it would be preferable to aim for a comprehensive 
revision of the Statute in order to provide the Agency with greater powers in 
relation to safeguards. 
44. He wished to re-emphasize his country's commitment to the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. It believed that the safeguards regime 
should be viewed as a system of confidence-building measures and that it 
should embrace both horizontal and vertical non-proliferation. While that 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 14 


might be one of the main themes of the NPT Review Conference in 1995, the 
Agency should begin now to explore alternative safeguards approaches which 
could lead to a more effective and efficient non-proliferation system. The 
report of the expert group on safeguards and the Director General's opening 
statement had both provided many useful ideas and suggestions concerning 
possible ways to proceed in that important area. 


45. His Government, together with those of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, 
had recently sponsored certain amendments to the Tlatelolco Treaty which 
foresaw - inter alia - an important role for the Agency in the performance of 
special inspections. He hoped that, following ratification of the amendments, 
it would be possible to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America. 
That would demonstrate the region's commitment to and participation in the 
global disarmament process. In that context, his country welcomed the 
conclusion of a safeguards agreement with South Africa and hoped to see the 
speedy and full implementation of the Joint Declaration between the Republic 
of Korea and the DPRK, together with the implementation of the latter*s 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
46. In the past year, Chile's nuclear activities had focused mainly on the 
areas of health, mining, agriculture, industry and the proper exploitation of 
the country's natural resources. Chile was seeking to integrate its nuclear 
activities fully with its scientific, technological and productive sectors and 
in so doing to optimize the use of its resources. That approach was well 
illustrated by its new research projects involving lithium. Chile possessed 
extensive reserves of that element, was endeavouring to increase exports and 
develop new uses for it, and had initiated joint projects with other countries 
involving ceramic materials containing lithium. Furthermore, his Government 
considered that only those projects which brought real economic benefits to 
the population should be approved. Projects too often used up large amounts 
of money for political prestige, to the detriment of other more urgent 
requirements. Accordingly, Chile was endeavouring to obtain the best possible 
return from its facilities, for example by increasing the range of uses of its 
research reactors. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 15 


47. Other activities to which Chile attached great importance were the 
application of nuclear techniques in the study of environmental pollution and 
the local production of materials for the diagnosis of diseases in newborns. 
48. In the international context, his country's desire to strengthen 
regional co-operation was reflected in its co-operative agreement with 
Argentina, a bilateral agreement with Uruguay and its active involvement in 
the ARCAL programme. All countries of Latin America were seeking new ways of 
co-operating with one another, both under the ARCAL programme and outside it, 
with the aim of raising the level of research, and a number of centres of 
excellence had been set up in specific fields. 
49. It was clear that, in order to be successful, any nuclear programme 
needed the acceptance of the public. It was therefore vitally important to 
ensure that groups which were opposed to nuclear activities were provided with 
the technical background information which they lacked. Chile also assigned 
high priority to programmes for disseminating information designed to 
counteract public distrust regarding the use of nuclear energy. In that 
connection he wished to thank the Agency for its assistance in organizing an 
international seminar on educating the public about nuclear energy which was 
to be held in Chile in March 1993. The seminar was intended for specialists 
from the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, who would learn of the 
experience Chile had gained through its national programme in that sphere. 
50. The Agency's technical co-operation programme had greatly benefited his 
country, as an evaluation carried out by the Agency in October 1991 had 
revealed. The evaluation had covered 62 projects either under way or 
completed during the period 1981-91. A total of 262 professionals had taken 
part in training courses and 40 research contracts had been implemented, the 
total value of which was US $325 000. The Agency's evaluation had confirmed 
that those activities had made a significant contribution to Chile's economic 
and social development. That had been possible because the projects had been 
geared to national development priorities and because the executing bodies had 
been selected for their capacity to carry out research and to transfer the 
knowledge acquired. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 16 


51. Mr. CONNOLLY (Ireland), having associated himself fully with the 
statement made by the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the 
European Community, welcomed the new Members of the Agency. 
52. In the nuclear field, effective non-proliferation measures and improved 
safety continued to be the two essential tasks before the international 
community. The Agency's responsibilities in those areas were growing 
steadily, but its resources continued to be constrained by budgetary limits 
and a shortfall in contributions. In the circumstances, priority must be 
given to those two important challenges. 
53. Turning first to the task of strengthening safeguards, he recalled that 
a significant step forward had been taken at the 1991 session of the General 
Conference. On that occasion, the European Community countries had proposed a 
number of concrete measures. The Board of Governors had since tackled the 
question of the strengthening of safeguards, taking up a number of the 
Community's proposals. He was looking forward to further progress in that 
area and to the creation of a more effective and transparent confidencebuilding 
regime. 
54. The case for improving the safeguards system to prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons had never been clearer, with continuing revelations 
over the past year about Iraq's clandestine programme to develop nuclear 
weapons. He commended the Secretariat for its excellent work in implementing 
Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715. Ireland deplored Iraq's 
failure to co-operate fully with the Agency in that matter. 
55. That situation again demonstrated the Agency's crucial role in the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime, a role which would become increasingly clear 
as the 1995 NPT Review Conference approached. His Government welcomed the 
growing international support for the NPT and, in particular, the recent 
accession of France and China; those were encouraging moves towards making the 
Treaty universal. It was, however, a cause for concern that many important 
countries still remained outside it, and Ireland again appealed to those 
States which had not yet done so to accede to the Treaty. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 17 


56. His delegation attached considerable importance to the full and speedy 
implementation of both the safeguards agreement ratified by the DPRK and the 
bilateral agreement between that country and the Republic of Korea on the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. That was vital not only for the 
fulfilment of the DPRK's obligations under the NPT, but also for the 
reconciliation of the two countries. 
57. The other essential challenge facing the Agency was improved nuclear 
safety. The Agency had a vital function as the universal forum for the 
promotion of internationally acceptable safety levels in the nuclear 
industry. In the past year, a group of experts had begun work on a draft 
convention on nuclear safety. His Government welcomed that development and 
hoped that an effective convention would emerge containing concrete 
obligations and embracing all aspects of the nuclear power and fuel cycle, 
including fuel reprocessing and waste disposal. But the momentum generated 
in 1991 must be maintained if public expectations were to be met. Ireland 
urged the group of experts not to adopt a minimalist approach to the scope and 
content of a future convention: a meaningful convention was far more 
important than early results. It was also to be hoped that the group of 
experts would be responsive to the wider political context and produce a draft 
convention that reflected the concerns expressed at the International 
Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power held in 1991 and in the debate at 
the General Conference the same year. 
58. The substantial risks associated with certain nuclear power plants 
built to earlier standards had been known for some time. He noted with great 
concern the Agency's findings on the safety of such plants, particularly WWERs 
and RBMKs. The Agency should continue to encourage the relevant Member States 
to have expert safety evaluations undertaken in those plants and to make the 
necessary improvements as a matter of urgency. The offers of technical and 
financial assistance made by various Member States should be taken up without 
delay. 
59. His delegation endorsed the revision and expansion of the Basic Safety 
Standards for Radiation Protection to reflect the recommendations of the ICRP 
and hoped that work could be completed in the coming months and new standards 
published in 1993. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 18 


60. Ireland was deeply concerned about the increased reprocessing of 
nuclear material. Such an expansion was no longer justified, as earlier 
expectations regarding fast reactors and the supply of uranium fuel had failed 
to materialize. His Government was troubled about a number of aspects of 
reprocessing: the concentration at a few sites of large quantities of 
hazardous nuclear material; the risks of accidents and environmental pollution 
associated with reprocessing, the discharge of waste, increased transport and 
international trade in nuclear materials; and, above all, the hazards from 
both a safety and safeguards point of view that the growing stockpile and 
trade in plutonium and other highly active materials entailed. In that 
connection, his delegation noted with great interest the remarks made by the 
Director General concerning plutonium stocks in his opening address. The 
entire question of reprocessing, together with the related issues of 
transport, discharges, storage and supervision of plutonium, must be more 
widely debated and given increased attention in the Agency's future programme. 
61. Finally, the Agency must continue to take a strong lead in the area of 
liability for nuclear damage. Ireland had participated in recent years in the 
work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage and welcomed 
the progress made to date. Some items remained to be agreed upon by the 
Committee, such as procedures for the settlement of claims, the application of 
a liability convention to military installations and the relationship between 
civil and State liability. While the entry into force earlier in 1992 of the 
Joint Protocol Relating to the Application of the Vienna Convention and the 
Paris Convention would strengthen the existing nuclear liability regime, 
further progress in the work of the Standing Committee was essential. Every 
effort should be made to achieve as broad a consensus as possible. 
62. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) extended a warm welcome to Croatia, Slovenia 
and Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency. A number of important developments 
had taken place since the previous session of the General Conference. 
Some independent States with nuclear capability had emerged following the 
dissolution of the Soviet Union, initially causing considerable uncertainty 
and concern over the control of tens of thousands of nuclear weapons. It was 
heartening that appropriate controls for those nuclear weapons had been worked 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 19 


out by the Commonwealth of Independent States. The agreements between the 
United States and Russia to reduce their nuclear arsenals substantially and to 
withdraw tactical nuclear weapons were also welcome. The international 
community looked forward to a further acceleration of that process so that the 
goal of the total elimination of nuclear weapons could be reached in the near 
future. 


63. Pakistan remained committed to non-proliferaton and was convinced that 
regional arrangements offered a constructive and confidence-building approach 
to global non-proliferation. Pakistan had been advocating the creation of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia since 1972. In June 1991, the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan had proposed a conference with the participation of the 
United States, Russia, China, India and Pakistan to discuss an arrangement 
that would ensure nuclear non-proliferation in the region. So far, all but 
one of the proposed participants had agreed to attend. Pakistan would 
continue its efforts in that direction. 
64. At the same time, Pakistan remained prepared to enter into bilateral 
negotiations with India on the non-proliferation issue. It was well known 
that Pakistan had made a series of bilateral proposals, including the 
simultaneous accession by Pakistan and India to the NPT or the acceptance by 
both of full-scope Agency safeguards. He hoped that those efforts would 
result in an equitable, non-discriminatory non-proliferation regime in the 
region. 
65. As the Conference would recall, India and Pakistan had agreed, as a 
confidence-building measure, not to attack each other's nuclear facilities. 
He was pleased to report that that accord was being implemented through the 
exchange of lists of those facilities. 
66. He recalled that, in the Board of Governors, his country had supported 
proposals put forward for the strengthening of safeguards. It was vital, 
however, that changes in the safeguards regime should not be politically 
motivated or inconsistent with existing safeguards agreements. The Agency, as 
a United Nations organization, should fully respect the sovereignty of all 
nations. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 20 


67. His country had also supported the Secretariat's proposals for 
improvements in the implementation of safeguards and hoped that those 
improvements would, as far as possible, be effected through greater efficiency 
and not through the diversion of resources from the equally vital objective of 
promoting the peaceful applications of nuclear technology. Pakistan was 
strongly in favour of a balance between the Agency's regulatory and promotional 
activities, which should be regarded as complementary. 
68. Access to nuclear technology had often been denied to certain countries 
in the name of non-proliferation. Such measures were counterproductive: the 
cause of non-proliferation was better served by co-operation than by the 
denial of technology for peaceful programmes. 
69. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development held in 
Rio de Janeiro in June 1992 had highlighted international concerns about 
environmental matters and adverse climatic changes. There was a growing 
awareness that the greater use of nuclear power could be vital in controlling 
the greenhouse effect. That and other positive developments had led to a 
resurgence of interest in many countries in nuclear power, and it was 
imperative that the benefits of that technology be made accessible to energystarved 
countries of the Third World. The Agency had in the past sought a 
solution to the problem of financing nuclear power in capital-weak developing 
countries, and the time was now ripe to take a fresh look at that problem. It 
would also be helpful if the Agency could take concrete steps to promote the 
development of standardized medium-capacity nuclear power plants and to remove 
impediments to the transfer of nuclear technology to countries with nuclear 
power programmes that were subject to safeguards. 
70. Nuclear material which was becoming available from the dismantling of 
nuclear arsenals could be turned into fuel for civil commercial nuclear power 
reactors under safeguards. The Agency should consider establishing a nuclear 
fuel bank, as provided for under Article IX of the Statute, to enable such 
materials to be used in the peaceful nuclear activities of Member States. His 
delegation would like a feasibility study to be made of that proposal. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 21 


71. He welcomed the programmes being undertaken by the Agency, in 
co-operation with Western countries, to upgrade the safety of nuclear power 
plants in East European countries. A similar initiative should be taken in 
respect of ageing nuclear power plants in developing countries. 
72. With regard to the subject of an international nuclear safety 
convention, he wished to stress that, while there was a need for minimum 
binding international safety standards, nuclear safety was, and should remain, 
the responsibility of national regulatory authorities. The Agency's OSART, 
ASSET, WAMAP and other services could be of tremendous help to national 
regulators, and he encouraged Member States to make fuller use of them. 
73. Turning to the Agency's financial difficulties, he welcomed the news 
that some countries had taken steps to pay off their arrears. The Agency's 
co-ordinated research programme had suffered badly during the financial crisis 
and he hoped that resources would be found for that programme. 
74. Pakistan's nuclear programme had recently taken some major strides. In 
December 1991, Pakistan had signed an agreement with China for the supply of 
a 300 MW(e) reactor which would operate under Agency safeguards. The supply 
of that plant represented a milestone in south-south co-operation in the 
nuclear sphere. His country expected the Agency to take major initiatives to 
encourage north-south and south-south co-operation in the nuclear power and 
nuclear desalination programmes. 
75. With technical assistance from the Agency, his country had upgraded a 
5 MW research reactor which had been in operation since 1965. The power of 
the reactor had been increased to 10 MW and its fuel had been converted from 
high-enriched to low-enriched uranium. Most of the refurbishing effort had 
been undertaken locally, while the fuel had been fabricated in China. The 
upgraded reactor remained under Agency safeguards. 
76. Pakistan's 137 MW(e) Karachi Nuclear Power Plant (KANUPP) was the 
second oldest CANDU reactor in operation in the world, having completed over 
two decades of safe operation. As a result of an Agency ASSET mission, the 
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission had decided to undertake a comprehensive 
long-term diagnostic programme to evaluate any inherent safety deficiencies of 
the plant. The Agency had approved a technical assistance project for the 
period 1991-94 to ensure the continued safe operation of the plant. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 22 


77. Pakistan had also continued to use radioisotopes and radiation sources 
in agriculture, medicine and industry. In agriculture, 18 varieties of field 
crops had been developed using induced mutations. In 1992, the National 
Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering had started functioning at 
a new complex in Faisalabad. Nine medical centres in Pakistan were using 
nuclear techniques in the diagnosis and therapy of malignant diseases and 
in 1992 had treated over 170 000 patients. Pakistan appreciated the role 
played by the RCA as a catalyst for south-south co-operation, especially in 
the areas of the industrial applications of radiation technology and nuclear 
medicine. 
78. The Agency's achievements over the past 35 years were primarily due to 
the fact that, in fulfilling its mandate under the Statute, the Agency had 
been able to act independently. Pakistan was confident that the Agency would 
continue to perform its functions with the same independence in the future. 
79. Mr. FERNANDEZ (Guatemala) welcomed the Agency's new Member States 
and expressed his satisfaction at the accession by China and France to the NPT. 
80. Applications of nuclear energy were making a valuable contribution to 
Guatemala's development, through projects using nuclear techniques to promote 
improvements in the areas of health, technology and agriculture. At the same 
time, care was being taken to ensure adequate radiation protection of the 
population, the environment and workers who were occupationally exposed. The 
fact that the Secondary Standard Dosimetry Laboratory at the Guatemalan 
General Directorate for Nuclear Energy (DGEN) had become fully operational was 
an important development in that respect. 
81. Guatemala was grateful to the Agency and to all those countries, 
particularly the United States of America and the United Kingdom, for the 
assistance which they had provided to it. His country fully supported and 
participated actively in the ARCAL programme, and he was pleased to report 
that the DGEN was being used for national and regional courses. 
82. With regard to nuclear applications in the health sector, the purchase 
of a gamma camera with extrabudgetary resources made available by the United 
States would further improve the diagnostic imaging services provided to the 
population. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.34 7 
page 23 


83. In the agricultural sector, nuclear techniques were being used in 
research on mutation breeding. Improved varieties of bean, which would 
provide the Guatemalan population with a staple foodstuff and thereby help to 
combat malnutrition, and early varieties of rice with physical resistance to 
pathogens were being bred for subsequent distribution to farmers. 
84. In the area of nuclear analytical techniques, there had been many 
improvements in the infrastructure, and a programme for monitoring soil to 
determine natural background radioactivity had been established. Guatemala 
hoped, with the Agency's assistance, to set up a more comprehensive laboratory 
in the near future to provide support to private firms in elemental analysis 
and in certifying agricultural exports as free from radioactive contamination. 
85. As to radiation protection, the highest priority was being given to 
training, the improvement of installations and the preparation of 
regulations. Licensing regulations governing radioisotopes and ionizing 
radiation had been signed by the Guatemalan President and would enter into 
force in the near future. 
86. In 1992, his Government had started a radioactive waste management 
project with the aim of concentrating all spent radioactive sources and other 
radioactive waste in three specially designed facilities constructed in 
accordance with the recommendations made by various Agency expert missions, 
including WAMAP. The DGEN was also making every effort to survey all 
radioactive material used in Guatemala and to establish a national inventory 
of radiation sources and all equipment involving the use of ionizing radiation 
for medical, dental and industrial purposes. 
87. In conclusion, he wished to pledge his Government's assessed share of 
the TACF target for 1993, a pledge which his country would make every effort 
to fulfil. 
88. Mr. NGUYEN DONG HAI (Viet Nam) said he wished first to extend a 
warm welcome to the new Members of the Agency. Over the years, Viet Nam had 
received considerable assistance from the Agency through technical 
co-operation projects and research contracts. That assistance had had a 
marked impact on the development of nuclear science and technology in his 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 24 


country and had stimulated progress in the application of nuclear techniques 
in such sectors as agriculture, industry, biology and medicine. As part of 
its action plan for 1992-93, Viet Nam was planning to implement various 
projects that would build on the progress achieved during the preceding 
five-year plan. It was also planning to carry out a comprehensive upgrading 
of the Da Lat reactor, which had been operating safely for 30 years. The 
100 kci irradiation facility in Hanoi would also be brought into operation 
after one year's test operation. Agency assistance would be vital to the 
success of those plans. Technology transfer could not be achieved effectively 
without international co-operation and it was essential that technology 
transfer be implemented on a non-discriminatory basis, particularly since it 
was the most effective way of promoting the advancement of developing 
countries. 


89. In a desire to create a co-operative climate and political stability in 
the region, Viet Nam had explicitly demonstrated its commitment, within the 
framework of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, to the settlement of 
all conflicts and disagreements by peaceful negotiations and the creation of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South-East Asia. 
90. In response to the appeal issued by the recent United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development, he joined others in urging 
developed countries to curb environmental pollution, which threatened to bring 
the earth to the verge of disaster. Nuclear power had emerged as a promising 
alternative energy source in the context of sustainable development. For that 
alternative to be viable, however, the Agency and its Member States had to 
solve the problems of nuclear safety, public acceptance, and waste disposal. 
Viet Nam had made great efforts to raise public awareness of the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy by publicizing State-run projects and Agency 
technical co-operation projects. He hoped the Agency would continue to assist 
Viet Nam in absorbing advanced technology, since that was an effective way of 
convincing the public of the advantages of nuclear energy. 
91. Viet Nam had a firm commitment to Agency safeguards. With respect to 
the strengthening of the safeguards system, he noted that safeguards and 
the NPT should be applied on a global basis and without discrimination, that 
vertical proliferation should be halted and nuclear tests banned, and that the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 25 


process of political democratization should be promoted so as to avoid a 


situation where countries might use their military or economic power to take 
advantage of an unstable world situation and force other countries to 
relinquish their own ideologies or political views. Viet Nam shared the 


legitimate concern of many Member States with respect to the problems of 
national sovereignty raised by the safeguards and safety issues, and urged the 
Agency to pay careful attention to those problems. 


92. Mr. AALTO (Finland) said he wished to welcome Croatia, Slovenia 
and Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency. 
93. The past twelve months had been marked by intensive activity in the 
areas of nuclear safety and safeguards, as well as unprecedented financial 
problems. The Agency had had to learn to live with a shortfall in assessed 
contributions which had impaired its ability to fulfil its approved activities 
and compelled the Director General to make programme cuts of 13% in the 
current year. The same might be necessary in 1993. During the 1991 session 
of the General Conference, his country had proposed that, as a basis for the 
cuts, the programme should be reviewed and those parts which were of low 
priority should gradually be phased out. That task had now become even more 
urgent. 
94. Nuclear safety was not simply a national matter but a subject of 
legitimate international concern, and the most important current endeavour in 
that field was the preparation of an international convention. Early 
agreement on the convention would be a major achievement. Member States held 
widely differing views on the content and scope of a convention, but they 
shared the same basic interests. Finland's view was that the essence of such 
a convention should be a commitment to internationally agreed safety 
principles. While primary responsibility for safety would rest with national 
organizations, jointly agreed principles would provide the necessary basis for 
national safety practices and improved quality control. The convention should 
also provide for suitable follow-up measures that would encourage regular 
contacts and transparency in the exchange of regulatory findings and 
operational data. Those elements were prerequisites for a credible and 
effective control system. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 26 


95. Thus far the work on the convention had addressed civilian activities 
only, as they offered the best chance of rapid progress. Yet the military use 
of nuclear energy also created safety concerns. The convention should include 
those issues, and, at the very least, should make a general reference to the 
importance of long-term safety aspects such as the management of wastes from 
military applications. 
96. Significant progress was needed at the meeting of the group of experts 
in October if the momentum was to be maintained. A convention could not in 
itself guarantee the safety of nuclear energy, but it would be an important 
move in the right direction. 
97. The safety of old reactors in Eastern and Central Europe was causing 
great concern. Every effort should be made to improve the safety of riskprone 
reactors until they were shut down, including the backfitting of safety 
systems, the establishment of a sound legal and regulatory framework, and 
personnel training. Finnish organizations were already engaged in bilateral 
projects with Russian organizations for enhancing the safety of two nuclear 
power plants. At the multilateral level, his country was assisting with the 
implementation and financing of the necessary technical improvements. In that 
context, he welcomed the steps taken by the Group of 24 to improve the 
co-ordination of that assistance. A firm commitment on the part of recipient 
countries and the utilities concerned was a precondition for progress. 
98. The assessments made of the status of the oldest WWER and RBMK reactors 
were good examples of the Agency's useful contribution to joint international 
efforts. The Agency could also play a role in the development of legal and 
regulatory structures for the Eastern and Central European countries. 
99. Preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons was the main task of 
the parties to the NPT. Finland's goal for the 1995 NPT Review Conference was 
the indefinite extension of that Treaty. His country welcomed the accession 
of China and France to the Treaty and urged all countries which had not yet 
acceded to the NPT to do so in order to make the Treaty universal before the 
time came - in 1995 - for it to be extended. He welcomed the new safeguards 
agreements, notably with South Africa, Argentina and Brazil, the DPRK and 
Syria. Of special concern were the countries belonging to the Commonwealth of 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 27 


Independent States. He noted with satisfaction Uzbekistan's accession to 
the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State. Statements made in various 
international fora by representatives of Belarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan 
inspired the hope that they, too, would soon sign the NPT. 


100. Some 50 countries had still not concluded safeguards agreements within 
the prescribed time limit. Safeguards agreements were not a mere formality, 
and he urged the countries in question to conclude the requisite agreements 
with the Agency without delay. 
101. Progress in arms control and disarmament, including the Lisbon protocol 
on implementing the START treaty and various far-reaching unilateral nuclear 
disarmament commitments by both the United States and the Russian Federation, 
had enhanced prospects for an indefinite extension of the NPT. He noted with 
pleasure the co-operation between the Russian Federation and the United States 
on the commercial use of Russian highly enriched uranium in electricity 
production as it became redundant during the disarmament process. 
102. In order to strengthen further the NPT regime by tightening export 
controls on sensitive material and equipment, Finland had, along with 26 other 
Agency Member States, committed itself earlier in the year to the guidelines 
for transfers of nuclear-related dual-use equipment, material and related 
technology. The principle of full-scope safeguards as a condition of supply 
had finally been established by a number of countries, including Finland. 
That should be recognized as a most important step towards strengthening the 
non-proliferation regime. 
103. The Iraqi case had brought to light some serious shortcomings in the 
present safeguards system. While the Agency had performed its duties fully in 
accordance with existing rules and practices, it had been possible for Iraq to 
engage in activities aimed at developing nuclear weapons. He noted with 
satisfaction that certain proposals for the strengthening of safeguards had 
been approved by the Board of Governors, and he looked forward to further 
measures being taken. In that connection, his country intended to follow the 
Board's recommendation on the voluntary reporting of exports, imports and 
inventories of nuclear material and equipment. For safeguards to be credible 
and effective, the Agency must be able to make full use of the mandate given 
to it in the Statute and in safeguards agreements if circumstances so required. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 28 


104. The safeguards agreements concluded recently had created new obligations 
for the Agency. Also, recent technological and political developments were 
posing new challenges for the Agency at a time of budgetary constraints. 
Consequently, the safeguards system would have to be streamlined to enable the 
Agency to cope with the additional workload. As the Agency was simultaneously 
facing increasing demands and financial constraints, it must strive for 
improved quality and efficiency in all areas of its work and clear priorities 
should be set. Finland was prepared to contribute to these endeavours. 
105. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said he wished to take the opportunity to 
congratulate Slovenia, Croatia and Uzbekistan on joining the Agency. 
106. In the coming years, the problem of the world's increasing energy needs 
would pose a major challenge for the international community. Annual global 
electricity consumption was expected to double between 1990 and 2010, and much 
of that growth would occur in developing countries, where it was essential to 
ensure a reasonable standard of living. How could all that electricity be 
produced with minimum environmental impact? Reliance on fossil fuels could 
only exacerbate the already serious problem of pollution, with dire consequences 
for the health of the world's population. 
107. Nuclear power was the only viable non-polluting method of electricity 
production. Construction of new nuclear power plants at the rate of 60 GW(e) 
a year could bring about a 38% reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by 2010 
in comparison with an all-coal system. Yet there was such prejudice and 
distrust regarding the safety of nuclear power that that option was not being 
considered seriously by planners. The Agency should do more to convince the 
public and policy-makers of the environmental merits of nuclear-produced 
electricity. The success of such a campaign would depend upon a dynamic 
approach being taken to reactor safety and waste disposal. It was not enough 
to quote repeatedly the statistics on so many reactor-years of operation 
without an accident, or to express the belief that a Chernobyl-type accident 
could not happen again. The main requirement was for safer nuclear power 
plant designs - high-temperature reactors and high-temperature gas-cooled 
reactors, for example - that incorporated the inherently safe features which 
had recently been proposed. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 29 


108. The issue of power reactor fuel cycles as a possible factor in nuclear 
weapons proliferation must also be tackled. Fuel cycle schemes designed to 
"denature" plutonium produced in natural or low-enriched uranium fuel had been 
proposed and should be thoroughly evaluated. Also, the public had to be 
convinced that safe, long-term solutions to the radioactive waste problem were 
really available. 
109. Nuclear energy could also help solve the grave problem of water 
shortages in arid areas of the world. An increasing number of countries, 
particularly in the Middle East and Africa, were suffering from a shortage of 
potable water. Seawater desalination seemed the most promising solution to 
that problem for many countries. The Agency had been active in that area 
until 1977, at which time most desalination technologies were either not 
sufficiently mature or were expensive. Since then, however, considerable 
progress had been made, and large quantities of good quality desalinated water 
could now be produced at lower cost using reliable techniques such as reverse 
osmosis or evaporative desalination. In the last few years the Agency had 
renewed its activities, concentrating on feasibility studies of desalination 
plants run by nuclear power units. An Agency group of experts had prepared a 
document on the latest desalination technologies and their coupling to nuclear 
reactors. Further investigations of the potential and economics of 
constructing nuclear desalination units were in progress. 
110. Israel had concentrated on the indigenous development of the 
evaporative desalination method and had acquired ten years of experience with 
a very large and modern desalination unit coupled to a power station, which 
had been designed, built and operated as a full-scale simulation of a nuclear 
desalination system. 
111. His delegation recommended that the Agency's future work on 
desalination proceed along the following lines: first, the most promising 
combinations of types of nuclear power unit and desalination process should be 
identified for a variety of plant sizes and capacities; second, all significant 
parameters associated with those combinations should be optimized; and 
third, efforts should be made to encourage steam turbine manufacturers to 
provide large-size, back-pressure steam turbines suitable for operation with 
dual-purpose nuclear power and desalination plants. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 30 


112. His country felt that there was an urgent need to strengthen the 
international liability regime for nuclear damage and had played an active 
part in the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage. It would 
continue to contribute to the Standing Committee's efforts to formulate a 
draft text of an amended Vienna Convention. 
113. Israel had been following with interest work on the elaboration of a 
convention on nuclear safety that would require the parties to share their 
experience and knowledge and to consult each other on safety problems. 
However, it did not welcome the proposals made with a view to imposing peer 
reviews on States that would encompass all areas of nuclear activity and would 
pass judgement on national practices and authorities. Such a measure would be 
counterproductive, as would any attempt to include in the convention areas and 
activities for which no widely accepted standards existed and in which 
national practices varied significantly. A lack of standardization did not in 
itself imply a lack of safety. Arguments about whose practices were better 
would serve no purpose and could only increase disquiet among those whose 
distrust of nuclear technology was already strong. 
114. A more practical approach would be to adopt a convention obliging 
States to observe general safety principles such as those recommended by INSAG 
and to create a network facilitating consultations and the sharing of 
experience. Moreover, since nuclear power plants were the primary issue of 
public concern and since there was a high degree of agreement on their basic 
safety requirements, it would be wise to restrict the convention at present to 
such plants. Many Member States had expressed similar views on the matter. 
Despite the present lack of consensus on the scope and content of the 
convention, he hoped that it would soon be concluded and that it would provide 
a useful tool for enhancing co-operation on nuclear safety throughout the 
world. 
115. In conclusion, he wished to share his pleasure at the assistance 
rendered by the staff of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission to the archeological 
community. Non-destructive testing techniques had been used routinely 
in the identification and cleanup of archeological objects and to investigate 
ancient metallurgical techniques. For example, neutron and gamma radiography 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.347 
page 31 


had been applied to numerous ritual artefacts dating from 6000 to 4000 BC. 
Gamma radiography had also been used to study ancient shipbuilding techniques 


and microfocus X-ray techniques had been employed to study previously unknown 
multilayer forging techniques used in the manufacture of a ceremonial sword 
from the biblical kingdom of Judea about 2600 years previously. Coming from a 


land in which the ancient and the modern were so intimately intertwined, he 


found the application of nuclear-based technologies to the study of cultural 
history particularly gratifying. 


116. Mr. KIENER (Switzerland), after welcoming the Agency's new Member 
States, expressed his satisfaction with the accession of China, France and 
South Africa to the NPT and appealed to all Member States which had not yet 
done so to accede to the Treaty in the interests of its universality. He was 
also pleased to note the safeguards agreements concluded by the Agency with 
the DPRK, Argentina and Brazil. 
117. The credibility of the NPT had been enhanced by the progress made by 
the United States and the Russian Federation in dismantling their nuclear 
arsenals and by the temporary discontinuation of certain nuclear tests. 
Non-proliferation was not without its problems, however, as was illustrated by 
the difficulties presented by the dismantling of thousands of nuclear warheads 
in the former Soviet Union and the monitoring of the storage and re- use of the 
fissile materials recovered. Several cases of trafficking in radioactive 
material with Eastern Europe had been publicized in the media in recent months. 
118. In Iraq, despite the work of the United Nations Special Commission, it 
could not be claimed that the situation was now entirely free of danger. 
Without an integrated policy embracing the entire region, it was unlikely that 
political problems could be solved merely by intensifying vigilance. 
119. With regard to the control of nuclear exports, major progress had been 
made early in the year. The Nuclear Suppliers Group had adopted a new regime 
for the control of dual-purpose nuclear equipment and material and had 
introduced a policy of requiring comprehensive safeguards as a condition for 
future nuclear supplies. In that connection, he encouraged all countries 
engaged in nuclear exports to abide by the previous and the new guidelines on 
nuclear transfers recently published by the Agency. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.34 7 
page 32 


120. It was pleasing to note the steps taken in the past year to improve the 
effectiveness of the safeguards system, including the proposed modifications 
to the procedures for the declaration of and provision of design information 
on facilities. In contrast, the extension of verification procedures relating 
to nuclear material and exchanges of equipment seemed to enlarge the 
safeguards system without necessarily making it more effective. Those 
measures largely concerned NPT States and, on the whole, would serve merely to 
confirm known transactions or those which complied with the regulations in 
force rather than uncovering fraudulent transfers. 
121. The Agency should work with countries possessing the necessary 
experience to explore ways of making safeguards more effective at no extra 
cost or at a lower cost. Asking SAGSI to offer suggestions was a step in the 
right direction, but interested countries should be given the opportunity to 
become more closely involved in its work. He therefore supported Japan's 
proposal to permit the participation of a number of additional governmental 
experts in SAGSI. 
122. There was a need to define priorities for the implementation of 
safeguards by making a qualitative inventory of the characteristics of nuclear 
materials and technologies. Also, an analysis should be made of routine 
safeguards activities in order to classify them according to their potential 
effectiveness in detecting a diversion of nuclear materials. On the basis of 
the priorities thus established, it should be possible to devise a 
satisfactory system of routine safeguards combined with judiciously selected 
special inspections to create a flexible, reliable and efficient system. 
Moreover, the cost of safeguards activities should be commensurate with the 
expected non-proliferation benefits. That condition would not be fulfilled if 
comprehensive safeguards were applied in nuclear-weapon States. 
123. In the past year, both the nuclear industry and governments had become 
more aware of the need for an international nuclear safety convention. While 
the work done so far on such a convention was to be commended, it was vital to 
specify which of the standards proposed called for absolute compliance. It 
was gratifying to note that good progress was being made with the new Basic 
Safety Standards for Radiation Protection, which were to be published the 
following year. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.347 
page 33 


124. Switzerland supported the Agency in its role as the co-ordinator of 
measures to improve nuclear safety standards worldwide. It had provided 
financial and technical assistance for the Agency's programme on the safety of 
WWER-440/230 reactors and had also decided to contribute 200 000 Swiss francs 
to the Agency's study of the safety of RBMK reactors. 
125. The operation of Swiss reactors had once again been entirely satisfactory 
from the point of view of both safety and electricity production. 
Nuclear power plants supplied 40% of the country's energy needs. Despite the 
10-year moratorium on the construction of new plants, nuclear power continued 
to be strongly opposed, with heated discussions taking place whenever 
authorization was sought for the continued operation of an existing power 
plant or the siting of waste storage or disposal facilities. The public 
continued to have an irrational attitude to nuclear power, rejecting the means 
of production while none the less wanting the product. In order to reduce 
conflict and thereby extricate the country from its present political impasse, 
discussion groups had been started with participants representing the various 
parties concerned, including operators, ecological organizations, scientists, 
government authorities and officials from the particular cantons affected by 
waste storage and disposal plans. 
126. Finally, he noted that there had been little improvement in the 
Agency's financial situation because of the late payment or non-payment of 
contributions. Although Member States were anxious to create a climate of 
material confidence in the nuclear sphere, when it came to providing the 
resources necessary for doing so they, quite illogically, suffered a failure 
of nerve. Not paying the assessed contribution in full was tantamount to 
depriving the Agency of the means of fulfilling its primary mission. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
5 May 1993 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1992, at 3.40 p.m. 


President: Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 
later: Mr. WAGNER (Czechoslovakia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


General debate and annual report 
for 1991 (continued) 1 - 135 


Statement by the delegates of the 


following States and organization: 


Philippines 1 - 11 
Egypt 12 - 24 
Ecuador 25 - 29 
Sri Lanka 30 - 41 
Nigeria 42 - 63 
Netherlands 64 - 73 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 74 - 92 
South Africa 93 - 103 
Qatar 104 - 109 
Commission of the European 


Communities 110 - 126 
Morocco 127 - 135 


[*] GC(XXXVI)/1027. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI)/INF/313/Rev.2. 


92-03744 (1162n/0073n) 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 


page 2 


Abbreviations used in this record 


AFRA African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 


and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 


Science and Technology in Latin America 
CEC Commission of the European Communities 
CIS Commenwealth of Independent States 
CNESTEN National Centre for Nuclear Energy, Sciences and Technology 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
EURATOM European Atomic Energy Community 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
INF Treaty Treaty on the Elimination of Medium- and Shorter-Range Missiles 
IRRT International Regulatory Review Team 
ITER International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 
JET Joint European Torus 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
NUSSAG Nuclear Safety Standards Advisory Group 
Pre-OSART Pre-Operational Safety Review Team 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 


Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 


(for Asia and the Pacific) 
START Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
TCDC Technical co-operation among developing countries 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
UNSCEAR United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic 


Radiation 
WAMAP Waste Management Advisory Programme 
WHO World Health Organization 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 GC(XXXVI)/1004) (continued) 


1. Mr. BELLO (Philippines), after welcoming Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan as Members of the Agency, thanked the Director General for his 
report on the Agency's activities. His delegation shared the Director 
General's concern about the organization's financial situation and joined the 
appeals for timely payment of contributions to the Regular Budget. In 1991, 
in response to the Director General's appeal, his country had paid its 1992 
contribution in advance. 
2. His country was pleased to note the successful implementation of 
technical co-operation activities. It shared the view that the biennial 
programming cycle was an improvement on the annual cycle and welcomed the 
Board's decision to continue that cycle beyond the initial four-year trial 
period. Thanks to the Agency's technical assistance, the Philippines had been 
able to set up the scientific infrastructure required for research and 
development in the field of peaceful nuclear applications. The approval of 
funding for its technical assistance requests for the 1991-92 programme had 
increased the resources - in terms of expert advice, training opportunities 
and, most importantly, equipment - which were available to the country for 
implementing its national nuclear science and technology programme. His 
country particularly appreciated the technical assistance provided for its one 
nuclear research reactor. It also thanked the United States Government for 
its assistance in the upgrading of two footnote-a/ projects and the Agency for 
the expert assistance it had provided in February 1992 for a national workshop 
on project design, management and evaluation. 
3. The importance of technical co-operation activities could not be 
overemphasized. His delegation was therefore concerned at the continuing 
decline in pledges and payments of contributions to the TACF. That 
unfortunate trend clearly showed up the vagaries of a voluntary system. His 
delegation believed that technical assistance projects should be financed on a 
more secure and reliable basis and proposed once again that appropriations for 
those activities be included in the Regular Budget. 
4. He noted with satisfaction that the RCA had been extended for 
five years and hoped that, as a result, the uncertainties surrounding the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 4 


implementation of ongoing and future projects had been removed. The agreement 
had clearly attained its objective of promoting the more effective utilization 
of the resources available in the region, particularly with regard to the 
TCDC component of the programme. To demonstrate its firm support for the RCA, 
his Government was hosting the 15th Working Meeting in March 1993. However, 
he noted with concern the delay in the decision on UNDP funding for the RCA 
project on the use of isotopes and radiation to strengthen technology and 
support environmentally sustainable development. He hoped that the remaining 
problems would be resolved so that the momentum gained so far could be 
maintained. 


5. He noted with satisfaction that the Agency was continuing to give very 
high priority to strengthening radiation protection in the region. Indeed, an 
adequate radiation protection infrastructure played a cardinal role in the 
peaceful uses of ionizing radiation in all activities, whether industrial, 
medical or research. His country's active participation in the RCA project on 
the strengthening of radiation protection infrastructure had contributed 
significantly to the improved level of radiation protection in the 
Philippines. His country also fully supported the Australian proposal for an 
RCA project on the application of isotope and radiation technology to regional 
development with special reference to industry and nuclear medicine. 
6. His delegation was pleased to note the initiatives taken by the Agency 
in promoting nuclear safety and recognized its crucial role in that area. The 
safety issue was receiving increasing attention in the Philippines in connection 
with the current governmental review of the possible reactivation of 
the country's nuclear power plant. His country had sought the Agency's advice 
on the timing of the proposed Pre-OSART mission and of an IRRT mission to 
review the plant's state of preservation. 
7. His country had actively participated in the meetings on the revision 
of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and had made 
several proposals aimed at making the Convention more effective. He reiterated 
his country's position that the Convention should include military 
nuclear facilities in its scope. In that connection, it looked forward to the 
convening of a diplomatic conference to deal with the proposed revisions. His 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 5 


delegation also intended to play an active part in the Review Conference of 
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material scheduled for 
the week following the General Conference. 


8. Through its safeguards activities, the Agency played a crucial role in 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and other nuclear devices. 
Several measures had been proposed for further strengthening the safeguards 
system, and he agreed with the Board's conclusion that those proposals warranted 
further study in view of their far-reaching implications. His delegation 
also hoped that the comprehensive safeguards agreement with the DPRK 
and the Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula 
would be properly implemented. 
9. With regard to the long-standing issue of the financing of safeguards, 
the current review should be continued in co-ordination with the study of the 
financing of technical assistance. He reaffirmed the principle that nuclear 
States should bear the main burden of the cost of the safeguards system. He 
was nevertheless encouraged by the Secretariat's efforts, in response to 
Member States' requests, to use the resources available for safeguards more 
efficiently within the constraints imposed by the zero-real-growth budget. 
Recalling that at its previous session the General Conference had adopted a 
resolution regarding the need for a better balance between the Agency's main 
activities, his delegation urged the Secretariat to continue making every 
effort to achieve that objective. Safeguards certainly had a crucial role, 
but it was important not to lose sight of the Agency's other main function, 
namely the development of nuclear power for peaceful purposes. 
10. His delegation had been very active in the initiatives to revise 
Article VI of the Agency's Statute, particularly with regard to the 
composition of the Board of Governors. It had joined other delegations on 
several occasions in appealing for provisions clearly defining the conditions 
for membership of the Board. The Philippines supported the proposals to 
review the system of division into geographical areas used in the Statute as 
the basis for representation on the Board. 
11. Finally, he noted with satisfaction the increased recruitment to highlevel 
posts of personnel from developing countries. However, that increase 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 6 


was still not sufficient. A greater effort should be made to disseminate 
information on vacancies and to encourage applicants from developing countries. 


12. Mr. ONSY (Egypt), after congratulating Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan on their admission to the Agency, said that the experience of past 
decades had highlighted the importance of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy in the promotion of development activities, both from the point of view 
of responding to growing energy needs that could not be met by traditional 
sources, and resolving problems in various key sectors such as medicine, 
industry and agriculture. The peaceful use of nuclear energy had become one 
of the rare tools available to developing countries enabling them to accelerate 
their progress. The Agency played an important role in that respect 
through its three main acitivties, namely nuclear safety, technical assistance 
and the implementation of safeguards, which contributed, on the one 
hand, to increasing confidence among Member States and, on the other, to 
ensuring a minimum level of balance between the developed North and the 
developing South in terms of technological capabilities, an essential factor 
in development in all areas. Although the Cold War had worked against efforts 
in support of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and had limited 
opportunities for the peaceful application of nuclear energy, radical changes 
in the world over the past few years had resulted in a climate of detente and 
co-operation among the major nuclear powers and the accession of several 
States to the Non-Pro1iteration Treaty. If the various nuclear States 
continued on that path, all efforts, including those of the Agency, could be 
channelled towards expanding co-operation with respect to the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. 
13. Since its adoption by the General Conference in September 1991, the 
Agency had made strenuous efforts to implement the resolution on the 
strengthening of the safeguards system. Such strengthening was needed in 
order to increase international confidence in the effectiveness of the system, 
but must be applied to all the States without discrimination and without 
delaying the transfer of modern nuclear technology to developing countries. 
Greater attention and interest should be devoted in future to the position of 
States which had not yet acceded to the NPT and the safeguards system, and 
everything possible should be done to persuade those States to change their 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 7 


position, particularly in view of the possible implications of the present 
situation for the balance between those States and the parties to the Treaty 
in terms of their obligations. 


14. Safeguards were therefore very important as a means of ensuring nonproliferation, 
particularly in regions of conflict and especially in the 
Middle East, which was first on the list. While supporting the efforts made 
to achieve a peaceful, global and just settlement of the conflicts in the 
Middle East, his country believed that, if that settlement was to be stable 
and lasting, the States of the region would have to accept that their territories 
should be free of all weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear 
weapons. Over the past ten years Egypt had made several proposals along those 
lines at international conferences and meetings. At the previous session of 
the General Conference it had also presented a draft resolution on the 
application of safeguards in the Middle East, which had received unanimous 
approval, and he hoped that the same would happen at the present session. The 
application of safeguards in that region would be a significant step towards 
establishing confidence among the States. He emphasized the importance of the 
Agency's role in that area and hoped that it would continue its efforts. He 
also invited the States of the region, and particularly those with developed 
nuclear capabilities, such as Israel, to accede to the NPT. 
15. The signing of safeguards agreements with the Agency in 1991 by the 
Governments of South Africa and the DPRK would certainly help to strengthen 
security and stability in Africa and on the Korean Peninsula, and he hoped 
that the co-operation of those two countries with the Agency would result in 
full implementation of the two agreements. He also welcomed the unceasing 
efforts to maintain the dialogue in South Africa, which he hoped would lead to 
the establishment of a democratic regime supported by the entire population. 
If those initiatives were successful, South Africa would certainly be able to 
return to its activities in all the organizations and participate once again 
in all international meetings. 
16. The technical co-operation programme was one of the Agency's main 
activities. The developing countries attached particular importance to the 
programme from the point of view of planning their development projects and 
bridging the gulf separating them from the developed countries. The General 
Conference resolutions regarding the financing of the programme from secure, 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 8 


predictable and assured resources rather than from voluntary contributions 
should be implemented as soon as possible, and the resources in question 
should be distributed among the technical assistance projects in such a way as 
to ensure their benefit to the peoples of the developing countries. Regional 
technical co-operation could provide an appropriate and effective instrument 
for that purpose as it would assist co-ordination between the different 
countries and take acount of each region's special circumstances and needs. 
The AFRA was a practical example of such regional co-operation, and his 
delegation invited the donor countries to take a greater interest in the 
projects proposed in that context. He welcomed the initiatives taken by 
France and Spain in that area. 


17. Nuclear safety was an essential part of the Agency's activities and was 
supported by world public opinion as it helped to bolster confidence in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. His delegation appreciated the efforts made 
to establish a convention to promote international co-operation in that vital 
area and looked forward with eager anticipation to the results of the working 
group of experts. In that connection, it wished to state its belief that the 
convention should include all nuclear activities in its scope. The Agency 
would have a more important role to play in the developing countries, where it 
should provide the necessary technical assistance and take charge of coordination 
and follow-up of activities in the light of the international 
standards adopted. 
18. The Egyptian nuclear programme was going through a new phase of intense 
activity based on 35 years of experience in the field of the peaceful 
applciations of nuclear energy. It was a phase of modernization, with Agency 
assistance, of the Atomic Energy Organization's nuclear facilities. New 
facilities, including a research reactor (ET-RR-2) had also been built. In 
addition, a contract had been signed in Cairo on 19 September between the 
Atomic Energy Organization and the Argentine firm INVAP for the purchase of a 
22 MW research reactor. It had been necessary to buy a new reactor because 
the first Egyptian research reactor, which had been in service for over 
30 years, had been designed around 40 years back when nuclear safety standards 
were far less strict. The new reactor would enable Egypt to improve its 
capacity for isotope and radiation source production and to carry out material 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 9 


tests as well as biological, medical and other research. The project would 
entail collaboration with the Agency and, in particular, technical support 
with regard to nuclear safety and quality control. The reactor would be 
placed under safeguards in accordance with Egypt's obligations under the NPT. 


19. A 20 MeV cyclotron would also be built in collaboration with the Agency 
and the Russian Federation and would be used for the production of short-lived 
isotopes for nuclear medicine and basic research to be applied in various 
areas. 
20. Egypt was developing its food preservation programme and was drawing up 
construction plans for an experimental unit for that purpose. It also 
intended to use radiation for the sterilzation of medical items and in 
industry and, in addition, had launced a programme based on nuclear techniques 
for the development of desert areas. 
21. Environmental problems were a major concern in Egypt, where a national 
monitoring network had been set up including a facility at El-Daba, where the 
nuclear power plant was situated, as well as radiation measurement laboratories 
in the region of the Suez Canal whose design was based on the Agency's 
laboratory at Monaco. A training centre for the medical applications of 
nuclear energy was also planned. A liquid radioactive waste-processing centre 
had also been built with assistance provided by the Agency and the former 
Soviet Union, and a radioactive waste-management training programme was 
planned for October as part of the programme. 
22. His country had always planned to use nuclear energy for electricity 
production and was closely following the progress made with regard to power 
reactors, including low- and medium-power reactors. Egypt had almost finished 
installing the infrastructure required to introduce sufficient and safe 
nuclear power plants and was about to embark on an intensive programme of 
exploration of nuclear raw materials in the country and evaluation of the 
available reserves. 
23. Convinced of the importance of co-operation between the States of the 
African continent, Egypt had taken an active part in the AFRA programmes and 
was doing everything possible to further African and international cooperation. 
Egypt shared the great interest taken by all the North African 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 10 


countries in the desalination of sea water by means of nuclear energy and was 
counting on the Agency's support in that area. 


24. In conclusion, his delegation approved the planned increase in the 
Agency's Programme and Budget for 1993-94 and hoped that the non-safeguards 
programmes would receive similar attention in the future in accordance with 
General Conference resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/587. His delegation urged Member 
States to pay their contributions in a timely manner in order to avoid 
delaying the implementation of the programme activities. 
25. Mr. VILLAMIL de la CADENA (Ecuador) congratulated the President on 
his election and the Director General on his achievements as head of the 
Agency and on his statement. He also welcomed Slovenia, Croatia and 
Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency. The President of Ecuador, 
Mr. Duran Ballen, had asked him to commend the Agency for its role in 
promoting peace and the development of mankind. The President was keen to 
support science and technology as activities necessary to the development of 
the country and of society in general. In view of the dramatic changes which 
had taken place in international affairs in past years, the Agency should 
firmly grasp its leading role, insist on the removal of every threat of 
nuclear warfare and leave room only for the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. 
26. His delegation attached great importance to safeguards. It welcomed 
the negotiation of new agreements and encouraged the Agency to continue its 
activities in that area. He noted with satisfaction the active collaboration 
of the DPRK with the Agency with a view to implementing the safeguards 
agreement concluded with that country. He also welcomed South Africa's cooperation 
with the Agency with a view to the implementation of safeguards on 
its territory. He was sure that Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 
715 (1991) would be implemented. He also fully supported the steps taken to 
permit the implementation of the Tlatelolco Treaty along with the recently 
approved amendments to the Treaty. 
27. Emphasizing the importance of technical co-operation for the developing 
countries in general and for Ecuador in particular, he thanked the Agency and 
the Member States concerned for their significant co-operation in the 
programmes and projects carried out in Ecuador. If further assistance was 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 11 


provided, the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission could continue its 
beneficial activities and make the results available to interested countries. 


28. His country had recently begun to devise regulations to take account of 
the new recommendations for radiation protection. Advice had been provided to 
all the nuclear medicine services concerning their quality control programmes, 
an iodine-131 distribution laboratory had already been commissioned and a 
technetium-99 production laboratory would soon be operational too; with 
regard to the environment, a system had been set up to monitor natural background 
radiation and measures had been taken to protect the ecology of the 
Amazon Basin from possible damage due to oil and mining works; data had also 
been collected on precipitation in order to determine the influence of the 
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans on the Amazon, the Pacific shore and the Andean 
Cordillera, while studies had been initiated on the effect of pesticides and 
fertilzier on plants and foodstuffs. Ecuador attached particular importance 
to studies and to applications relating to animal husbandry, plant nutrition, 
the breeding of new varieties, seeds and the improvement of production. His 
country was also involved in efforts to eradicate the medfly and was trying to 
improve animal health. As for industry, advisory and further training activities 
had been carried out and services provided, particularly in the area of 
non-destructive testing. Finally, at the regional and sub-regional levels, 
Ecuador was supporting ARCAL activities to promote the free transfer of 
technology. 
29. His country intended to continue to participate in the work of the 
Agency, which should further develop its activities in order to meet its 
statutory obligations and enable Member States to obtain the assistance they 
needed, while at the same time endeavouring to contribute to a better future 
for the world and a peaceful and harmonious civilization. 
30. Mr. FAROUQUE (Sri Lanka), after welcoming the admission of 
Croatia, Slovenia and Uzbekistan to the Agency, noted with satisfaction the 
progress made by the Agency in the past 35 years. The Agency had proved to be 
one of the most efficient, if not the most efficient, specialized agency of 
the United Nations in its promotion of science and technology for the purposes 
of improving the quality of life and economic development while ensuring that 
human beings and the environment were protected against the potential risks of 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 12 


radiation and applying safeguards to prevent the destructive use of nuclear 
technology. 


31. Recent times had seen unprecedented political changes on a global 
scale. The Agency's ability to perceive those changes, adapt to new situations 
and play a prominent role in promoting nuclear science and technology 
as well as the efficiency of its management and its communication and information 
systems were the keys to its success. Nevertheless, as in many multilateral 
organizations, the Agency had not been spared two major constraints 
which had hindered its efficiency over the past two years: the reduction in 
its budget and the increasing politicization of its work. His delegation 
earnestly hoped that Member States would do their utmost to overcome those 
constraints by paying their contributions to the Agency in a timely manner and 
by refraining from using the organization as a platform for political 
controversies to the detriment of its scientific and technical work and its 
safeguards activities. 
32. His delegation recognized the importance of the Agency's safeguards 
activities for the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and welcomed the 
Board's current efforts to strengthen the Agency's safeguards system. However, 
it was equally important that resources should not be allocated to 
current safeguards activities at the expense of activities relating to the use 
of science and technology for peaceful purposes. In other words, the Agency's 
resources should be distributed in a more rational and balanced manner. He 
noted with satisfaction that the Director General intended to take measures to 
make the safeguards system more efficient. 
33. In the international arena there had been major successes such as the 
completion of the INF Treaty, the signing of the START Agreement and the 
unilateral and bilateral measures taken by certain nuclear powers further to 
reduce their nuclear arsenals. The recent accession of China and France to 
the NPT, the desire expressed by the new States emerging from the former 
Soviet Union to accede to it as non-nuclear-weapon States and the French 
moratorium on nuclear tests were of particular importance for the Agency. The 
recent conclusion by Argentina and Brazil on a joint accounting and control 
system followed by the signing of a comprehensive safeguards agreement between 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 13 


the Agency and those two countries was a commendable co-operative achievement. 
Similarly, the entry into force of the Tlatelolco Treaty in the near 
future promised to be a significant step towards nuclear non- proliferation. 
His delegation hoped that those examples would be followed in other regions. 


34. Despite those positive developments, the outbreak of new violent 
conflicts and the emergence of volatile situations in various parts of the 
world were setting a dangerous trend. In view of those trends, which were 
both favourable and disturbing, it was essential for an important multilateral 
organization such as the Agency to renew its efforts to perform its extremely 
sensitive role with efficiency and impartiality. Although the Agency was 
fully committed to achieving the objectives defined in its mandate, 
unfortunately there was as yet no international mechanism to promote a wider 
acceptance of the provisions relating to non-proliferation, particularly by 
countries with significant nuclear activities. Their lack of participation in 
the regime established by the NPT was a cause for concern for countries such 
as Sri Lanka which were entirely dependent on the relevant international 
systems, and particularly that of the Agency, to provide satisfactory 
safeguards. His delegation hoped that the 1995 NPT Review Conference would 
deal with those problems in depth and find solutions. 
35. His delegation attached importance to the safety of nuclear power 
plants, radiation protection, safety in the context of other applications of 
nuclear science and technology, the strengthening of radiation protection 
regulations and their enforcement capabilities as well as education and 
training in those fields. In that connection, UNSCEAR had contributed to 
increasing awareness of radiation levels and radiological effects and risks 
relevant to development, while also strengthening radiation protection 
measures for radiation workers and the public. The Committee had played an 
important role in enhancing public awareness. 
36. His country had completed the draft revision of its national radiation 
protection regulations which had benefited from the many training courses 
organized by the Agency on various aspects of radiation safety. In 
November 1991, with the assistance of Agency experts, Sri Lanka had also 
organized a national workshop on radiation safety for medical personnel. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 14 


37. His country had benefited from most of the regional co-operation 
activities organized within the context of the RCA, which now covered almost 
all aspects of nuclear science and technology. His delegation was particularly 
pleased that the IAEA/UNDP/RCA project on industrial applications had 
obtained its objective of increasing the use of nuclear technologies in 
regional industries for the purpose of improving productivity and competitiveness. 
Particular benefit had been derived from that project, which had 
increased national awareness of the potential of nuclear technology in 
industry and had permitted the training of scientists in radiation processing 
in various areas. 
38. A national capability had been developed for training in nondestructive 
testing methods and for providing services in that area to 
industry. Radiotracer techniques had been used in Sri Lanka in 1992 to test 
leaks in oil pipelines and problems that could be solved using such techniques 
had been identified in various national industries such as cement, paper, 
petroleum, tyre, ceramics and steel. Research and development work in his 
country on the radiation vulcanization of natural rubber latex and the preservation 
of spices by means of irradiation had shown that those techniques were 
suitable for commercial application in Sri Lanka. Medical applications had 
been among the more successful nuclear activities. In 1991, Sri Lanka had 
held two meetings for national co-ordinators of RCA projects in the medical 
field. The regional project on thyroid hormones had achieved its objective of 
reducing the cost of treatment per patient. 
39. His Government would continue its policy of harnessing nuclear science 
and technology effectively in order to increase national production and 
improve the population's quality of life without damaging the environment. 
The programmes of the National Atomic Energy Authority were implemented in 
accordance with those national policy objectives, which were, however, 
difficult to attain in Sri Lanka because of the lack of local resources for 
infrastructural development. 
40. The interest shown by Member States and the initiatives taken by WHO 
and other international bodies in promoting the subject of food irradiation 
had been encouraging. In view of the expertise and experience available to 
the Agency and other United Nations organizations such as FAO and WHO, he 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 15 


hoped the Agency would play a central role in bringing the subject of food 


irradiation to the forefront in order to initiate an international plan of 
action, particularly for the benefit of developing countries. Such an action 
plan would benefit not only those in possession of food irradiation 
technology, but also those in the business of producing and marketing food. 


41. In conclusion, he reiterated his delegation's support for the Agency's 
programmes and activities, which had been very effective in promoting the 
application of nuclear science and technology for development purposes and 
without which developing countries such as Sri Lanka would have made little or 
no progress. 
42. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria) warmly welcomed the Agency's new Member States 
Slovenia, Croatia and Uzbekistan, whose presence testified to the principle of 
universality to which the organization was committed. 
43. His delegation had carefully studied the annual report contained in 
document GC(XXXVI)/1004, which confirmed that the Agency remained steadfast in 
the pursuit of its statutory objectives. In particular, it commended the 
Agency's activities relating to nuclear applications in the fields of food and 
agriculture, human health, industry and earth sciences, and physical and 
chemical sciences. 
44. His delegation was concerned at the drop from 67.8% in 1990 to 63.6% 
in 1991 in the overall implementation rate of the technical assistance 
programme. However, it had noted in document GC(XXXVI)/INF/308 that a 
recovery was possible by the end of the biennial cycle and every effort should 
be made to ensure such a recovery. His delegation wished to see an increase 
in the number of scientific visits made to developing Member States so that 
their ability to derive the greatest possible benefit from the technical 
assistance programme might be enhanced. 
45. Nigeria continued to attach great importance to the Agency's role in 
promoting international co-operation in the sphere of nuclear technology and 
its applications and appreciated the contribution made by such co-operation to 
its own national development. The four recently completed projects in Nigeria 
relating to the establishment of a nuclear science laboratory, nuclear 
analytical techniques, RIA in animal production and food irradiation had had a 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 16 


considerable impact. Nigeria was confident that the remaining 18 projects 
still active would further the country's development and increase the benefits 
it derived from the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme. 


46. Recently, Nigeria had successfully held its first National Conference 
on Nuclear Methods, hosted by Nigerian organizations together with the Agency 
and the International Programme in Physical Sciences based in Uppsala, 
Sweden. Other participants had come from Ghana, Hungary and Kenya, and papers 
had been sent from, inter alia, Australia, Denmark, Madagascar and Sweden. 
The Conference had focused chiefly on the usefulness of neutron activation 
analysis involving neutron generators in trace element analysis in geology, 
industry and food production and preservation, as well as research on 
environmental pollution. Neutron generators with a capacity of 14 MeV were 
the main neutron sources at Nigeria's two nuclear research centres, which had 
received assistance from the Agency. With further assistance from the Agency, 
Nigeria hoped to acquire a small research reactor as a high neutron flux 
source for one of the two centres. 
47. The significant decrease in pledges and actual contributions to the 
TACF was a major source of concern to his country. The percentage of the 
target met through pledges to the TACF had declined from 85.3% to 78.4% in the 
year under review. Nigeria appealed to Member States to pledge more and pay 
the pledged amounts more promptly, and expressed its gratitude to the major 
donors. 
48. The past year had seen the start of implementation of the first AFRA 
programme. It was an indication of the growing interest in the programme that 
membership of AFRA had risen from 12 to 14 since the previous session of the 
General Conference. His country wholeheartedly welcomed that development and 
wished to thank the donor countries, in particular France and Spain, for their 
continuing support, while urging them not to slacken their efforts. However, 
the spirit of the AFRA agreement could not be sustained without adequate 
funding. Unlike the two earlier regional co-operative agreements AFRA had 
come into being at a time of worldwide economic recession that had made donors 
scarce. Nigeria therefore appealed to the Agency to consider making more 
funds available from regular sources to help AFRA overcome its initial 
difficulties. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 17 


49. Having noted with satisfaction the progress reported in the areas of 
radioactive waste management and radiation protection, his delegation 
commended the Agency for its work in those areas and urged the Secretariat to 
continue its efforts to develop a comprehensive proposal for the programme of 
education and training in radiation protection and nuclear safety. 
50. As in previous years, all Member States had praised the Agency for its 
vigorous approach. Nigeria noted with satisfaction the professionalism with 
which the Agency - at times under very arduous conditions - had implemented 
the special task assigned to it in the area of safeguards under Security 
Council resolution 687 (1991). 
51. His delegation had noted the action taken by the Board and the Director 
General in response to operative paragraph 3 of resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/559 
requesting them to continue their efforts to strengthen the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system. It shared the concern expressed 
by the members of the Group of 77 and urged that the questions raised by the 
Group be satisfactorily resolved and all the implications clearly defined 
before a decision was taken on the envisaged system. 
52. Nigeria had taken part with keen interest in the discussion of issues 
concerning the financing of technical assistance and had noted the report of 
the informal working group established in pursuance of operative paragraph 1 
of resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/562. His country commended the efforts of the 
working group and urged it to persevere with a view to making it easier for 
the Agency to take the measures necessary to ensure the funding of technical 
assistance from predictable and assured resources. 
53. His delegation had noted the encouraging findings reported in document 
GC(XXXV)/INF/298 concerning the possibility of producing potable water 
economically using nuclear heat. His delegation had contributed to the debate 
on that matter in the past and given the project its support. It was 
convinced that the economic production of potable water by such means could be 
of great use to developing Member States, particularly those in the arid and 
semi-arid zones, in helping to improve their standards of living. 
54. The Agency's Programme and Budget for 1993 and 1994, contained in 
document GC(XXXVI)/1006, had been the subject of much discussion and 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 18 


compromise. His delegation hoped that the budget which succeeded would 
correct any imbalance which might remain in the current one. While he was 
pleased to note the steady upward trend in the target set for voluntary 
contributions to the TACF, which had risen from $52.5 million in 1992 to 
$61.5 million in 1995, there was nevertheless an urgent need to tackle the 
problem of the decreasing level of payments to the Fund. 


55. Nigeria had always attached great importance to its obligations in 
respect of the Agency's Regular Budget and had always endeavoured to meet them 
in a timely manner, despite an average annual increase of over 8% in its 
contribution over the past four years. As the timely payment of contributions 
to the Regular Budget was vital to the smooth functioning of the Agency, he 
urged all the Member States to endeavour to pay their assessed contributions 
as soon as possible. 
56. His delegation believed that the time had now come to reach agreement 
on the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute in order to correct the 
imbalance in the representation on the Board of Africa, the Middle East and 
South Asia. With more Member States, including African countries, joining the 
Agency, the divergent points of view on the matter should and could be 
reconciled if all parties were willing to demonstrate the necessary political 
will. 
57. Nigeria accepted that safeguards constituted one of the principal areas 
of the Agency's activity and noted that their role in promoting world peace 
had repeatedly been acknowledged by the international community. Confidence 
in the Agency's safeguards activities had been strengthened by the 1991 
Safeguards Implementation Report, which confirmed that the nuclear material 
under safeguards had remained within the confines of peaceful nuclear 
activities or had otherwise been adequately accounted for. 
58. Nigeria had followed with interest the recent political developments in 
the Middle East and commended the willingness of all parties to tackle the 
issues which had so far impeded the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in that region. It urged them not to relax their efforts to resolve all 
the outstanding problems. 
59. There had also been significant changes in the African region. His 
delegation noted the satifactory start to implementation of the safeguards 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 19 


agreement between South Africa and the Agency, following that country's 
accession to the NPT. As a consequence, the prospects for nuclear nonproliferation 
in Africa had brightened considerably. An era of free and 
unhindered co-operation between African scientists in the area of the peaceful 
application of nuclear energy should now begin. 


60. Those developments testified to the wisdom of previous decisions of the 
General Conference with regard to the situation in southern Africa. The steps 
which had been taken by South Africa in the nuclear field should be reinforced 
through continuing co-operation with the Director General aimed at ensuring 
that South Africa's safeguards were adequate and effective and that all its 
people could enjoy the benefits of nuclear energy. 
61. There remained the need to create a climate conducive to the flourishing 
of democratic and constitutional institutions. The direction of the 
developments depended to a great extent on the South African Government. The 
Nigerian Government, together with the member States of the Organization of 
African Unity, had continued to encourage constructive change in South Africa 
in the hope that its Government would quickly take the last and irreversible 
steps in the process of dismantling apartheid and establishing democracy and 
peace in that part of Africa. 
62. When the General Conference convened for its 35th session in 1991, 
there had been prospects of important developments in the area of nuclear 
non-proliferation. Those hopes were now being realized. In particular, 
Nigeria welcomed the decision of France and China to accede to the NPT, the 
first safeguards inspections carried out in South Africa under the NPT and the 
signing of the NPT safeguards agreement by the DPRK. Those developments, 
together with the trend towards non-proliferation emerging throughout Africa 
and in other regions, were important for the non-proliferation regime, which 
it was the Agency's task to promote. 
63. The further the frontiers of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy, science and technology were pushed back, the greater the responsibilities 
devolving upon the Agency. His delegation had no doubt that, 
provided it was given the necessary means, the Agency was capable of rising to 
those challenges, as shown by its activities in connection with Security 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 20 


Council resolution 687 (1991). It was to be hoped, therefore, that during the 
present session all the Member States would amply demonstrate their 
determination to strengthen the Agency. His own delegation, for one, would 
continue to give the Agency its unstinting support. 


Mr. WAGNER (Czechoslovakia) took the Chair. 


64. Mr. PLUG (Netherlands), having congratulated Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan on becoming Members of the Agency, said that his delegation fully 
endorsed the statement made by the representative of the United Kingdom on 
behalf of the European Community and its member States. 
65. The Netherlands attached great importance to the principle of universality 
espoused by the organizations of the United Nations system, and was 
therefore in favour of South Africa's resuming its participation in the 
Agency's activities. Its doing so would be fully in line with the NPT, to 
which it had acceded in 1991. 
66. In his opening statement the Director General had placed the Agency's 
current serious budgetary difficulties against the background of the new 
challenges it was now facing. His delegation shared the Director General's 
concern and hoped that the circumstances which had forced him to make deep 
cuts in the budget for 1992 would not recur. His delegation therefore joined 
the Director General in his plea to Members to pay their contributions in a 
timely fashion. It would be regrettable if the discussion on the Programme 
and Budget for 1993 and 1994 was overshadowed by the need to provide for 
drastic cuts in order to compensate for shortfalls in Member States' contributions. 
As his delegation had stated on many occasions, full and timely 
payment of regular contributions was essential for the proper functioning of 
the Agency. In a similar connection, he called on Member States to pay in 
full their pledged amounts for technical assistance and co-operation. The 
Netherlands intended to make a contribution to the TACF of $826 950 for 1993 
in accordance with the target figure set. 
67. The five possible areas for new or increased co-operation mentioned by 
the Director General were certainly all worthy of further consideration. The 
delegation of the Netherlands would be interested, in particular, in the 
further development of his remarks concerning radioactive waste disposal and 
the conversion of military nuclear material into non-military reactor fuel, 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 21 


subjects which raised a number of issues, including that of how the 
accompanying safeguards measures should be determined. 


68. It was evident that the safeguards system - the cornerstone of nuclear 
non-proliferation - was placing an ever greater encumbrance on the Agency's 
resources. New challenges were emerging. The efficiency of the system ought 
to be improved wherever possible, although not, of course, at the cost of its 
effectiveness. For that reason, his delegation warmly welcomed the creation 
of a special working group to review and analyse the Agency's long-term safeguards 
tasks. It also felt that improvements could be made in the nonproliferation 
regime through new forms of assistance for Member countries. 
69. As the delegate of the United Kingdom had mentioned in his statement on 
behalf of the European Community, the Twelve had agreed to provide the Agency 
on a voluntary basis with information on nuclear exports, imports and inventories 
and on exports of certain relevant items of equipment and non-nuclear 
material. He hoped that other countries would follow that example, thereby 
reinforcing the international safeguards regime and at the same time strengthening 
confidence that no nuclear material was being used for purposes other 
than that declared. 
70. The problems confronting the countries of Central and Eastern Europe 
and the republics of the former Soviet Union operating older types of nuclear 
power plant were a source of great concern to all States. The Agency acted as 
a catalyst to international efforts to improve nuclear safety in those 
countries. The extrabudgetary programme relating to WWER-440/230 reactors had 
yielded vital information and enabled an order of priorities to be established 
for safety problems, that being of incalculable importance to countries 
operating such plants, especially when they needed to take decisions on their 
future. His country, which was the principal contributor of funds to the 
programme, would be making a further contribution of 500 000 guilders (approximately 
$300 000) in 1992. The Netherlands was also highly appreciative of 
the technical advice and other inputs provided by the Agency's Secretariat to 
the activities of the Group of 24 aimed at improving nuclear safety in Central 
and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. 
71. The work of the expert group responsible for preparing a nuclear safety 
convention represented a further step towards the introduction of internationally 
accepted and binding nuclear safety principles. The elaboration of 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 22 


Basic Safety Standards by NUSSAG was a sign that the international aspects of 
nuclear safety were being increasingly acknowledged. Bearing in mind what had 
been said on behalf of the EC, his delegation considered that in order to 


implement the conclusions of the International Conference on the Safety of 
Nuclear Power held in 1991 it was necessary to establish a broad-scope 


convention defining the process leading to a truly international safety 
regime. Such a regime would also strengthen public acceptance of nuclear 
power as a possible source of energy. 


72. Thanks to financial assistance and expertise from the Netherlands, a 
hospital had been founded at Gomel in Belarus to provide medical care for the 
population after the Chernobyl disaster. The hospital had been fully operational 
since January 1992 and, according to first evaluations, seemed to be 
functioning in a highly satisfactory manner. 
73. As to nuclear power in the Netherlands, as a result of the Chernobyl 
accident his Government had postponed all decisions concerning new nuclear 
power plants until the end of its current term of office in 1994. In the 
meantime, the nuclear option remained open and a number of in-depth studies 
were being carried out in key areas such as nuclear safety and radioactive 
waste management. 
74. Mr. CHANG (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), recognizing 
that in the past year the Agency had once again fulfilled its basic mission to 
prevent nuclear proliferation, preserve world peace and promote the use of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes, supported the Director General's 
statement and the Annual Report for 1991. 
75. In recent years the Agency had endeavoured to accelerate the development 
and use of nuclear energy in various fields, maintain the expansion of 
international co-operation aimed at strengthening nuclear safety and safeguards 
and increase technical co-operation in the developing countries, all of 
which the DPRK appreciated highly. 
76. In accordance with its philosophy of self-reliance or "juche", the DPRK 
strongly encouraged the establishment of a nuclear energy industry fully 
capable of meeting the growing daily demand for energy in various sectors of 
the national economy. Pursuant to the decision taken by the Fourth Congress 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 23 


of the Korean Workers' Party to develop the nuclear industry, his country was 
using radiation and radioactive isotopes extensively in various sectors of the 
national economy. His Government had, moreover, formulated an independent 
nuclear power development plan and was promoting research aimed at harnessing 
nuclear power in efforts to build an independent national economy. 


77. Although it gave priority to the construction of thermal and hydraulic 
power plants, the DPRK had long attached great importance to nuclear power, 
which it had endeavoured to develop using its own resources. At the same 
time, in accordance with its plan for a self-reliant nuclear power programme, 
the DPRK had built a nuclear research centre near Nyongbyon and scientific 
research centres at Pyongyang and elsewhere, which conducted research on 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy and systematically trained scientific 
and technical personnel in that field. 
78. The country's scientists and technicians, working tirelessly in a 
spirit of self-reliance, had, for instance, succeeded in the construction and 
operation of a 5 MW(e) pilot power plant. Using that valuable experience as a 
basis, they had begun construction on nuclear power plants of 50 and 200 MW(e) 
capacity to be completed by 1995. The DPRK was also planning to build large 
nuclear power plants in co-operation with other countries and was making 
arrangements accordingly. 
79. Such were the DPRK's achievements resulting from its efforts to use 
nuclear power for peaceful purposes. The legal basis for all such activities 
in the DPRK was a law, passed by the Fifth Supreme People's Assembly in 1974, 
entitled the "Law on Atomic Power", according to which the objective of 
research and development work in the field of nuclear power was to assist the 
rapid scientific and economic development of the country and improve its 
people's living standards and quality of life. The law also stipulated that 
exchanges and technical co-operation activities with other countries relating 
to peaceful applications of nuclear energy should be based on the principles 
of equality and mutual benefit and that co-operation with international organizations, 
including the Agency, should be strengthened. 
80. Co-operation between the DPRK and the Agency in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy was making daily advances. The technical 
information and various data sent regularly by the Agency was being used 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 24 


effectively in R&D work in nuclear power and isotope applications, and also in 
the establishment of radiation protection, nuclear safety and safeguards 
systems. In the future, the DPRK expected to strengthen further its 
co-operation with the Agency and other countries in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 


81. It had always been his Government's policy to faithfully implement its 
obligations under the NPT, and hence to use nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes only and to work towards making the Korean Peninsula a nuclearweapon-
free zone as soon as possible. Thanks to his Government's efforts and 
to the Agency's active co-operation, the problem of inspecting the DPRK's 
nuclear facilities was in the process of being solved. On 30 January 1992 his 
Government had signed a safeguards agreement with the Agency which had come 
into force after being examined and approved by the Supreme People's Assembly 
on 9 April 1992. In accordance with that agreement, his Government had 
submitted to the Agency on 31 May 1992, ahead of schedule, an initial report 
giving an inventory of the country's nuclear materials and all its nuclear 
facilities and a list of equipment located in the DPRK. 
82. In mid-May, acting voluntarily and in a spirit of co-operation, the 
DPRK had invited the Director General to visit its nuclear installations. As 
a confidence-building measure, the DPRK had issued Agency officials with a 
standing invitation to visit all its sites or installations, whether or not 
they were included in the initial report, thereby demonstrating its intention 
to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes only. 
83. The three subsequent ad hoc inspections carried out by the Agency to 
verify the initial report had all confirmed that the DPRK had done what it had 
said it would do and that it never made empty promises. In the future too, 
the DPRK would co-operate actively with the Agency in order to ensure the 
smooth conduct of inspections at its nuclear facilities and to fulfil its 
obligation under the NPT to confine its use of nuclear energy to peaceful 
purposes. 
84. His delegation was astonished by the statement by the delegate of 
Japan, who had made irresponsible and unfounded remarks to the effect that the 
DPRK had a nuclear weapons programme and had requested the unconditional and 
rapid implementation of its comprehensive safeguards agreement. The DPRK had 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 25 


emphasized on more than one occasion that it had neither the intention nor the 
means to develop nuclear weapons. It had already signed a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency and received three ad hoc inspections. It had 
opened all its nuclear facilities to the inspection teams and provided them 
with all necessary assistance to enable them to discharge their 
responsibilities. 


85. Nevertheless, the delegate of Japan had made unjustifiable and unacceptable 
remarks contrary to the spirit of the Agency's safeguards regime, 
remarks which his delegation felt must have been made out of ignorance of the 
facts. The Japanese delegation had also unilaterally requested the DPRK to 
implement the Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula. As his delegation had stated very clearly at the Board's meetings 
in June and September 1992, implementation of that Declaration was a matter to 
be discussed and settled by both Koreas. The joint North-South committee on 
nuclear control was discussing the matter, which could be resolved if both 
parties made an honest effort to do so. At the Board's meeting in June, his 
delegation had cited the main reasons why the problem had not yet been 
settled. If anything, the remarks made by the delegate of Japan hindered 
rather than helped the implementation of the Declaration. 
86. The delegate of Japan should explain why his country had accumulated an 
enormous quantity of plutonium far in excess of its needs before fretting 
about North-South mutual inspections. His statement implied that the Agency's 
inspections of nuclear facilities in Japan had credibility, while those 
conducted in the DPRK did not, despite having passed off smoothly. All that 
showed was that in the long term Japan had no sincere desire for the denuclearization 
of the Korean Pensinsula, but sought rather to hasten its nuclearization. 
87. Japan was accumulating an emergency stock of plutonium far in excess of 
its needs despite the unanimous objections of peace-loving peoples. There 
could be only one conclusion: that Japan, under all kinds of pretexts, was 
endeavouring to become a nuclear power. Japan contended that it had the right 
to stockpile plutonium as its nuclear facilities were subject to Agency 
safeguards. Why, then, was it dissatisfied with the inspections carried out 
by the Agency in other countries? 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 26 


88. Once again, the DPRK urged the Japanese authorities to be honest and 
open before the entire world about their nuclear policy instead of resorting 
to the transparent device of finding fault with other countries while pursuing 
their own policy back home of turning Japan into a nuclear power. Japan would 
also benefit from making its intentions known. 
89. In addition, his delegation felt bound to reply to the delegate from 
the Republic of Korea, who had acted as if his country alone took an interest 
in implementing the Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula. The DPRK's interest was most sincere, and it was sparing no effort 
to implement the Declaration. Those with the key to the issue were the 
Koreans themselves, and only the joint efforts of North and South Korea could 
bring results. His delegation therefore strongly urged South Korea, firstly, 
not to use international fora to slander the other party to the Joint 
Declaration on a matter of concern to the Korean nation only and, second, to 
show sincerity, honesty and loyalty at meetings of the joint North-South 
committee on nuclear control. Such behaviour would be conducive to settling 
the matter, creating a good atmosphere at the General Conference and 
preventing an unnecessary waste of time. 
90. All the DPRK's nuclear facilities had been placed under Agency 
safeguards. 
91. The DPRK knew what needed to be done to ensure the safe operation of 
its nuclear reactor. His delegation believed the concern affected by the 
delegate of the Republic of Korea with regard to the safety of that reactor to 
be completely groundless and urged that country to calm down and behave 
normally. 
92. In conclusion, the DPRK assured the General Conference that it would 
co-operate with the Agency with a view to carrying out its obligations under 
the NPT and under its safeguards agreement. 
93. Mr. DE VILLIERS (South Africa), after welcoming Croatia, Slovenia 
and Uzbekistan, said that even before formal accession to the NPT South Africa 
had supported the goals and principles of the Treaty and also the guidelines 
of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, and it would continue to conduct its nuclear 
policy accordingly. South Africa also supported the limitation and ultimate 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 27 


prohibition of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, and had 
recently acquired observer status at the United Nations Conference on 
Disarmament. 


94. South Africa reaffirmed its support for the Declaration on the Denuclearization 
of Africa adopted by the OAU in July 1964, as well as the recommendations 
contained in the report of the second meeting of the group of 
experts set up to examine the modalities and elements for the preparation and 
implementation of a convention or treaty on the denuclearization of Africa, 
held in Lome from 28 to 30 April 1992. South Africa was ready to contribute 
actively to the achievement of that long-standing objective. 
95. The only means available for limiting the spread of nuclear weapons 
were the NPT and the Agency's safeguards. In order to generate international 
confidence and contribute to peace and security, full disclosure of information 
on all nuclear facilities and material was needed, together with the 
continued implementation of safeguards in a transparent, professional and 
co-operative manner. South Africa therefore intended to make a constructive 
contribution to the Agency's safeguards activities by continuing to facilitate 
control of its own nuclear activities. 
96. As a member of SAGSI, South Africa would contribute actively to the 
strengthening and improvement of the Agency's safeguards. It would report to 
the Agency all exports of nuclear material, including natural uranium, and 
also exports of sensitive nuclear technology and equipment. 
97. Excellent progress had been achieved in the implementation of safeguards 
at all South Africa's nuclear facilities. He thanked the Agency's 
staff for the manner in which they had carried out their inspections and 
verified South Africa's Initial Report and nuclear inventory. It was largely 
thanks to their competence and enthusiasm that the Director General had been 
able to give such a conclusive report to the Board and to the General 
Conference. In the light of those developments, South Africa saw no need to 
include a separate item on South Africa's nuclear capabilities in the agenda 
of future meetings of the General Conference. 
98. South Africa believed that nuclear energy could make a safe, economic 
and environmentally friendly contribution towards meeting the growing demand 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 28 


for electricity and would continue to contribute to improving the safe 
operation of nuclear plants and facilities. Its national electricity company, 
ESKOM, was a member of WANO. South Africa was also a signatory to the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. It 
hoped soon to be in a position to ratify the Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material. Through its national competent authorities, 
South Africa was co-operating with the Agency and contributing to activities 
organized in connection with its various programmes and committees for 
promoting the safe operation of nuclear power plants and facilities and the 
safe use of isotopes and radiation. 


99. In addition to the Koeberg nuclear power plant, consisting of 
two 960 MW(e) light-water reactors operated by ESCOH, South Africa had 
established a sophisticated nuclear industry and technological base encompassing 
the entire nuclear fuel cycle with the exception of reprocessing, 
i.e. uranium mining and extraction, conversion to UF , enrichment and 
6 
nuclear fuel manufacture to internationally accepted standards. It also 
operated a well-equipped hot-cell complex for the post-irradiation inspection 
of nuclear fuel and a national low- and intermediate-level nuclear waste 
repository. That facility was currently being equipped for the interim 
storage of spent fuel. 


100. South Africa's R&D programmes included activities relating to isotope 
production, food irradiation preservation and nuclear applications in 
industry, medicine, biology and agriculture. Regarding the environment and 
geophysical sciences, activities were focused on nuclear site evaluation, 
groundwater studies, advanced mineral exploration and extraction technology 
and also atmospheric and environmental dispersion and pollution technology. 
Nuclear medicine was well-established in South Africa, and a number of 
universities and technical colleges provided education and training in nuclear 
science and technology. The Atomic Energy Corporation also contributed to the 
technological development of South Africa's industry by supplying it with 
advanced technology and products on a commercial basis. 
101. South Africa trusted that in future it would be able to contribute more 
actively to the Agency's various programmes. However, it was concerned at the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 29 


Agency's financial situation and the increased demands on its budget, 
especially those due to its enlarged safeguards responsibilities. For that 
reason, South Africa had paid in full its contributions to the Regular Budget 
and the Working Capital Fund. 


102. Noting the concern expressed by some African countries that Africa was 
not receiving as much as it should from the Agency's technical assistance and 
co-operation programme, his delegation considered that South Africa could make 
a significant contribution to the economic and social welfare of all the 
countries in that region by taking an active part in co-operation, training 
and assistance in the field of nuclear and related technologies. South Africa 
had recently acceded to AFRA and, as a first step, would be exploring ways and 
means of contributing directly to the technical assistance and co-operation 
programme through AFRA and bilateral co-operation agreements with various 
countries in the region. It had already invited a number of African colleagues 
to visit its facilities, and some of them had already done so. 
103. Finally, South Africa trusted that in due course it would be in a 
position to resume its seat on the Board as the member in the African region 
most advanced in the field of nuclear technology, including the production of 
source materials. 
104. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar), having first of all welcomed the new members of 
the Agency, said that, like all countries that aspired towards peace, Qatar 
had acceded to the NPT out of its firm belief in the need to put an end to the 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and to eliminate such weapons in 
countries that already possessed them, with a view to achieving a just and 
global peace based upon mutual trust and the desire to guarantee a better life 
for all peoples in the world. The Agency had two main tasks to perform in 
that regard: verification of the peaceful use of nuclear energy within the 
framework of safeguards agreements, and provision of technical assistance with 
nuclear energy applications in medicine, agriculture and industry for the 
purpose of raising the standard of living of people in the developing 
countries and accelerating progress in those countries. 
105. Despite the positive results achieved by the Agency in several areas, 
the Middle East was still threatened by the fact that Israel was continuing to 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 30 


develop its nuclear capabilities, thus challenging the Agency's principles, 
and threatening peace and stability in the Middle East and throughout the 
world. Qatar was aware of the danger inherent in Israel's refusal to accede 
to the NPT and open its nuclear installations to Agency inspections in 
accordance with the many resolutions which had been adopted by United Nations 
bodies on that issue. He reaffirmed the need to create a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in the Middle East in accordance with the resolutions of the United 
Nations General Assembly. Having taken note of the Director General's report 
on the application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East, his delegation 
noted with regret that no appreciable progress had been made with the 
implementation of the resolutions adopted by the General Conference during its 
preceding sessions. 


106. The Annual Report for 1991 gave a positive picture of the Agency's 
activities and its efforts to implement its main activities within the limits 
of the budget. Owing to financial difficulties, certain major activities had 
had to be cancelled or deferred to later years, which was cause for concern to 
the developing countries, which needed the Agency's assistance in order to 
develop their industry and agriculture, through the incorporation of peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, and thus improve the standard of living of 
their peoples. The Agency's technical co-operation projects should receive 
special attention and should enjoy secure and predictable funding which did 
not depend solely on voluntary contributions or the state of contributions to 
the Regular Budget; they should be given priority within the Agency's programme 
and budget. He therefore urged the more major contributors to comply 
with their financial obligations as swiftly as possible in order to ensure 
that the Agency could perform the tasks for which it had been created. 
107. The developing countries attached great importance to the technical 
assistance and co-operation programme, which allowed them to benefit directly 
from nuclear applications in agriculture, the environment and health. He noted 
with concern that resources in the TACF had dropped in 1991, which had in turn 
lowered the implementation rate. 
108. He stressed the numerous advantages of devising a plan to produce 
potable water economically through the desalination of sea water using nuclear 
techniques. Water shortage was a problem that affected several regions of the 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 31 


world, and particularly arid zones in developing countries, where it threatened 
security and stability. He also attached special importance to the 
elaboration by the Agency of a project to assist the developing countries with 
food preservation by means of irradiation on an industrial scale. 


109. His delegation was convinced of the importance of nuclear safety in 
increasing confidence in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and welcomed the 
Agency's efforts in that area and the progress achieved. The results of the 
International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power held in 1991 had been 
satisfactory, and the same was true of the work on the drawing up of an 
international convention on nuclear safety. A convention of that kind would 
most certainly help consolidate the Agency's role as the international organization 
responsible for co-ordinating and monitoring compliance with safety 
standards and criteria, and providing the developing countries with technical 
assistance in order to help them improve their radiation protection systems. 
110. Mr. CACCIA DOMINIONI (Commission of the European Communities) said 
that the year that had passed since the preceding General Conference had seen 
many important events, of which one of the most notable was probably the 
drawing up of the Maastricht Treaty. Also, 1992 was the last year before the 
establishment of a single market within the European Community. 
111. In the energy sector, one of the foundations of that single market was 
the liberalization of the electricity and natural gas market within the 
Community. In January 1992, the Commission had submitted proposals to its 
member States which should result in progressive moves towards liberalization 
whilst improving the competitiveness of that sector. 
112. The European Energy Charter, signed on 17 December 1991 in The Hague by 
around 40 countries, established a framework for co-operation in the energy 
sector between the world's main industrialized countries, on the one hand, and 
those countries which had previously had planned economies, on the other. The 
basic Protocol, which would permit the practical application of the Charter, 
and the nuclear Protocol, which established a specific framework for cooperation 
in the field between all signatories, would probably be signed 
before the end of the current year. The contribution made by the Agency to 
the negotiation of the latter Protocol had been appreciated by all the 
participants. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 32 


113. Economic development and the improvement of living standards were 
legitimate aspirations but could not be realized at the expense of the 
environment. The global significance of that problem had been recognized by 
the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development held in 
Rio de Janeiro in June 1992. In October 1990, the Community's Council of 
Ministers had set the objective that CO emissions should be kept down to 
their 1990 level until the year 2000. In May 1992, as part of efforts to 
counteract the greenhouse effect, the Commission had put forward a proposal 
comprising a draft directive for a tax on energy and CO , a draft directive 
on energy efficiency and a draft decision on renewable energy sources. 
114. In that context, the role which nuclear energy played and could play 
within the range of energy sources available, given adequate operational 
safety, should not be neglected. At Community level, the harmonization of 
nuclear safety practices and regulations had progressed further and reached a 
more practical stage through the Council's adoption of two important 
resolutions in June of the current year. 
115. The first related to the renewal of the action plan on radioactive 
waste up to the end of the current decade. That plan was a continuation of 
earlier plans and, in addition to waste generated by the nuclear power 
production, also covered waste produced by medical activities and by the 
concentration of radioisotopes in industrial processes. 
116. The second related to technological nuclear safety problems and aimed 
at consolidating the progress already achieved and encouraging future work, in 
particular through joint efforts at Community level by the authorities 
responsible for nuclear safety in member States. Its priority objective was 
to bring nuclear facilities in countries in Central and Eastern Europe and the 
countries of the CIS progressively in line with safety levels in the Community 
and to facilitate the application in those countries of the safety criteria 
and requirements already recognized in the Community. 
117. The two resolutions in question also encouraged member States and the 
Commission to intensify their co-operation with international organizations, 
and in particular the Agency. 
118. The member States of the Community and the Commission had also played 
an active part in the International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 33 


held in 1991. They hoped that an international convention on nuclear safety, 
providing the basis of an international safety regime, would be elaborated as 
quickly as possible. 


119. There already existed a broad consensus on the need to work towards 
achieving a high nuclear safety level throughout the world. The European 
Summit held in Lisbon at the end of June and the G-7 summit held in Munich in 
July had concluded that special efforts should be made to improve the safety 
level of nuclear power plants in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe 
and in a number of CIS republics. In the short term, the assistance programme 
should concentrate on improving operational safety, improving plants from the 
technical point of view on the basis of safety evaluations and, of course, 
strengthening regulatory regimes. 
120. In the longer term, with a view to replacing the intrinsically less 
reliable older design plants, it was planned to develop replacement energy 
sources, to use energy more efficiently and to move over to plants based on 
newer and improved designs. 
121. As far as the Community was concerned, the Commission had already 
allocated significant levels of funding to PHARE (programme of assistance for 
the economic reconstruction of countries in Central and Eastern Europe) and 
TACIS (Technical Assistance to the CIS) projects in order to improve nuclear 
safety in countries with older-design reactors. As non-Community countries 
were also involved - on an individual basis - in that vast assistance 
programme, efforts needed to be co-ordinated. The G-7 summit had requested 
the Commission to play a key role in such co-ordination within the G-24. It 
was chairing the Committee of major contributors, at the last meeting of 
which, held in Brussels, important decisions had been taken with a view to 
implementing the conclusions of the Munich summit. Thus, a select steering 
committee had been set up, assisted by a secretariat and two technical working 
groups. The Agency would also be called upon to play a very important role as 
the main technical advisor to both contributors and beneficiaries. 
122. In the context of international solidarity, it was also important to 
remember the initiative taken in March 1992 to set up an international centre 
for science and technology. The four parties behind that project, the United 
States of America, Japan, the European Community and the Russian Federation, 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 34 


had agreed that the centre, which would be located on Russian territory, would 
have as its main objective the reorientation of the activities of scientists 
and engineers in the nuclear and non-nuclear military sector in the CIS 
towards peaceful purposes. 


123. Safeguards were crucial to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
They should be strengthened when circumstances demanded, albeit within the 
limits imposed by the need for financial restraint. The actions recently 
undertaken by the Agency in that regard merited strong support. On 
28 April 1992, the Director General of the Agency and the CEC Energy 
Commissioner, had agreed, in a joint declaration, that the moment had come to 
strengthen collaboration between the two organizations with a view to 
achieving the above-mentioned objectives. Explicit mention was made of a 
partnership approach which, by means of a thorough rationalization of the work 
performed by both parties, should help save some of the Agency's resources 
without jeopardizing the efficiency of safeguards, or violating the conditions 
of the agreement concluded between the Agency, EURATOM and those member States 
of the Community which did not possess nuclear weapons, or changing the 
parties* respective responsibilities. For its part, the Commission would do 
everything in its power to ensure that the new approach delivered concrete and 
significant results as soon as possible. The extensive resources thus 
liberated for the Agency's use could be channelled in directions where 
strengthened safeguards could have the greatest impact on nuclear nonproliferation 
at world level. 
124. In July 1992, the Commission had submitted to the Board some draft 
regulations on the control of exports of certain dual-use items and technologies 
and certain nuclear products and technologies which, once approved by 
the Board would permit, as of 1 January 1993, effective and standardized 
control at borders outside the Community of a number of sensitive products and 
technologies, in particular those of a nuclear nature, through framework 
agreements contained in the document in question. The nuclear technologies 
and products, and in particular the dual-use items covered by those draft 
regulations, were enumerated in a list ratified by the twelve Heads of State 
of the Community during the European summit in Lisbon. Naturally, full 
account had been taken of the recent consensus within the Nuclear Suppliers 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 35 


Group which the representative of the United Kingdom had mentioned in his 
statement on behalf of the Community and its member States. 


125. The Commission of the European Communities wished to recall the 
importance it attached to maintaining its leading position in research into 
the peaceful use of nuclear fusion energy. That had been illustrated in 
November 1991 when, for the first time in the world, almost 2000 kW of fusion 
power had been generated in the Community's experimental JET installation. 
The 1990-1994 programme envisaged the development of international 
co-operation in fusion. To that end, on 21 July 1992, the Commission had 
signed, under the auspices of the Agency, the quadripartite agreement on the 
ITER project and the first protocol to that agreement. That collaborative 
effort between the European Community, Japan, the Russian Federation and the 
United States of America was unprecedented in its size and scope. Two 
countries from outside the Community - Sweden and Switzerland - were fully 
involved in the Community fusion programme and hence in the Community's 
involvement in the ITER project, and one other important country would 
probably be joining them. 
126. In conclusion, he stressed that the Community was willing to co-operate 
on a global scale, provided such co-operation was constructive. 
127. Mr. FASSI FIHRI (Morocco) welcomed the Agency's new Members and 
noted that their presence within the organization would help reinforce international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
128. The radical changes that had occurred in the international arena had 
created a new and extremely complex situation, in the face of which all States 
and organizations would have to exercise clear sightedness and vigilance. The 
Agency had, more than ever before, an important role to play. It would have 
to respond to urgent and increasing demands in the field of non-proliferation 
and verification thereof. It would also have to continue providing the 
developing countries with stable and effective assistance in areas relating to 
its statutory objectives and, in particular, in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
129. Remarkable progress had been made with the application of various 
nuclear techniques in all branches of science and industry. Morocco, which 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 36 


was aware of the attractiveness of those techniques, had been attempting to 
benefit from them since the early sixties, particularly in the agricultural 
and medical sectors. Nowadays, such techniques were used in various other 
areas, including geology, hydrology and industry. In agriculture, in 
particular, Morocco had a strong interest in the use of irradiation for food 
preservation. In collaboration with the Agency and aided by the contribution 
of the French Government, Morocco would soon be acquiring a pilot irradiation 
plant which would be used for research before being introduced into industry. 
Morocco commended the quality of the assistance which the Agency had provided 
under its technical co-operation programme. It was a country rich in human, 
agricultural, industrial and mineral resources, and would continue to promote 
the use of nuclear techniques, extending them, as far as possible, to various 
key sectors of the economy. Clearly, some form of co-ordinating body would be 
needed to monitor the evolution of those techniques in the light of national 
priorities. With that in mind, the Moroccan Government had recently approved 
the text on the creation of the National Nuclear Energy Board which provided 
for the creation of three standing committees, the first to be in charge of 
co-ordinating nuclear activities, the second in charge of nuclear technology, 
and the third international programmes. 


130. As part of Morocco's efforts to develop its scientific and technical 
infrastructure, a nuclear research centre would be set up in 1993 which would 
have a TRIGA Mark II research reactor where the necessary personnel could be 
trained, isotopes produced, and technical and scientific research developed. 
With the Agency's help, Morocco had already developed a complete training 
programme for the staff and technicians to be responsible for operating the 
various installations in the Centre. In preparation for the commissioning of 
the reactor, the CNESTEN had provided assistance to national bodies with the 
development of nuclear techniques, particularly in relation to radioactive 
waste storage. In addition, a WAMAP mission would be visiting Morocco at the 
beginning of 1993 to assist the CNESTEN with the establishment of a national 
radioactive waste management programme. With respect to nuclear power 
generation, the studies undertaken by Morocco on the choice of a site for the 
first plant and the technical and economic feasibility of a project of that 
kind should, in principle, be finished by 1993. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.348 
page 37 


131. The Moroccan authorities attached great importance to the training of 
staff and elaboration of the necessary regulations for the development of 
nuclear techniques. With that in mind, intensive efforts had been made, with 
the Agency's assistance, to train teams in project planning, radiation 
protection and nuclear safety. Moreover, in collaboration with Agency 
experts, the competent authorities had drawn up the texts of basic laws taking 
account of Morocco's international obligations in the nuclear field. 
132. Nuclear safety, waste management, radiation protection and the 
environment continued to be issues of concern to the international community, 
and the development of nuclear power was still contingent upon the attainment 
of the highest safety levels. Morocco set great store by the Agency's 
activities and recommendations in those areas, where an enormous amount of 
planning was required to assist those Member States which needed to acquire 
the necessary human, technical and organizational resources. It should be 
noted that, during the conference on monitoring of environmental activity 
recently held in the United States, Morocco had been chosen as host country 
for the regional co-ordination centre. It had also been decided that a 
national radiation protection centre should be set up for the purpose of 
promoting radiation protection activities and strengthening the scientific and 
technical infrastructure of the central radiation protection service. With 
that in mind, Morocco would be organizing a regional course for Africa on 
radiation protection in medicine in co-ordination with the Agency. 
133. The Moroccan delegation was satisfied with the assistance which the 
Agency had provided for projects of interest to North African countries, 
namely those on the use of nuclear reactors to desalinate sea water and on the 
eradication of the screwworm and the Mediterranean fruit fly. AFRA constituted 
the ideal framework for strengthening regional co-operation and establishing 
contacts between scientists in the region with a view to promoting the 
use of nuclear techniques. The number of African countries that had joined 
AFRA showed how much interest the agreement had excited. The courses 
organized by the Agency under AFRA had helped countries in the region to 
become better informed on available resources and infrastructures and to find 
out more about the advantages to be derived from regional co-operation 
directed at achieving common objectives. The AFRA projects had a very high 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.348 
page 38 


priority but their implementation was contingent on the financial resources 
available. He commended the efforts that France and Spain had made in that 
regard and urged all donor States to follow their example and to offer the 
support and assistance needed for those projects. He thanked the Agency for 
its support and the financial assistance it had provided for the programme and 
stressed that, if it was to be able to respond to the growing needs of the 
developing countries, the TACF could not rely entirely on voluntary 
contributions but needed predictable and assured funding too. 


134. Morocco attached particular importance to the safeguards system, which 
was of fundamental importance to the credibility of the non-proliferation 
regime. The Board's reaffirmation of the Agency's right to carry out special 
inspections and the proposals regarding the provision of additional information 
and voluntary declaration of the production, export and import of 
nuclear and non-nuclear equipment were measures which would help strengthen 
the safeguards system. Credible safeguards could create a climate of international 
trust and co-operation which would help lay the foundation for new 
nuclear technology of benefit to the economic and social development of Member 
States. 
135. In conclusion, noting that a balance should be maintained between 
regulatory and promotional activities, he commended the Agency's efforts to 
meet the challenges confronting the international community in relation to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The progress made by the Agency during the 
past few years was clear proof of the positive role it played. 
The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
16 October 1992 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 
Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 24 September 1992, at 10.25 a.m. 


President; Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 
later: Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


General debate and annual report for 
1991 (continued) 1-49 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Paraguay 1- 19 
Norway 20 - 27 
Argentina 28 - 43 
Algeria 44 - 49 

Arrangements for the Conference 50 - 51 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
of items for initial discussion 
(resumed from meeting 345) 50 - 51 
[*] GC(XXXVI)/1027. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI)/INF/313/Rev.2. 


92-03750 
0418n/0035n 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 2 


Item of the 
agenda* 


General debate and annual report for 
1991 (resumed) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Lebanon 
Belarus 
New Zealand 
Colombia 
Namibia 
Kenya 
Kuwait 


Paragraphs 


52 - 102 


52 - 60 
61 - 70 
71 - 77 
78 - 82 
83 - 88 
89 - 97 

98 - 102 


ABACC 


AFRA 


ARCAL 


Basic Safety 
Standards 
CIS 
DPRK 
FAO 
NPT 
OPANAL 


RBHK 
TACF 
Tlatelolco 
Treaty 
UNEP 
WWER 


Abbreviations used in this record. 


Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of 
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America 


Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection 
Commonwealth of Independent States 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 


Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
United Nations Environment Programme 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (GC(XXXVI)/1004) (continued) 


1. Mr. PEYRAT (Paraguay) was pleased to see that the Republics of 
Slovenia, Croatia and Uzbekistan were assuming the responsibilities of 
membership in the Agency, which implied promoting peace and development in the 
world through the conscientious application of safeguards, prohibition of the 
military uses of nuclear energy, and its utilization for peaceful and 
productive purposes. 
2. He hoped that the Agency would supply the appropriate technological 
means to consolidate the use of nuclear energy as a source of development, 
since it was an asset from the technological, economic and ecological standpoints. 
He recalled that since 1960 Paraguay had been receiving Agency 
assistance. Thanks to the profound changes that had occurred in his country, 
it was in a position to take its due place among nations. 
3. Under Law No. 14 of 28 July 1992 Paraguay's National Atomic Energy 
Commission had been restructured. It had a close relationship with the 
National University of Asuncion, and its members were designated by the 
University's rector from among persons proposed by institutions direcily 
concerned with the use or handling of nuclear material. 
4. Referring to activities in the area of animal science, he pointed out 
that the emphasis was on immunoassay techniques for diagnosis of foot-andmouth 
disease. His country also attached importance to the use of nuclear 
techniques to study water pollution and to radiological protection. As for 
equipment and fellowships, he hoped that the Agency would make a special 
effort, despite its scarce resources, to provide assistance, and make 
available accessible technology so that his country could enjoy the benefits 
of nuclear energy. 
5. Paraguay did not use fossil fuel or nuclear energy since it produced 
12 600 MW of hydroelectric power from the Itaipu plant, operated jointly with 
Brazil. The Yacyreta hydroelectric plant was in an advanced stage of 
construction and, as from 1994, would generate 4300 MW, to be shared on an 
equal basis with Argentina. Other such plants were under consideration. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 4 


6. Because of the availability of rich hydraulic resources, the existence 
of the conditions needed for overall development and the possibility of 
obtaining assured and pollutant-free nuclear power it was time, on the basis 
of the principles enunciated at the Rio de Janeiro Conference, to tackle the 
problem of damage to the environment, which endangered the very existence of 
the human species. 
7. Paraguay supported the need for an international nuclear safety 
convention which would make it possible to verify the conditions of use, 
ensure non-proliferation and eliminate the possibilities of military use of 
nuclear energy. 
8. His country was resolutely opposed to clandestine development of 
nuclear energy in any form and commended the Agency's role in preventing such 


development by providing detailed and reliable information thereon. 


9. In connection with the search for new ways of co-operation, he 
expressed his appreciation of the offers made by countries in the Latin-
American region, the willingness of developed countries to provide technological 
support, the bilateral arrangements within the regions and the 
effective work of the Agency, which was carrying out its tasks with competence 
and had continually to improve its capacity to be of service in the areas of 
safety and development. 
10. He was happy to see that positive steps were being taken to ratify 
safeguards agreements with the Agency providing for regular inspections in 
States possessing nuclear technology. 
11. He hoped that safeguards inspections by the Agency would proceed 
satisfactorily, thereby raising international confidence and contributing to 
peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region at the present time. 
12. He urged that pressure be applied with a view to compliance with the 
guidelines for weapons control in the case of transfer of missile technology 
and missile sales. 
13. His delegation supported the international community's efforts to curb 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and noted the positive changes in the 
attitude of Governments with regard to the strengthening of nuclear nonproliferation. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.349 
page 5 


14. Welcoming the joint declaration on denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula of 31 December 1991, he called for full implementation of the 
agreement, which would promote regional peace and security and contribute to 
reconciliation and stability in the area. He also commended the ratification 
of the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea and hoped the latter would place its nuclear facilities 
under appropriate safeguards. 
15. Furthermore, he was in favour of adherence by all countries in the 
Middle East, without exception, to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
because peace could only be achieved by agreement. 
16. Fifty years had gone by since the first chain reaction, and the General 
Conference was meeting at a time when the world faced the choice between 
extermination and a better future life. 
17. The work which the Agency had done during the preceding 35 years by 
formulating conditions of use of nuclear energy and promoting effective agreements 
proved its usefulness, and it owed its achievements, in large measure, 
to its freedom of action within the United Nations system. 
18. In conclusion, he recalled a statement of the Foreign Minister of 
Paraguay, Mr. Alexis Frutos Vaesken, who had referred to the beginning of a 
new international order marked by accelerated and profound political changes 
and to the emergence of regional economic blocks, demanding a new pattern of 
trade relations. It was in that context that Paraguay wished to declare its 
commitment to discharge its responsibilities, to abide by the treaties it had 
signed and to promote the success of ARCAL. Weakening of confidence in the 
Agency must be avoided by continually updating the legal provisions and 
conditions, and he called upon the developed countries not to flinch from 
supporting assistance activities. 
19. Paraguay's commitment to the Agency was clear and unequivocal, as was 
its opposition to every type of discrimination and its support for activities 
to achieve the highest levels of safety and development. 
20. Mr. AAMODT (Norway), having welcomed Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency, said that his delegation could 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.349 
page 6 


support the Agency's proposed programme and budget for 1993 and 1994 submitted 
by the Board. It also supported the Board's proposal to increase the level of 
the Working Capital Fund for 1993 by $2 million in order to help ensure that 
the Agency could operate continuously and efficiently. It could also accept 
that the Director General be given the authority to make advances of up to 
$500 000 from the Working Capital Fund for projects or activities which had 
been approved by the Board but were not funded from the Regular Budget. 
However, the Director General should only exercise that authority in 
exceptional cases and only in order to achieve the objectives of the Statute. 
An increase in the Working Capital Fund should not be a remedy for the problem 
of late payment of contributions by Member States to the Regular Budget. In 
some cases, late payment might reflect severe economic problems in the Member 
States concerned, but in the past that had not been so in all cases and Norway 
fully supported the Director General's repeated statements urging Member 
States to pay their assessed contributions prompty and in full. 


21. His country supported the $55.5 million target for voluntary contributions 
to the TACF for 1993 and, pending parliamentary approval, would 
contribute its assessed share to that fund. While the target for the TACF had 
increased from $34 million in 1987 to $55.5 million for 1993, there had been a 
serious decline during the past couple of years in the percentage of the 
target actually met. It might therefore be advisable if the target over the 
next few years increased somewhat more slowly than it had done in recent years. 
22. Protection of the environment and natural resources was of vital 
interest to the entire international community and a substantial contribution 
in that area had been made by the Agency's nuclear applications programme. 
The eradication of the New World screwworm in North Africa was a striking 
example of the benefits of nuclear techniques. 
23. As experience had shown, the operation of nuclear installations was not 
without risks and it was imperative that all countries operating nuclear 
installations should observe the strictest safety and environmental 
standards. Agreement as soon as possible on a framework convention on nuclear 
safety, including the handling and disposal of radioactive waste, was crucial 
in that respect. Such a convention would contribute considerably to the 
improvement of nuclear safety worldwide. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 7 


24. Norway was particularly concerned about the dumping of radioactive 
waste at sea. It had on earlier occasions stressed the need to monitor 
dumping sites regularly and to evaluate possible consequences to the marine 
environment. A joint Norwegian-Russian expedition, with Agency participation, 
had been carried out in the Barents and Kara Seas to measure levels of radioactivity, 
to establish the origin of the radioactive contamination and to 
inspect dumping sites. The findings of that mission were currently being 
evaluated. 
25. Norway was also very concerned about the safety of nuclear installations 
in Eastern Europe and supported Agency activities in that area, 
including the project to evaluate the safety of RBMK reactors. The conclusions 
of the first phase of the Agency's study on WWER reactors were worrying 
and the problems which had been identified needed to be dealt with through 
concerted international action with adequate financing. His country welcomed 
the initiative of the Group of 24 in that context. For its part, Norway was 
working out bilateral measures to improve the operational safety of the Kola 
nuclear power plant and was co-operating with the Agency and with institutions 
and authorities in Belarus, Russia and Ukraine to reduce the levels of caesium 
in cattle by the use of Prussian blue. There was clearly a need to 
co-ordinate the assistance given to the countries of Eastern Europe so as to 
define prior- ities and prevent overlapping. The Agency was in a good 
position to provide technical support by collecting, reviewing and 
disseminating information on the assistance programmes being implemented. 
26. The statement by the Secretariat that in 1991 it had not detected any 
anomaly which would indicate the diversion of a significant amount of 
safeguarded nuclear material or misuse of facilities or equipment subject to 
safeguards was an important one, but it was overshadowed by the information, 
resulting from inspection activities carried out by the Agency pursuant to 
Security Council resolution 687, that Iraq had failed to comply with its 
safeguards obligations. Following that disclosure there had been wider 
acceptance of strengthened safeguards commitments. While more extensive use 
of special inspections and the earlier submission of design information would 
help to improve the safeguards system, it was also very important that the 
Agency should have more knowledge about the worldwide flow of nuclear 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 8 


materials. Norway was therefore in favour of universal reporting of the 
production, export and import of nuclear materials, including those that had 
not reached a composition and purity suitable for fuel fabrication or isotope 
enrichment. Knowledge about the export and import of certain types of 
equipment and non-nuclear material might in some cases also improve Agency 
safeguards in countries with comprehensive safeguards agreements and Norway 
could therefore agree to the reporting of the international transfer of those 
types of equipment and material. 


27. Norway was pleased to note the accession to the NPT in 1991 of 
Lithuania, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe and the entry into 
force of safeguards agreements pursuant to the NPT with South Africa and with 
Tuvalu and of a unilateral submission agreement with Pakistan covering a 
miniature neutron source reactor. Norway also welcomed the accession in 1992 
of China and France to the NPT and the entry into force of a safeguards 
agreement pursuant to the NPT with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
which it hoped would be implemented in full at an early date. However, it was 
to be regretted that at the end of April 1992, 49 non-nuclear-weapon States 
party to the NPT had not concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency 
within the prescribed period of 18 months after ratificaton or accession. The 
Secretariat's document on the status of negotiations of safeguards agreements 
and subsidiary arrangements was a useful one which should be updated 
annually. In conclusion, Norway supported the gradual extension of safeguards 
in nuclear-weapon States and called upon all such States to make a complete 
separation between peaceful and military activities and to start reporting to 
the Agency on all nuclear materials in peaceful nuclear activities. 
28. Mr. MONDINO (Argentina) said he wished first to extend a warm 
welcome to the new Member States of the Agency: Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan. 
29. In the past year, Argentina and Brazil had continued to implement the 
measures foreseen in the Argentine-Brazilian Declaration on Common Nuclear 
Policy issued on 28 November 1990 in Foz do Iguacu, which were: the 
establishment of a common system of accounting and control of nuclear 
materials; the joint negotiation of a comprehensive safeguards agreement with 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 9 


the Agency, which would audit the bilateral system; and the adoption of 
pertinent measures to update and improve the text of the Treaty of Tlatelolco 
with a view to achieving its full entry into force in both countries. 


30. The common system of accounting and control of nuclear materials was 
already fully functional. The system had been given a legal framework through 
the signing by both countries of an agreement for the exclusively peaceful use 
of nuclear energy in July 1991 in Guadalajara. It had been ratified by both 
Governments and had been in force since 12 December 1991. That agreement also 
established the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials (ABACC), which had its headquarters in Rio de Janeiro and 
which had been in operation since 1 July 1992. The ABACC had already made 
arrangements for the first reciprocal inspections. He was pleased to note 
that the ABACC was participating in the General Conference. 
31. With regard to the second step foreseen in the Foz do Iguacu Declaration, 
a safeguards agreement between Argentina, Brazil, the ABACC and the 
Agency had been signed in Vienna on 13 December 1991 by the Presidents of the 
two countries at a special meeting of the Board of Governors. That agreement 
had already been ratified by the Argentine parliament. Until that quadripartite 
safeguards agreement entered into force, the common system of 
accounting and control of nuclear materials would provide the international 
community with adequate guarantees that both countries were fulfilling their 
obligations. 
32. With regard to the third step foreseen in the Foz do Iguacu Declaration, 
a meeting of all the parties to the Treaty of Tlatelolco had approved 
on 16 August 1992 amendments to the Treaty jointly drawn up by the Governments 
of Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico, thus opening the way to the speedy 
ratification of the Treaty by the Argentine parliament and to its full entry 
into force. 
33. Further evidence of Argentina's full adherence to the international 
policy of non-proliferation of nuclear arms was that a decree had recently 
been passed establishing strict control over the export of sensitive 
equipment, material and technology in fields related to the production of 
weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear arms. The National Commission 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 10 


for the Control of Sensitive Exports, set up to implement that system, had 
already granted the first export licences and refused others. 


34. His Government attached great importance to the functions of the 
so-called Nuclear Suppliers Group and identified itself with the decisions 
taken by the Group at its meeting on 31 March 1992 with a view to preventing 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The Group had welcomed some 
of the concrete steps taken by Brazil and Argentina. He was pleased to 
announce that his Government was ready to formally join the Nuclear Suppliers 
Group. 
35. Turning to the status of nuclear activities in Argentina, he observed 
that nuclear energy continued to play a major role in electricity production. 
In 1991 the Atucha I and Embalse power plants had contributed 17.1% of the 
total electricity produced by the national grid, in spite of the fact that 
those plants represented only 7.6% of the installed capacity. On 
17 March 1992, Atucha I had established a record for uninterrupted operation 362 
days at close-to-maximum output. Work on the Atucha II plant was 
progressing well. Economic difficulties in recent years had led to delays, 
but connection to the grid was now predicted for 1996. Another project which 
had been held up by economic constraints was the industrial heavy water plant 
at Arroyito. Final pre-licensing tests were now taking place. The first 
school of nuclear medicine and radiodiagnostics in Latin America, and one of 
the few of its type in the world, had opened in 1991 and was operating 
successfully. Progress had also been made on the design of a plant for 
decontaminating sewage sludge by irradiation before its conversion into 
agro-industrial fertilizer. The plant had the capacity to meet the needs of a 
city with a population of 400 000 and would use a 600 000 curie cobalt-60 
source to destroy the bacteria and viruses responsible for such diseases as 
cholera and salmonella. 
36. Within the framework of the new free-market economy which was being 
vigorously pursued in Argentina, nuclear activities were being restructured 
for maximum efficiency and economy, and the use of private capital was being 
encouraged in those areas which appeared profitable. The State was, however, 
retaining control of the industry, in addition to carrying out its regulatory 
functions. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 11 


37. In the field of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, the past year had "been a very active one for Argentina, on 
both the multilateral and bilateral fronts. Under the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme, including ARCAL, Argentina had hosted training courses 
and workshops, provided training for visiting scientists and fellows from 
other countries, and had made a large number of experts and lecturers 
available to the Agency. In 1991 it had occupied fourth place of all Member 
States in supplying experts and lecturers, and tenth place in training 
visiting scientists and fellows. As for bilateral co-operations, two new 
agreements had been signed. The first was an agreement with the United States 
and symbolized a new stage in the development of nuclear relations between the 
two countries. The second was with Costa Rica and related primarily to radioisotope 
applications and nuclear medicine. Negotiations were in progress for 
a co-operation agreement with France. Lastly, a contract had been signed very 
recently between the atomic energy authority of Egypt and its Argentine 
counterpart for the construction of a research reactor and additional facilities 
that would significantly improve Egypt's capabilities in nuclear 
medicine, the irradiation of materials, basic scientific research and manpower 
training. 


38. Turning to the Agency's technical assistance activities over the past 
year, he commended the Secretariat for its efforts to make optimum use of its 
scarce resources during a period of financial crisis. Having been an active 
user of the technical co-operation programme only since 1991, his country was 
completing - to its full satisfaction - its first biennial cycle of such cooperation. 
Argentina would be pledging a contribution to the TACF for 1993 
and had paid all its outstanding contributions to the TACF, including for 1992. 
39. With regard to Agency safeguards, Argentina regretted that, for the 
first time, a Member State had failed to comply with its obligations. It 
seemed that the absence of adequate information had prevented early detection 
of that non-compliance. His Government welcomed the steps being taken by the 
Agency, within the framework of the Statute and existing safeguards 
agreements, to strengthen the safeguards system and remedy its shortcomings 
with regard to information. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 12 


40. His delegation also commended the results achieved in the fields of 
nuclear safety and radiological protection, food and agriculture, the life 
sciences and the physical sciences. The work done by the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics in Trieste was of great importance and his country 
supported the continuation of its activities in whatever institutional 
framework was considered most appropriate. 
41. His delegation welcomed the significant progress made in a very short 
time towards establishing a nuclear safety convention. However, it felt 
strongly that the technical content of such a convention should be compatible 
with the Agency's basic safety standards, which were currently under 
revision. Wide acceptance of the revised standards was vital and would 
provide a sound basis for further progress on the convention. Moreover, the 
convention should not contain excessive technical detail since that might 
impede future progress in nuclear safety and should not exempt operators or 
national regulatory bodies from the primary responsibility for safety. 
42. His delegation welcomed the proposal put forward by several Member 
States for the strengthening of assistance to developing countries regarding 
the commercial-scale use of food irradiation. His country had gained 
experience with that technology and was capable of manufacturing sealed 
cobalt-60 sources for irradiation. It was willing to place its knowledge and 
technology at the disposal of the Agency and Member States to help further 
that initiative. 
43. Finally, his Government commended the Director General and all the 
staff for the achievements of the past year, particularly where the 
strengthening and universalization of the Agency's safeguards system were 
concerned. 
44. Mr. LAMAMRA (Algeria), after welcoming the new Member States of 
the Agency, noted that in order for the peaceful uses of atomic energy to 
flourish, it was essential to establish and improve confidence among States. 
Every effort had to be made, therefore, to strengthen the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system, to take steps to ban nuclear 
testing, to bring about substantial reductions in existing arsenals, and to 
codify a universal commitment not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons 
against non-nuclear-weapon States. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 13 


45. With its thirty-five years of experience, the Agency was in a good 
position to allay concerns about the risks associated with certain peaceful 
uses of atomic energy and to stress the important role of nuclear energy in 
the preservation of the environment. In that context, it was important to 
ensure a dynamic balance between the Agency's control activities and its 
promotional activities. 
46. The Director General's opening statement and the Annual Report for 1991 
gave an idea of the range of the Agency's activities and the progress of its 
major programmes. However, it was clear that the implementation of planned 
projects was made precarious by the effects of the policy of zero real growth, 
the accumulation of substantial arrears in contributions and delays in the 
payment of contributions. Demands on the Agency were increasing, but its 
resources were being eroded. Such a situation was unacceptable and impaired 
the Agency's credibility. His country therefore hoped that the Agency's 
financial situation would improve and regarded the Agency's Medium-Term Plan 
as a means of ensuring realistic and reliable programming which would help to 
stabilize the Agency's activities. 
47. Algeria was grateful to the Agency for the valuable assistance which it 
had provided in major areas such as health, agriculture, water resources and 
energy. Algeria's projects were centred around the Nur and Salam research and 
radioisotope production reactors, which it had voluntarily placed under Agency 
safeguards and which had been the subject of numerous technical visits and 
inspections. Algeria also appreciated the Agency's assistance in projects of 
interest to the North African subregion, such as those related to control of 
the screwworm and medfly and the possibility of using nuclear reactors for the 
desalination of sea water. His country was also participating actively in the 
AFRA programme. 
48. With regard to the financing of technical co-operation, the 
establishment of a system which would ensure predictable and assured resources 
continued to be a major challenge. While a satisfactory arrangement had been 
found for the financing of safeguards through the efforts of an informal 
working group and there was regular growth in that area, increased attention 
needed to be paid to strengthening international co-operation in the areas of 
nuclear safety, radiation protection and radioactive waste management. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 14 


49. In conclusion, he stressed that the Agency should be responsive to new 
developments. For that reason, it was important to make a detailed analysis 
of the composition and functioning of its various organs and of the 
Secretariat. Appropriate measures should be taken to allow greater participation 
by developing countries in the Agency's work, and it was with that 
requirement in mind that the items on the staffing of the Agency's 
Secretariat, the amendment of Article VI.A.2 and of Article VI as a whole 
should be considered. 
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(resumed) 
50. The PRESIDENT said that, at a meeting just concluded, the General 
Committee had decided to recommend the inclusion in the agenda of an 
additional item entitled "Participation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
(Serbia and Montenegro)" as an item of an important and urgent character. It 
further recommended that the new item be included as item 8, with consequential 
renumbering of the agenda items listed in document GC(XXXVI)/1O27, and 
that it be discussed direct in plenary. He suggested that the general debate 
be interrupted in the afternoon in order to take up that item. 
51. 
It was so decided. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (GC(XXXVI)/1004) (resumed) 


52. Mr. SALLOUKH (Lebanon) welcomed the new Members to the Agency. 
53. The past year had seen the accession of important countries to the NPT, 
a reduction in nuclear armaments, and initiatives to resolve long-standing 
disputes through negotiation. The world was now more ready for peace than for 
war and the vast resources formerly wasted on the arms race were now available 
to help achieve peace and security. The strict application of safeguards was 
vital to the security of the international community, which was dependent on 
tighter control of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction. 
54. He urged the Agency to strengthen its efforts in promoting the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy, particularly in the fields of food and agriculture, 
health, and industry, in order to increase the prosperity of developing 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.349 
page 15 


countries. He also commended the Agency's efforts to promote international 
co-operation in the fields of nuclear safety and radiation protection and 
expressed the hope that the Agency would have the right to inspect nuclear 
facilities from the safety point of view in the same way as for safeguards. 


55. Nuclear waste posed environmental problems that transcended national 
borders, and proper controls were necessary in order to preserve clean air, 
wholesome food and fresh water. The conference on the environment held 
recently in Rio de Janeiro had touched on that and many other issues. The 
rich industrialized countries had a greater responsibility than others to 
combat waste and pollution, to halt desertification, and soil erosion, and to 
resolve the problem of carbon dioxide emissions. 
56. Water was destined to become a major issue in the Middle East and other 
areas. Estimates for water requirements in the year 2000 in the Arab world 
predicted that 13.4 billion cubic metres would be needed for drinking water 
and 4.5 billion cubic metres for industrial use. In spite of its prodigious 
fresh water resources, Lebanon was conducting studies of future water 
requirements and called on the Agency to act swiftly to collate all available 
information on future water needs and on desalination using nuclear energy. 
57. His country shared the Agency's concern about its financial situation, 
which was attributable to shortfalls in assessed and voluntary contributions. 
Financial difficulties had had an adverse impact on the technical assistance 
programme and he hoped that a just balance would be found between the Agency's 
safeguards and technical co-operation programmes. There was no doubt about the 
need for safeguards nor about the necessity of providing technical assistance 
to developing countries, which had to cope with constantly growing populations 
and concomitantly increasing needs. An understanding approach to both issues 
was needed if a consensus was to be reached among Agency Members. 
58. Many years of consultations on the amendment of Article VI had not yet 
produced any agreement. In the light of the steady increase in the Agency's 
membership, it was apparent that some geographical areas were now underrepresented 
on the Board of Governors. The effectiveness of the Board would 
be enhanced by a more equitable representation. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 16 


59. Turning to the important issue of the application of safeguards in the 
Middle East, he recalled that the previous year the General Conference had 
requested the Secretariat submit a report to it on the matter. Document 
GOV/INF/658, submitted to the Board of Governors in June 1992, had not been 
wholly satisfactory, and the Board had requested that it be redrafted before 
being submitted to the General Conference. The revised version, which was 
contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1019, included the preamble of the previous 
document and some changes but his country felt that practical issues had still 
not been addressed. The peoples of the Middle East longed for peace and hoped 
to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. He stressed the need 
for non-discriminatory application of full-scope safeguards to all nuclear 
activities in the Middle East, including Israel. The Council of the League of 
Arab States, at a meeting in September 1992, had reaffirmed its readiness to 
discuss all disarmament proposals, thereby supporting Egypt's proposal for a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. It considered that approach to be the 
best way of achieving peace in the region. That goal could not be achieved 
through the efforts of one side alone. By accepting Agency safeguards on its 
nuclear installations, Israel would also be demonstrating its goodwill. The 
Agency was duty-bound to submit a comprehensive study on the application of 
full-scope safeguards in the region as a first step towards achieving a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone. All weapons, especially those of mass destruction, 
should be destroyed. 
60. Lebanon, a peace-loving country, was now in the process of rebuilding 
its infrastructure, which had been destroyed as a result of more than 15 years 
of war. He hoped that the Agency would contribute actively to those efforts. 
61. Mr. MIKHALEVICH (Belarus) welcomed Uzbekistan, Croatia and 
Slovenia as new Members of the Agency. 
62. Contributing to the reinforcement of peace and security in connection 
with the NPT must remain a priority for the Agency. All efforts in that 
regard should be multilateral in nature. One of the main tasks of the NPT 
Review Conference in 1995 would be to convert the NPT into an agreement of 
unlimited duration. Belarus was attempting to establish itself as a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone and was making active efforts to accede to the NPT. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 17 


The ratification of the Treaty would be one of the priorities on the agenda of 
the next session of the Parliament of Belarus, which was scheduled to begin on 
20 October 1992. 


63. The Chernobyl tragedy had shown very clearly that the fact that a 
country did not have a nuclear power programme of its own did not protect it 
from the risk from nuclear power plants in other States situated near its 
borders. His country was therefore particularly in favour of the extension of 
the Agency's nuclear safety programme and considered that nuclear safety 
issues should be a priority within the Agency's activities. It fully 
supported the creation of a binding international nuclear safety regime, and 
endorsed the work which was taking place within the Agency on the 
establishment of an international nuclear safety convention. Such a 
convention would be a unique opportunity to establish an officially agreed 
international approach to all aspects of the problem. One logical consequence 
of the efforts to strengthen the international safety regime could be the 
drawing up of an international treaty on the cessation of the production of 
fissile material for military purposes. A treaty of that kind would involve 
the setting up of an additional monitoring system for warheads and nuclear 
materials. Bilateral agreements could also play a major role in solving 
nuclear safety problems and problems related to the protection of the public 
from radiation. Belarus was ready to co-operate with interested Member States 
on that issue. 
64. The review of the Basic Safety Standards was to be commended. That 
activity was of particular interest to his country in view of the adjustments 
which it was currently making to the State programme to minimize the 
consequences of the Chernobyl accident. 
65. While he shared the concern of the international community regarding 
the problem of nuclear weapons control in the CIS, he pointed out that his 
country had already started to set up a State accounting and control system 
for nuclear materials and had established a national competent authority in 
that connection. In addition, his Government was currently considering the 
possibility of acceding to the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material. Belarus was grateful for the help it had received from the 
Agency with the establishment of the necessary legal framework and a 
regulatory infrastructure for dealing with nuclear and radiation safety issues. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 18 


66. Belarus was carrying out serious research in nuclear physics, the 
interaction of ionizing radiation with matter, radiobiology, radioecology and 
the use of radiation in medicine, agriculture and other fields. The 
strengthening of contacts between Belarus and the Agency was therefore of 
great importance. His country intended to co-operate actively with the Agency 
on the development of a strategy for the radiation protection of the public, 
in work on the effects of low radiation doses and the determination of overall 
exposure levels, and on the development of new technologies to facilitate 
agricultural production on contaminated land. He thanked the Agency for the 
assistance it had provided in organizing, together with FAO and the Government 
of Norway, the project on the reduction of the radioactive caesium content of 
milk and meat from grazing animals in regions affected by the Chernobyl 
accident. The preliminary results of an experiment carried out under 
production conditions showed a threefold reduction in the caesium level. 
67. Belarus had recently celebrated the first anniversary of its existence 
as a sovereign State. The transition to independence was being dogged by a 
severe economic crisis. It was experiencing difficulties in the fuel and 
energy sector and had to import approximately 90% of its fuel and almost 30% 
of its electricity. One way of solving that energy crisis would be to build 
nuclear power plants, but that would require public support and the 
vanquishing of the "Chernobyl syndrome". 
68. The complex problems with which the people of Belarus were faced had 
been made significantly worse by the Chernobyl tragedy. His Government was 
making great efforts to improve the life of the people who lived in the 
affected regions. Enormous amounts of resources had been poured into the 
construction of "clean" living areas for the evacuees. Very stict standards 
had been introduced for the radionuclide content of food products. Medical 
care had been improved, as had techniques for the farming on contaminated 
territory; decontamination and radioactive waste disposal techniques were 
being developed. Unfortunately, experience had shown that national efforts 
were not enough and that the consequences of the catastrophe could only be 
mitigated by effective international co-operation. He extended his sincere 
thanks to all those countries and organizations which were providing 
assistance to his country in that connection. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.349 
page 19 


69. He shared the general concern over the Agency's financial 
difficulties. His Government was endeavouring to pay off its debts to the 
Agency. 
70. His country felt that a more flexible approach should be adopted to the 
drawing up of scientific and technical co-operation programmes, allowing for 
redistribution of resources in accordance with changing priorities. There 
should be periodic reviews and revision of plans in that area based on 
consultations between Member States and the Secretariat. At present, special 
priority should be given to projects related to the Chernobyl accident since 
that work would benefit the international community as a whole. 
71. Mr. BISLEY (New Zealand) said that the Agency had a vital role to 
play in providing information and advice to developing countries to enable 
them to assess the nuclear power option. New Zealand, which had 
hydroelectric, geothermal and natural gas resources, had not chosen that 
option, but its scientists had developed expertise in certain non-power 
applications of interest and relevance to developing countries and had 
contributed to the Agency's technical co-operation activities by participating 
in over a dozen different projects in fields such as hydrology and geothermal 
studies. 
72. There was a striking difference between the current strategic situation 
and that prevailing immediately after the establishment of the Agency. 
However, although danger of global nuclear warfare had receded, the threat of 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons had not. The international community was 
rightly concerned about attempts to circumvent international control systems, 
including the Agency's safeguards system. The details of Iraq's secret 
nuclear weapons programme, which had existed despite the safeguards system, 
had created the impetus for moves to strengthen the Agency's safeguards 
system. Agency inspectors working with the United Nations Special Commission 
had done an admirable job under difficult circumstances in unearthing details 
of Iraq's secret nuclear weapons programme. That task was not yet finished 
and Iraq had not yet fully revealed the details of its nuclear weapons 
programme, as required by the Security Council, including details of its 
foreign nuclear suppliers. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 20 


73. As a country in the Asia and Pacific region, New Zealand had been 
concerned that it had taken so long for the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea (DPRK) to honour its obligation under the NPT to conclude a safeguards 
agreement. His country welcomed the fact that it had now done so and that the 
first three Agency inspections had taken place. It also welcomed the Joint 
Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula signed at the end 
of 1991 between the DPRK and the Republic of Korea and hoped that the DPRK 
would complement the implementation of its Agency safeguards agreement by 
allowing effective bilateral inspections as provided for in that Declaration. 
74. The full-scope safeguards agreements entered into by a number of other 
States, including Brazil and Argentina, the accession by China and France to 
the NPT, and the fact that Belarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan had agreed to sign 
the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States were all significant developments. In 
view of the additional responsibilities for the Agency which those 
developments would entail, every effort had to be made to ensure that 
safeguards were not only effective but also efficient. His country was 
encouraged by the Director General's evident willingness to explore ways of 
doing that. 
75. It was clear that there were severe strains on the safeguards budget. 
However, the financing of safeguards should be based on an equitable system. 
Although all States benefited from an effective safeguards system, it was 
nevertheless those States with nuclear industries which created the 
requirement for safeguards activities and the distribution of the burden of 
financing safeguards should take that fact into account. His country was 
nevertheless happy to contribute its fair share towards financing Agency 
safeguards. It was also pleased that it had been able to respond positively 
to the Director General's request earlier in 1992 for help with the funding of 
safeguards equipment by making a modest extrabudgetary contribution. 
76. It was increasingly being accepted that transparency was a key element 
in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. For that reason, attention had 
been focused on export controls as a means of preventing nuclear 
proliferation. Shortly after the conclusion of the previous session of the 
General Conference, the United Kingdom and France had announced that they 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 21 


would adopt a policy of requiring full-scope safeguards for any new nuclear 


supply. Then, at the beginning of April 1992, all 27 members of the Nuclear 


Suppliers Group had agreed to adopt a full-scope safeguards export policy. 


Argentina had subsequently announced a similar policy. New Zealand therefore 


hoped that China, the only major nuclear supplier not already having done so, 


would soon accept the importance of a full-scope safeguards export policy in 


preventing proliferation. 


77. In conclusion, he extended a warm welcome to the three new members of 
the Agency and called upon all Member States to renew their efforts to prevent 
the spread of nuclear weapons and to ensure the safety of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear technology. 
78. Mr. GOMEZ MENDEZ (Colombia), having welcomed Croatia, Slovenia and 
Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency, observed that the recent new 
Colombian constitution prohibited the fabrication, import and use of chemical, 
biological and nuclear weapons and the entry into the country of nuclear and 
toxic wastes. His Government believed that there should be a balance between 
the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and the control, through the 
safeguards system, of its abuse. It also attached great importance to the 
safety of nuclear facilities as an effective way of ensuring the widespread 
peaceful use of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind. All Member States 
should therefore co-operate in making use of the Agency's services to promote 
operational safety and the effective application of the Early Notification and 
Emergency Assistance Conventions. 
79. As a party to the Tlatelolco Treaty, Colombia welcomed the amendments 
to Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 20 of the Treaty approved by OPANAL in 
August 1992. It also welcomed the decision by Argentina, Brazil and Chile to 
take the appropriate steps to implement that Treaty and the ratification by 
France of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty. With France's ratification, 
all nuclear-weapon States had agreed to respect the denuclearization of the 
region. 
80. In his Government's five-year economic and social development plan 
for 1990-94, high priority was given to the development and use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. The plan's objectives included the introduction 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 22 


of the peaceful applications of nuclear technology in undergraduate university 
courses, the introduction of specific aspects of that technology in 
post-graduate courses, and the improvement of public awareness of the benefits 
of nuclear technology. 


81. The Institute of Nuclear Affairs (IAN) had embarked on five major 
programmes for the coming five years: the establishment of a national 
radiation and nuclear safety programme: the upgrading of the TAN-R1 research 
reactor; the promotion of the applications of large radiation sources, 
including the purchase of a new cobalt-60 source with a view to setting up an 
industrial applications pilot plant: the setting up of an energy planning 
group with a view to including the nuclear option in Colombia's future energy 
power planning; and the creation of an environmental protection group with 
particular emphasis on the conservation of water resources using isotope 
techniques and nuclear analytical technology. 
82. In conclusion, he wished to express his Government's gratitude to the 
Agency and to donor countries which had made it possible to implement many 
important development projects in Colombia. For its part, Colombia had 
pledged its assessed share of the target for the TACF for 1993. 
Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea), Vice-President, took the Chair. 


83. Ms. SCHIMMING-CHASE (Namibia), after welcoming Croatia, Slovenia 
and Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency, commended the Secretariat for its 
commitment to the peaceful and safe application of nuclear energy for 
sustainable development. 
84. Namibia was currently taking the formal steps necessary to accede to 
the NPT. It had been encouraged to do so by the progress being made in 
reducing nuclear arms worldwide. It intended to commence negotiations 
immediately with a view to concluding a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
85. Namibia did not envisage the development of a nuclear power programme 
in the foreseeable future. So soon after independence, its priority was, to 
the extent that economic and social conditions allowed, to expand activities 
in nuclear science and technology in order to meet basic needs in agriculture, 
animal husbandry, hydrology and medicine. In establishing the basic radiation 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 23 


protection infrastructure which was a prerequisite for the expansion of the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy, Namibia would be relying for years to 
come on the Agency and on regional co-operation - through AFRA - for the 
provision of expertise, technical assistance and training. 


86. Her delegation welcomed the measures the Agency had taken to strengthen 
nuclear safety and radiological protection in developing countries. Namibia 
had joined the Agency only in 1991, but was grateful for the assistance it had 
already received under the technical co-operation programme. A mission 
consisting of five international experts had recently conducted a 
comprehensive technical appraisal of the radiological safety programme at 
Namibia's uranium mine, the results of which had provided a technical basis 
for the future supervision of the mine by the country's regulatory 
authorities. Currently, a second expert mission was visiting Namibia to 
assist with the establishment of a radioactive waste management programme. 
87. The preliminary draft of the new and expanded Basic Safety Standards, 
which took account of the principles and concepts set out in the new 
recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection, 
was a major step towards the attainment of a standardized level of safety 
internationally. In their final form the Standards would form part of 
Namibia's legislative framework for the peaceful and safe application of 
nuclear energy. 
88. In conclusion, she commended the Agency on its performance during the 
past year and confirmed her country's commitment to the Agency's goals and 
mandate. 
89. Mr. OGALO (Kenya) said he wished first to welcome Croatia, 
Slovenia and Uzbekistan as new Members of the Agency. 
90. His delegation was pleased to note the report prepared by the Board of 
Governors in response to requests from Member States concerning equitable 
geographical distribution in the recruitment of Agency staff. 
91. In the past year, co-operation between the Agency and Kenya had 
remained very good. Kenya's economy was largely dependent on agriculture, and 
the Agency had continued to support its national efforts to improve 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.349 
page 24 


agricultural production through research into the productivity of dairy 
cattle, isotope-based studies of the efficiency of fertilizer use, research 
into biological and other pesticides, and work on a trypanocide drug. The 
other main area of co-operation had been medical applications of nuclear 
technology, for which Kenya had received equipment for use in the treatment of 
cervical and oesophageal cancers, nuclear medicine, radiological protection 
and other areas. Kenya had also benefited from assistance in waste management 
and nuclear safety. He noted with satisfaction that the Agency intended to 
continue supporting his country in the safe application of nuclear technology 
and thanked the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, Italy 
and other countries which had provided funds for certain programmes. 


92. AFRA, of which Kenya was a member, had met all its targets in its third 
year. His Government was grateful to Spain and France for providing financial 
assistance to AFRA. Without such help, AFRA would not be able to function and 
he appealed to other Member States to support what was a very useful regional 
programme. 
93. Kenya noted with appreciation the actions taken by South Africa in 
implementing its safeguards agreement and the co-operation it had shown to the 
Agency. With more transparency, South Africa could make a substantial 
contribution to the peaceful uses of nuclear science in the African region. 
94. The Agency faced a challenging task in seeking to promote the peaceful 
applications of nuclear technology for sustainable development and to ensure 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It was therefore logical for it to 
pursue those two functions simultaneously and in a balanced manner. 
95. Kenya was currently experiencing one of the worst droughts in its 
history. The situation was exacerbated by the daily influx of thousands of 
refugees from neighbouring countries, which placed a great strain on the 
national economy. In that context, he wished to thank the Agency for standing 
by his country in its efforts to explore further possibilities for harnessing 
nuclear science to improve the living standards of its people. 
96. Referring to the United Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development held in Rio, he stressed that nuclear power had a great role to 
play in providing an alternative source of energy. For its part, the Agency 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.349 
page 25 


should take the lead in environmental monitoring and assessment, particularly 
with regard to the disposal of nuclear wastes. In that connection, his 
Government had been deeply concerned at UNEP's recent revelation of the 
dumping of radioactive wastes in Somalia by certain foreign companies. Owing 
to the potentially severe impact of such dumping on the environment and the 


lives of people in the whole region, his delegation requested the Agency to 
investigate the matter urgently. The world could not stand by and watch as 
some companies flouted international protocols and agreements with impunity. 


97. In conclusion, he wished to emphasize the importance of public 
awareness and education, which were vital components of overall efforts to 
harness nuclear science and technology for sustainable development. 
98. Mr. AL-SHERIDA (Kuwait) welcomed Croatia, Slovenia and Uzbekistan 
as new Members of the Agency. His Government attached great importance to the 
work of the Agency and had consistently paid its annual contributions to the 
budget. 
99. Kuwait had suffered total destruction as a result of the invasion by 
Iraqi forces. He had therefore been most surprised to hear the way it) which 
the Iraqi delegate had listed the damage suffered by Iraq, as if it had been 
the victim and not the aggressor. Kuwait had grown used to the prevarications 
of the Iraqi regime and was not surprised that Iraq had failed to respect 
Security Council resolutions. By shirking its responsibilities Iraq was 
losing credibility. Iraq still held Kuwaiti prisoners and spoke of Kuwait as 
if it were an Iraqi province. While trying to convince the international 
community of its intention to comply with Security Council resolutions, Iraq 
was at the same time concealing information about its nuclear programme. The 
case of Iraq represented a dangerous precedent and cast doubt on the efficacy 
of the present safeguards system. There was a clear need to strengthen that 
system in order to prevent the recurrence of a similar case. 
100. With regard to the question of the application of Agency safeguards in 
the Middle East, he urged the Director General to hold further consultations 
with relevant countries on the options available. He appealed to all 
countries in the Middle East to exert pressure on Israel to submit its nuclear 
installations to Agency safeguards. The Middle East would not achieve 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.349 
page 26 


stability or security so long as Israel failed to respect United Nations and 
Agency resolutions aimed at creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in that 
region. 


101. It was well known that the effects of nuclear activities were 
transboundary in nature. It was important, therefore, that the Agency verify 
safety measures taken nationally and ensure that the storage of waste was not 
carried out at the expense of the environment. 
102. His country was particularly interested in the use of irradiation to 
preserve foodstuffs and requested the Secretariat to disseminate all relevant 
information and to promote the transfer of that technology to developing 
countries. Another area of interest to his country was low-cost desalination 
of water by nuclear means. The availability of water was a fundamental 
problem in the Middle East and in many developing countries. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
2 March 1993 

International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


Original: FRENCH 


THIRTY-SIXTH REGULAR SESSION (1992) 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 24 September 1992, at 3 p.m. 
President: Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 


Later: Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 
811 
Participation of the Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
)( 
Election of members to the Board 
of Governors 
1 38 
37 
56 
7 General debate and annual report for 
1991 (resumed) 57 - 189 
Statements by the delegates of the 
following States and organizations: 
DenmarkSudanAustria 
57 69 
77 
68 
76 
88 

[*] GC(XXXVI)/1027/Rev.1. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI)/INF/313/Rev.2. 


92-03876 
0811n/0067n 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 2 


Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
Bolivia 89 - 98 
Peru 99 - 107 
Zambia 108 - 119 
Mongolia 120 - 129 
Ghana 130 - 141 
Jordan 142 - 148 
Libyan Arab Jamhiriya 149 - 158 
United Republic of Tanzania 159 - 166 
Slovenia 167 - 176 
Agency for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
and the Caribbean 177 - 183 
Brazilian-Argentine Agency for 
Accounting and Control of Nuclear 
Materials 184 - 189 
Abbreviations used in this record 
ABACC Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials 
AFRA African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology 
ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of 
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America 
ASSET Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OPANAL Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean 
OSART Operational Safety Review Team 
RADWASS Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
SAGSI Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
SSDL Secondary Standard Dosimetry Laboratory 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Tlatelolco Treaty Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America 
WAMAP Waste Management Advisory Programme 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 3 


PARTICIPATION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA (SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO) 
(GC(XXXVI)/1035) 


1. The CHAIRMAN drew the General Conference's attention to the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1035 and recommended by the Board 
of Governors. 
2. Mr. RIHA (Czechoslovakia) said that his delegation proceeded from 
the fact that the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had ceased to exist 
and new States had been created on its territory. Only two of them - Slovenia 
and Croatia - had applied for membership of the Agency, their applications 
being approved by the General Conference a few days before. He was therefore 
prepared to fully support the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1035. 
3. Mr. CLARK (United Kingdom) said that the European Community and 
its Member States, on whose behalf he was speaking, had consistently 
maintained that the Agency should wait until the General Assembly of the 
United Nations had taken a substantive position on the question of Yugoslavia 
before doing so itself. The General Assembly had taken such a position on 
22 September. With the General Conference in session, his delegation had 
requested that the Board of Governors hold an urgent meeting and had proposed 
that the Agency take a line similar to that taken by the General Assembly. 
The draft resolution recommended by the Board followed the text of the General 
Assembly resolution, with some minor modifications to take into account the 
different situation of the Agency. 
4. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that the General 
Conference was having to address the extraordinary consequences of one of the 
greatest tragedies of modern times. The conflict on the territory of the 
former Yugoslavia was endangering the security of all, for it jeopardized the 
endeavours to achieve a democratic and peaceful world order. For its part, 
the United States supported all practical efforts to bring peace to the 
territory of the former Yugoslavia. 
5. His delegation wished to stress that the action which had already been 
taken by the General Assembly and which the General Conference was now being 
invited to take merely reflected the realities of the situation in the former 
Yugoslavia. Although without precedent, the action was by no means completely 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 4 


unforeseen. Forty-five years before, the Sixth (legal) Committee of the 
General Assembly of the United Nations had formulated principles to guide the 
United Nations in deciding membership questions related to the break-up of 
States. According to those principles, which - in his opinion - could guide 
the General Conference as well, if, when a Member State broke up, there 
remained no clearly predominant portion which could reasonably be regarded as 
the continuation of the former State, the legal personality of the former 


State was considered extinguished and no State was entitled to continue the 


former State's membership in international organizations. 


6. Before breaking up, the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had 
been one of the most decentralized countries in the world. Since then, there 
had been no agreement among the former Yugoslav republics on the status of the 
former Yugoslavia's United Nations seat. Also, none of the former republics 
was so clearly a predominant portion of the original State as to be entitled 
to be considered the continuation of that State. His Government had therefore 
consistently made it clear that it could not accept Serbia-Montenegro's claim 
to the former Yugoslavia's seat. He regarded the action taken by the Security 
Council and the General Assembly as the appropriate response to an extraordinary 
situation and would accordingly welcome the taking of comparable 
action by the General Conference, as recommended by the Board of Governors, in 
conformity with Article IV of the Statute. Such action would confirm that the 
issue, like other membership questions, should be decided by the General 
Conference upon the recommendation of the Board of Governors. 
7. In resolution 777(1992), adopted on 19 September, the Security Council 
had recognized that the former Yugoslavia had ceased to exist. Upon 
recommendation of the Security Council, the General Assembly resolution, like 
the draft resolution now under consideration, rejected the claim of 
Serbia-Montenegro to continue the membership of the former Yugoslavia. 
Contrary to what some maintained, the point at issue was not the suspension of 
a Member State pursuant to Article XIX of the Statute. Rather, following the 
actions taken by the Security Council and the General Assembly, the General 
Conference, on the basis of recommendations made by the Board of Governors 
pursuant to Article IV of the Statute, would simply be deciding that the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 5 


former Yugoslavia had ceased to exist and that its membership in the Agency 
had therefore expired. 


8. Confirmation by the Board of Governors and the General Conference that 
Serbia-Montenegro was not the continuation of the Socialist Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia would automatically mean that Serbia-Montenegro must apply for 
membership, just as other former Yugoslav republics had done, if it wished to 
participate in the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
9. If it submitted an application, Serbia-Montenegro would be judged by 
the same criteria as all other new States applying for membership. Like them, 
it would have to demonstrate that it was willing and able to fulfil the 
obligations deriving from the Agency's Statute, and due consideration would be 
given to its ability and willingness to act in accordance with the Charter of 
the United Nations. It was to be hoped that its desire to become a Member of 
the Agency would serve as a strong incentive for Serbia-Montenegro to honour 
its obligations, especially those deriving from the Charter of the United 
Nations. Until such time as it applied for membership and was formally 
admitted, Serbia-Montenegro, like any other State that was not a Member of the 
Agency, could not participate in the Agency's work, except in accordance with 
the rules and practices regarding the participation of non-member States. 
10. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) thanked the Board of 
Governors for having met promptly in order to consider the question of the 
participation of Yugoslavia in the Agency and for taking appropriate action. 
He also thanked the members of the European Community for having reacted 
promptly and effectively to the resolution recently adopted by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, which had served as a basis for the draft 
resolution now before the General Conference. 
11. The tragedies occurring in the Balkans had warranted a decisive and 
rapid response on the part of the Security Council of the United Nations and 
other international bodies, including the European Community. Unfortunately, 
the atrocities had been allowed to proceed unimpeded. The decision of the 
General Assembly to deprive the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and 
Montenegro) of its membership had been a just, but belated, response. The 
decision had at least indicated that the international community would not 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 6 


tolerate savagery at a time when all countries or groups of countries should 
be resolving their ethnic and cultural differences by peaceful and diplomatic 
means. 


12. His delegation was therefore pleased that the Board of Governors had 
the previous day decided to recommend to the General Conference for approval a 
draft resolution similar to the resolution adopted by the General Assembly. 
He hoped that the draft would be supported by all delegations. 
13. Mr. BALANESCU (Romania) said that his delegation supported the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1035, which had been recommended by the 
Board of Governors to the General Conference on the initiative of the United 
Kingdom delegation. 
14. However, he wished to draw the General Conference's attention to the 
fact that nuclear facilities and materials subject to Agency safeguards were 
located on the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. He would like 
to know how the Agency proposed to proceed with regard to the application of 
safeguards to those facilities and materials pending the admission of the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to the Agency. 
15. Also, he noted that in the resolution adopted by it on 
22 September 1992 the General Assembly had taken note "of the intention of the 
Security Council to consider the matter again before the end of the main part 
of the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly". 
16. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) said that his delegation supported the 
draft resolution under consideration for the following reasons: first, 
Yugoslavia had ceased to exist, so that it had ceased to be a Member of the 
Agency; second, none of the successor States on the territory of the former 
Yugoslavia had become a Member of the Agency automatically; third, two of 
those successor States, Slovenia and Croatia, had applied for admission to the 
Agency and been approved for membership; fourth, if other successor States 
wished to become Members of the Agency, they would have to submit 
applications, which would have to be considered in accordance with the 
existing rules. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 7 


17. Ms. DJURICKOVIC-TUVIC (Yugoslavia) regretted that the question of 
the participation and status of her delegation had been raised again in the 
General Conference, which should not be called upon to deal with political 
issues. Her delegation considered that the draft resolution recommended by 
the Board on the participation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had no 
legal basis in the Statute of the Agency. Moreover, it was contrary to the 
principle of the universality of the Agency. 
18. The question of the international identity and the continuity of a 
State was primarily a legal one - not a political one. The maintenance of 
Yugoslavia's international personality and statehood was in compliance with 
the practice usually followed in international relations and with the 
international rules of conduct normally applied in such cases. For example, 
the Charter of the United Nations did not provide for the disappearance of a 
Member State without its attachment to another State. 
19. That position had been corroborated by the principles which the Sixth 
(legal) Committee of the General Assembly had adopted in 1947 after 
considering the issue of the legal rules which should apply to the States 
appearing on the international scene as a result of the partition of a Member 
State of the United Nations. It had been stated that, "as a general rule, it 
is in conformity with legal principles to presume that a State which is a 
member of the United Nations does not cease to be a Member simply because its 
constitution or its frontier have been subjected to changes, and that the 
extinction of the State as a legal personality recognized in the international 
order must be shown before its rights and obligations can be considered 
thereby to have ceased to exist". In the absence of evidence to that effect, 
adoption of the recommended resolution could constitute a dangerous precedent. 
20. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had never claimed to be the only 
successor to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It had 
expressed its willingness to discuss succession issues and all other relevant 
matters on an equal footing with all other concerned parties at the 
International Conference on Yugoslavia that was currently taking place. 
21. Accordingly, given the de facto and the legal situation, the identity 
and continuity of the legal personality of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 8 


could not be questioned. Denial of the presence of the Federal Republic of 


Yugoslavia in the Agency and in other international organizations not only 


lacked a legal basis - it might also be detrimental to the ongoing peace 


negotiations. Moreover, the proposed text went beyond what had been adopted 


by the General Assembly of the United Nations in that the suspension of the 


participation of the Yugoslav delegation related only to the General Assembly. 


22. Finally, it was the earnest hope of her delegation that, if the draft 
resolution was adopted, it would not have adverse consequences for the 


successful co-operation which had existed for many years between the Agency 


and Yugoslavia, especially in nuclear safety and radiological protection. 


Yugoslavia would continue to be bound by the obligations which it had accepted 


under international treaties in the field of nuclear energy. 


23. At the request of several delegations, a role-call vote was taken on 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1035. 


24. Czechoslovakia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called 
upon to vote first. 


25. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour; Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, 
Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, 
Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, 
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Korea (Republic 
of), Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mauritius, Monaco, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi 
Arabia, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab 
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay. 


Against: Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


Abstaining: Brazil, China, Cuba, Cyprus, Holy See, India, Mexico, 
Myanmar, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, United Republic 
of Tanzania, Viet Nam. 


26. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1035 was adopted by 69 votes 
in favour and 3 against, with 12 abstentions. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 9 


27. Mr. HELLER (Mexico), recalling that his delegation had abstained, 
said that Mexico had already explained its position on the matter under 
consideration in the General Assembly of the United Nations. Its position 
remained valid, and it was strengthened by the absence of a clear legal basis 
for the resolution which had just been adopted. 
28. The point was that the situation covered by the resolution was not 
envisaged either in the Charter of the United Nations or in the Statute of the 
Agency. The Charter of the United Nations did not touch on the question of 
the disintegration of and succession to a State, and that was why, on several 
occasions, the Security Council had tacitly recognized the automatic 
replacement of a whole by a part and had admitted new States resulting from a 
process of disintegration. 
29. The resolution just adopted therefore had legal defects to which 
attention should be drawn at a time when, with the rapid transformation of the 
world's political map, international legal norms should be treated with 
particular respect. 
30. Mr. MIKHAILOV (Russian Federation), recalling that his delegation 
had abstained, said that Security Council resolution S/RES/777 and General 
Assembly resolution A/47/1, which had been invoiced as the basis for the 
decision just taken, did not envisage that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
should be automatically deprived of its right to participate in the work of 
other international organizations. Also, the Security Council resolution did 
not provide for the exclusion of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the 
United Nations. The country could still submit documents, and it retained 
both its Permanent Mission to the United Nations and the plate bearing its 
name in the meeting rooms of the General Assembly and its organs. 
31. The Russian Federation could not understand the haste with which such 
an eminently political matter had been brought before the Agency, which was a 
technical organization. Moreover, the text just adopted went further than the 
resolutions adopted in New York, as it provided for the exclusion of the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the work of the Board of Governors. His 
delegation knew of no legal justification for the decision just taken - and no 
provisions of the Agency's Statute which might motivate it. Also, it was not 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 10 


convinced that the adopted resolution was in keeping with the spirit of the 
understandings arrived at in New York during the formulation of Security 
Council resolution S/RES///7 and General Assembly resolution A/47/1, and he 
did not think that the text adopted by the General Conference would really 
help to alleviate the Yugoslav conflict. He believed that all actions and 
decisions regarding the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should serve one single 
purpose - national reconciliation. 


32. Ms. MACHADO QUTNTELLA (Brazil), recalling that her country had 
abstained in the vote which had taken place a few days previously in the 
General Assembly of the United Nations on a similar resolution, said that the 
reasons for its abstention were valid also for the resolution which had just 
been adopted. 
33. Reading from the explanation of vote given by her country in New York, 
she said that Brazil had been following with close attention and great concern 
all aspects of the developments in the situation in the former Socialist 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and it remained ready to support efforts to 
achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict. Reasons for special anguish were 
the dire conditions afflicting the civilian population of the region, the 
intolerable breaches of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the 
recrudescence of dreadful practices based on ethnic grounds. Two reasons had 
nevertheless compelled Brazil to abstain in the vote. 
34. In the first place, it was still Brazil's firm belief that the Charter 
of the United Nations remained the paramount document governing the existence 
of the United Nations as an organization based on law. Questions related to 
admission, participation, suspension or expulsion affected the most basic 
rights of States, and they should therefore be handled with the utmost care 
and attention, bearing in mind the fundamental need to follow the Charter 
strictly. 
35. The treatment of such matters should certainly reflect an appropriate 
degree of reliability, predictability and transparency, with clear reference 
to the provisions of the Charter and the applicable rules of procedure. An 
overly imaginative interpretation of the Charter might lead to a weakening of 
the solid legal structure upon which the functioning of the United Nations was 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 11 


based. It had even been asserted, lately, that the Charter seemed to be 
undergoing a process of informal revision. Brazil was concerned that Member 
States more and more frequently had the impression that they were being rushed 
into decisions on important matters on fluid or questionable legal grounds. 


36. Secondly, Brazil attached the highest priority to the peaceful 
settlement of disputes and, to that end, advocated full use of the diplomatic 
potential of the United Nations. It was not convinced that the exclusion of 
any one of the parties to the conflict in the former Socialist Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia would in any way be helpful to the peace efforts 
currently being undertaken. One should also bear in mind the potentially 
negative impact of such a decision on the ability of the United Nations 
Protection Force to fulfil its increasingly complex tasks, as well as on the 
physical security of its multinational personnel. 
37. In the light of those considerations, her delegation had not been in a 
position to support the draft resolution and had abstained. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXVI)/1041) 


38. The PRESIDENT recalled that, in 1989, the General Conference had 
approved a procedure whereby, when there was agreement regarding the candidate 
or candidates from a particular area, no secret ballot would be held; 
balloting would only take place for regions where no candidate had been agreed 
upon. Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, which 
provided that elections to the Board should be by secret ballot, would be 
suspended for regions for which no secret ballot was to be held. 
39. Under Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure, the presiding officer had to 
indicate to the General Conference those elective places on the Board which 
had to be filled. He drew delegates' attention to document GC(XXXVI)/1041 in 
that connection. Paragraph 2 of that document indicated for each geographical 
area the number of Member States which had to be elected so as to ensure that 
the Board would be constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the 
Statute. Paragraph 3 listed the 24 Member States designated by the Board of 
Governors in June for membership of the Board in accordance with 
Article VI.A.I of the Statute or elected by the General Conference in 1991 in 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 12 


accordance with Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, which would therefore be 
serving on the Board during 1992-93. In order to facilitate the election, 
delegates had been provided with an informal note showing the results of the 
consultations among the eight geographical area groups regarding their 
candidates for the vacant seats. Delegates would see that agreement had been 
reached on all vacancies except the so-called "floating" seat. Balloting 
would therefore be required only for that seat. 


40. Inviting the General Conference to proceed with the elections along the 
lines which he had indicated, he said that, if there were no objections, he 
would take it that the General Conference wished to elect Argentina, Chile and 
Paraguay to the three seats for Latin America. 
41. Argentina, Chile and Paraguay were duly elected. 
42. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect Finland and Sweden to the 
two seats for Western Europe. 
43. Finland and Sweden were duly elected. 
44. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect Hungary to the seat for 
Eastern Europe. 
45. Hungary was duly elected. 
46. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
and Nigeria to the two seats for Africa. 
47. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Nigeria were duly elected. 
48. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect Saudi Arabia to the seat 
for the Middle East and South Asia. 
49. Saudi Arabia was duly elected. 
50. The PRESIDENT said that, if there were no objections, he would 
take it that the General Conference wished to elect the Malaysia to the seat 
for South East Asia and the Pacific. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 13 


51. Malaysia was duly elected. 
52. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to proceed with a 
vote by secret ballot for the so-called "floating" seat, which was to be 
filled on the present occasion by the Middle East and South Asia. 
53. A secret ballot was held to fill the "floating" seat. 
54. At the suggestion of the President, a member of the Mexican delegation 
and a member of the United Kingdom delegation were appointed as tellers. 
55. The result of the election was as follows: 
Abstentions: 8 


Valid votes: 79 


Required majority: 40 


Votes obtained: 


Islamic Republic of Iran 13 
Syrian Arab Republic 66 


56. Having obtained the required ma.jority, the Syrian Arab Republic was 
duly elected. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1991 (GC(XXXVI)/1004) (resumed) 


57. Mr. KOCH (Denmark), recalling that the Danish Parliament had 
decided in 1985 to exclude nuclear power from its national energy programme, 
said that Denmark had nevertheless responded vigorously to the challenge posed 
by the increase in harmful emissions arising from energy production and 
consumption. 
58. The Danish Parliament and Government were confident that very ambitious 
targets could be reached without using nuclear energy and without additional 
cost. In May 1990, Parliament had officially approved a plan of action for 
sustainable development in response to the report of the World Commission on 
Environment and Development. It was estimated that the measures proposed in 
the energy action plan would result in a reduction of almost 15% in total 
energy consumption, cutting CO emissions by over 20%, SO emissions 
by 60% and NO emissions by 50% by the year 2005. Progress towards those 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 14 


targets was being monitored regularly and in 1995 at the latest the results 
would be evaluated and the action plan revised if necessary. 


59. Like other countries, Denmark welcomed the Agency's contribution to the 
implementation of Security Council resolution 687. The failure to detect 
Iraq's secret nuclear weapons programme had demonstrated the urgent need to 
strengthen the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system. 
60. His country welcomed the steps taken in that direction and particularly 
the reaffirmation of the Agency's right to conduct special inspections. 
Further improvements were nevertheless needed. Member States could commit 
themselves to declaring all civil nuclear materials - including uranium ore 
concentrates produced in their territory - and to providing information on 
international transfers of equipment. It seemed that unreported domestic 
production of yellow cake had played an important role in the covert Iraqi 
programme. The accumulation by Iraq of such material, for which there had 
been neither an export market nor a declared domestic use, might, if taken 
into account, have led to an earlier detection of the covert activities. 
61. Recent experience had also underlined the general need to tighten 
export controls. His country welcomed the agreement of the Nuclear Suppliers 
Group on the establishment of a new regime to control transfers of nuclearrelated 
dual-use equipment, materials and technology. Equally important was 
the fact that all members of the Group had adopted a policy of requiring 
full-scope safeguards as a condition of nuclear supply and were requesting 
other suppliers to do the same. 
62. Denmark regarded the NPT as the cornerstone of the international 
non-proliferation regime and found it gratifying that further States had 
acceded to the Treaty, thus contributing to universal acceptance of the 
non-proliferation principle. The obligation for States parties to conclude a 
safeguards agreement under Article III of the Treaty was unequivocal and 
unconditional. It was therefore a matter for concern that nearly 50 of the 
non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT had not yet concluded such an 
agreement. Although none of the States in question had significant nuclear 
activities, it was important for the credibility of the Treaty and the 
safeguards system that they should comply with their obligations. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 15 


63. Nuclear safety should be a major concern for the entire international 
community. It was a familiar fact that countries in Eastern Europe and the 
former Soviet Union were operating nuclear power plants with critically low 
standards of safety, and the situation required urgent action. The 
contribution already made by the Agency in that regard gave cause for 
satisfaction, and its important role in the new mechanism set up by the G-24 
countries for co-ordination of their nuclear assistance programmes was atso to 
be welcomed. 
64. Unfortunately, the creation of a genuinely comprehensive and legally 
binding international safety regime was still a remote goal, even though 
significant progress had been made in the past year, notably in connection 
with the efforts made to establish a nuclear safety convention and the 
negotiations for a nuclear protocol within the framework of the European 
Energy Charter. 
65. With regard to the nuclear safety convention, his delegation paid 
tribute to the preparatory work carried out by the expert group. In his view, 
the convention should above all be a dynamic instrument. It could take the 
present Agency safety princples and codes as a starting point, but should 
gradually be expanded to cover as many nuclear facilities and activities as 
possible, including the final disposal of nuclear waste. Then - although it 
had to be stressed that nuclear safety was bound to remain a national 
responsibility - the convention should include a procedure to verify that the 
safety principles adopted were actually being followed by States using nuclear 
power. Parties should be obliged to report on implementation of the 
convention, and there should also be an appropriate review mechanism. 
Finally, parties to the convention should commit themselves to accepting 
periodic visits from international safety experts. 
66. As for the European Energy Charter, Denmark strongly supported the 
efforts being made to conclude a protocol on principles governing the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the safety of nuclear facilities. An 
important element of that protocol concerned the conclusion of bilateral 
agreements - particularly between neighbouring countries - on the location 
of nuclear facilities. It would be a major step forward if the parties could 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 16 


agree on a legally binding commitment to consult neighbouring countries about 
plans to install nuclear facilities. The neighbouring countries concerned 
must be given the opportunity to express their views before decisions were 
taken. 


67. The entry into force in April 1992 of the Joint Protocol relating to 
the application of the Vienna Convention and the Paris Convention had done 
much to strengthen the existing nuclear liability regime. Also, the progress 
achieved by the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage was 
encouraging. Denmark fully supported the work of that Committee and hoped 
that draft amendments to the Vienna Convention would be submitted to a 
revision conference, possibly in 1993. 
68. His country attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
assistance activities, which continued to show substantial growth. Denmark 
accepted the target of US $55.5 million for contributions to the TACF in 1993 
and had already pledged its full share of that target. In conclusion, he 
thanked the Director General and the Agency's staff for their dedicated work. 
69. Mr. EL HUSSEIN (Sudan), congratulating Slovenia, Croatia and 
Uzbekistan on their admission to the Agency, said that important changes were 
currently taking place in international relations. In order to confront those 
changes succesfully, the Agency would have to expand its field of activities 
while bearing in mind the purpose for which it had been created, namely to 
obtain maximum benefit from the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. If 
the Agency was to be successful in that serious task, all States would have to 
work together to establish a climate which contributed to the Agency's 
stability and increased confidence in nuclear safety. In that connection, his 
delegation welcomed the fact that many States had acceded to the NPT and 
invited those who had not yet done so to follow that example. 
70. His delegation noted with satisfaction and supported the increasing 
efforts of Member States and the Agency to set up an international regime for 
nuclear safety, as such a regime would help to establish confidence in nuclear 
power plants and to dissipate existing fears that radioactive waste might not 
be properly stored, particularly in the developing countries. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 17 


71. The States of the African continent were very much in favour of the 
plan to establish a zone free from nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction. Sudan accordingly welcomed the accession of South Africa to 
the NPT and the submission of all its nuclear facilities to the Agency's 
safeguards system; that was an important step towards establishing peace and 
security in the region. 
72. Sudan once more deplored Israel's refusal to submit all its nuclear 
facilities to the Agency's safeguards system. As long as Israel refused to 
accede to the NPT and to submit its nuclear facilities to Agency monitoring, 
it would be difficult to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East 
and peace in the region would continue to be threatened. 
73. The developing countries, and especially the least developed among 
them, attached considerable importance to the technical assistance and 
co-operation programme, particularly as they were now aware of the advantages 
to be derived from the use of nuclear techniques in various areas. That being 
so, they were requesting Member States, and notably the industrialized States, 
to contribute to strengthening that area of the Agency's activity. While 
praising the work performed by the Agency's Department of Technical 
Co-operation, his delegation believed that Member States should redouble their 
efforts to find a financing arrangement for the TACF which would meet the 
needs of the countries concerned. As reliance on gifts and voluntary 
contributions clearly involved risks, financing of technical co-operation from 
the Regular Budget seemed one of the best ways of ensuring the efficiency and 
further development of that programme. 
74. The States of the African continent had great hopes of AFRA, 
particularly in the fields of medicine, agriculture, improvement of animal 
husbandry, radiation protection, food irradiation, environmental protection, 
water supply, manpower development, and so on. Unfortunately, most AFRA 
projects had still not found sources of finance. In that connection, his 
delegation thanked the States which had participated in implementing certain 
AFRA projects and took the opportunity to invite all States and donor 
organizations to contribute to the projects, particularly those of greatest 
priority for development of the continent. In that connection he proposed: 
(1) that States parties to AFRA support those projects directly; (2) that the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 18 


Agency seek to obtain financial support from the more developed and richer 
countries for AFRA projects, in co-ordination and collaboration with the 
States parties to AFRA; and (3) that the necessary measures be taken for AFRA 
to receive a larger share of the Agency's budget. 


75. Animal husbandry was the main source of food and income for Sudan, as 
for most African countries, and his delegation accordingly wished to thank the 
Agency for its efforts on behalf of the screwworm eradication project in 
Libya, as the insect could certainly have ravaged Sudan as well as other 
countries in the region. 
76. In conclusion, he emphasized his country's increasing interest in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the efforts it was making to improve its 
capacities in that field. Sudan was, moreover, in the process of preparing 
regulations and programmes for the use of radioisotopes and radiation sources 
in agriculture, medicine, industry and hydrology. The Agency was providing 
valuable help, through its technical assistance and co-operation activities, 
in the areas of medicine, radiation protection, environmental monitoring, food 
supply, groundwater studies, maintenance of nuclear equipment and training. 
77. Mr. GLEISSNER (Austria) congratulated the President on his 
election and thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for the work 
accomplished over the past year. He also welcomed the admission of new 
Members to the Agency, which marked an important step towards the universality 
of the organization. 
78. Together with some of his colleagues present in the room, he had had 
the privilege of attending the first session of the General Conference 
thirty-five years previously. The events which had taken place since then 
brought some reflections to mind. He wondered, for example, how the Statute 
would have been formulated if the Agency's founding fathers had had the vast 
experience of nuclear energy which had been accumulated in the meantime. 
Those thirty-five years had in fact seen many achievements, but also 
disappointments and failures of an extent unimaginable in the climate of 
general euphoria which had surrounded the creation of the Agency. Those 
who thought about such matters were not trying to rock the boat, but rather 
to stabilize it on a sea that was sometimes rough. As there were over 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 19 


one hundred Member States, it was natural that they should have different 
views on the order of priority of the Agency's objectives. Those objectives 
were sometimes unanimously approved, but in other cases they brought 
disagreement or even controversy. 


79. Members of the Agency knew that, on the basis of a referendum held 
in 1978, the Austrian parliament had passed legislation forbidding the use of 
nuclear fission for power production in Austria. It was the policy of the 
Austrian Government to make that decision known to other members of the 
international community and to inform them of the reasons behind it, in the 
hope that its example would be followed, particularly by neighbouring States. 
80. Whereas views on nuclear power production differed widely at the 
international level, there could be only one view regarding the necessity of 
making nuclear plants as safe as possible as long as they existed. Austria 
therefore welcomed the Agency's activities in that area, particularly with 
regard to nuclear plants in Eastern Europe. There was by now a much keener 
awareness of the dangers inherent in the continued service of those reactors, 
and of the need for taking urgent corrective action. The efforts at present 
being made to draw up a convention on nuclear safety containing legally 
binding standards showed the increasing importance attributed to nuclear 
safety. His delegation hoped that the preparatory work currently under way 
would maintain its momentum so that the convention could soon be concluded. 
81. It was a matter for regret that the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage had made scarcely any progress during the past year. The basic 
problem facing the Committee was clear: although the purpose of its work was 
to formulate a meaningful set of rules on liability for nuclear damage, 
including transboundary nuclear damage - rules which could be applied to 
installation States not covered by the Paris Convention, whose provisions on 
liability for nuclear damage were in any case insufficient - it was necessary 
for reasons of geographical interdependence that the new set of rules should 
also be applicable to the major European installation States party to the 
Paris Convention. 
82. During the Committee's deliberations, the States party to the Paris 
Convention had introduced concepts specific to the OECD, namely the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 20 


distinction between the operator and the installation State, the relationship 
between insurability of risk and the extent of liability, and in general the 
civil law approach. Those concepts obviously posed problems for States in 
which nuclear power generation was a State activity, where OECD-based criteria 
for the insurability of nuclear installations did not apply, and where 
compensation for nuclear damage was seen as a matter of public policy rather 
than an obligation under civil law and could only be financed out of public 
funds, possibly augmented from international sources. 


83. In view of the difficulties experienced by the Standing Committee in 
creating an improved nuclear liability regime within the framework of civil 
law, his delegation found it reassuring that international law also obliged 
States to compensate other States for transboundary nuclear damage. That 
obligation was rooted in Principle 21 of the 1972 Stockholm declaration, which 
affirmed the responsibility of States to ensure that activities within their 
jurisdiction or control did not cause damage to the environment in other 
States. Austria held the view that the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage should give more attention to the questions of public 
international law raised by responsibility for transboundary nuclear damage. 
84. The term "nuclear energy" was sometimes used, quite erroneously, to 
mean nuclear power. Those who followed the activities of the Agency knew 
that, in addition to power production, nuclear energy had numerous 
applications which many countries, especially the developing countries, 
considered very important. Any assessment of the Agency's work should show 
that the use of nuclear energy in medicine, science and technology was raising 
living standards worldwide. 
85. The Austrian Government had always held the view that the non-proliferation 
regime was an essential element in establishing a world free from nuclear 
weapons. It was therefore reassuring to note that, since France and China had 
acceded to the NPT, all nuclear-weapon States were parties to the Treaty. 
Austria welcomed the accession of South Africa and the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea to the NPT and the conclusion by those States of safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. It also appreciated the declared intention of 
Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan to join the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 21 


Austria was looking forward to the NPT Revision Conference in 1995, at which 
Parties would have the opportunity to reaffirm their view that the Treaty was 
essential to a peaceful world order and, accordingly, to extend it indefinitely. 


86. The important events which had taken place in Latin America had also 
greatly strengthened the non-proliferation regime. The comprehensive 
safeguards agreement concluded between Argentina, Brazil and the Agency was an 
important step towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
region, in accordance with the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
87. Iraq's failure to observe its obligations under the NPT and its 
safeguards agreement with the Agency emphasized the importance of effective 
verification in relation to the obligations contained in the Treaty. The 
Agency's work pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions, carried 
out in close collaboration with the Council, had made a vital contribution to 
restoring international confidence in the feasibility of a non-proliferation 
regime. The Agency would no doubt continue to make a substantial contribution 
to the efforts aimed at ensuring that Iraq respected its obligations under 
the NPT and that nuclear activities were not diverted for non-peaceful 
purposes. 
88. In conclusion, as a representative of the host country, he commended 
the quality of the co-operation between Austria and the Agency and the 
essential role played by that organization in the efforts of the international 
community to achieve peace. 
89. Mr. DEL POZO CARAFA (Bolivia) congratulated the President and the 
other members of the General Committee on their election and welcomed the new 
Members of the Agency. Also, he thanked the Director General and the staff of 
the Agency for the effective work they were doing. 
90. During the past 35 years, the Agency had had to deal with a variety of 
situations, but it had nearly always succeeded in mastering them. The last 
few years, however, had been marked by a succession of events which even the 
most outstanding statesmen could not have foreseen. Although they reflected a 
strengthening of the principle of national self-determination, democracy and 
freedom, those events were also rather discouraging in that they seemed to be 
leading to a world where international security was constantly under threat 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 22 


and the prospects for a durable peace were growing dimmer. That situation 
represented a new challenge for the Agency and its Member States, and Bolivia 
was determined to help - as far as it could - in taking up that challenge, in 
order that the end of the twentieth century might see the disappearance of the 
current threats to collective security. 


91. In that regard, Latin America had every reason to be proud of the 
actions taken during the seventh extraordinary session of OPANAL's General 
Conference - they clearly demonstrated the desire of Latin America that the 
region should become a nuclear-weapon-free zone. His delegation was convinced 
that that desire would lead to the full entry into force of the Tlatelolco 
Treaty. Moreover, the ratification of Additional Protocol I to the Tlatelolco 
Treaty by France was an indication of support for the efforts being made in 
Latin America and the Caribbean. In the same spirit, the NPT should be 
strengthened and further accessions to it encouraged. 
92. With the ongoing efforts to reinforce various legal instruments, the 
Agency's ability to act needed to be enhanced. The implementation of Security 
Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715 had entailed 14 inspection missions to 
65 Iraqi nuclear establishments. The world community should act with the same 
determination everywhere in the world where attempts were being made to use 
nuclear weapons and materials for non-peaceful purposes. In that connection, 
his delegation wished to express its full support for the Agency in its 
efforts - being conducted through SAGSI - to increase the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the safeguards system. Also, it welcomed the conclusion of 
new safeguards agreements, but wished to emphasize at the same time that the 
effectiveness and credibility of such agreements depended in the final 
analysis on Member States. 
93. His delegation hoped that a universal nuclear safety regime would be 
created through adoption of the nuclear safety convention which was in the 
process of being worked out. 
94. Bolivia was receiving technical assistance in radiation protection, 
nuclear medicine, uranium prospecting and the application of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, animal production and health, and hydrology; the 
assistance was mainly in the form of experts' services, fellowships, equipment 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 23 


and instruments. By the end of 1991, the value of the assistance received had 
amounted to $3 524 400. The programme for 1992 represented a total of 
$297 700, for which his delegation thanked the Agency. 


95. With regard to the financing of technical assistance, his delegation 
had noted the hard work done by the Resident Representative of Mexico in his 
capacity as chairman of the informal working group dealing with that issue. 
The working group's final report reflected the diversity of opinion within the 
group. His delegation nevertheless believed that it was important to secure a 
quantitative increase in the TACF. 
96. Recalling the results of the Ninth ARCAL Planning and Technical 
Co-ordination Meeting, which had been held in Lima (Peru) from 18 to 
22 May 1992 and at which general guidelines had been formulated, he expressed 
his gratitude to the Agency - whose support ensured optimum programme 
implementation - and to the donor countries. 
97. With regard to the financial situation of the Agency, he said that his 
country was taking steps to make its recently announced payment. 
98. In conclusion, he said that the Agency's Member States should realize 
the true extent of the energy crisis facing developing countries: the latter 
needed to increase their consumption of energy, but the conventional energy 
sources available to them were insufficient. The Agency and its Member States 
should work together in preparing developing countries to use nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes in meeting the needs which emerged with development. 
99. Mr. SEMINARIO ARCE (Peru), after congratulating the President and 
the other members of the General Committee on their election and welcoming the 
new Members of the Agency, expressed his satisfaction with the activities of 
the Agency in 1991. 
100. The role being played by the Agency in the transfer of nuclear 
technology for peaceful purposes from developed to developing countries was of 
great importance for peace and well-being in the latter. In most cases, the 
absence of peace was the result of economic and social problems due to a 
technological imbalance. Peru therefore greatly appreciated the fact that the 
Agency, in fulfilling its statutory obligations, had since 1958 been providing 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 24 


it regularly with assistance related to the use of nuclear techniques in 
medicine, agriculture and industry. 


101. Peru had on many occasions demonstrated its dedication to the cause of 
peace. At present, it was going through a difficult period due to 
unfavourable international economic conditions, a financial crisis with 
serious social repercussions and - above all - the constant threat to which 
terrorism and drug trafficking were exposing the country. The unceasing 
efforts of his Government to combat subversion and ensure economic and 
financial stability were bearing fruit. That was why his Government was 
confident of being able to restore an atmosphere of calm and security within 
the country. Similarly, it expected to overcome its financial problems thanks 
to the Peruvian people's solidarity and willingness to make sacrifices and to 
the understanding of the international community. 
102. Because of the serious economic and financial crisis which it had been 
experiencing for several years, Peru had not been able to pay its 
contributions to the Agency in a timely fashion. The payments which it did 
make were made in order to demonstrate its willingness to honour its financial 
obligations towards the Agency. Despite severe financial restrictions, the 
competent authorities in Peru had decided to settle Peru's arrears as a matter 
of priority, and steps to that end had been taken. 
103. In the search for peace, safeguards and technical co-operation were 
indissociable. In a world where major socio-economic imbalances could lead to 
conflict, promoting development meant promoting peace. That was why Peru had 
always advocated the establishment of an appropriate balance between 
safeguards and promotional activities as regards the allocation of funds. 
104. During the past year, the changes initiated in Peru had continued in 
all sectors. The overblown public sector represented a considerable burden on 
the State, even if the salaries paid there were low. The burden was in the 
process of being alleviated through a policy which encouraged the voluntary 
departure of employees. Similarly, the Peruvian Institute of Nuclear Energy 
had begun rationalizing the use of its administrative resources in order to 
improve its methods of work, to manage its programmes of international 
co-operation better and to establish closer ties with technical assistance and 
co-operation organizations like the Agency. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 25 


105. Reviewing the technical assistance provided by the Agency to Peru, he 
thanked the United States and the United Kingdom for extrabudgetary 
contributions which would enable his country, on one hand hand, to continue a 
feasibility study for the introduction of nuclear power in the medium term 
and, on the other hand, to continue establishing neutron activation analysis 
and computer facilities. He highlighted certain activities: the training 
(through an advanced programme in nuclear physics) of highly specialized 
personnel in support of the future development of nuclear energy in Peru; the 
production of radioisotopes and radiopharraaceuticals for the domestic market; 
activities relating to the production of iridium-192 sources; the mutation 
breeding of plants; animal nutrition and reproduction (under the sometimes 
difficult conditions encountered in the field); and food irradiation (the 
establishment of a multipurpose irradiation facility being expected by the end 
of 1993). The last-mentioned project showed that it was not only possible, 
but also necessary, to ensure that the Agency's activities were in line with 
the main trends of national development plans. By taking greater account of 
the development needs and specific requirements of each State, the Agency 
would be able to optimize the use of its resources. 
106. Thanks to the assistance which it had received in the field of nuclear 
safety and radiological protection, Peru now had highly qualified personnel 
and the means for coping with any nuclear accident or emergency situation. 
Through an Agency project, it had acquired a modern laboratory where the 
internal contamination of radiation workers could be monitored. In that area, 
however, the problems were legal as well as technical. He was therefore 
pleased that the question of measures to strengthen international co-operation 
in the field of nuclear safety and radiological protection had been included 
in the General Conference agenda. In keeping with its tradition of respect 
for international law, his Government reiterated its wish to sign the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the Convention on 
Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in 
the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. 
107. Recalling that Peru had presided in May over the ninth annual meeting 
of ARCAL national co-ordinators, he said that ARCAL was an excellent example 
of horizontal co-operation among countries in the Latin American region. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 26 


108. Mr. KONIE (Zambia), after congratulating the President on his 
election and thanking the Director General for his statement, noted with 
satisfaction that the Agency had done good work in 1991 despite certain 
difficulties. Welcoming the new Members of the Agency, he expressed the hope 
that their participation would strengthen the Agency's role in promoting the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
109. His delegation appreciated the action taken by the Agency pursuant to 
various resolutions on measures aimed at strengthening international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear safety and radiological protection. 
Also, it was satisfied with the action taken to implement resolution 
GC(XXXV)/RES/551, on the revision of the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation 
Protection, and resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/552, on education and training in 
radiation protection and nuclear safety. Zambia continued to attach great 
importance to the Agency's technical co-operation activities, given the 
critical role which they played in efforts to resolve some of the developing 
world's problems. It was currently involved in six Agency technical 
co-operation projects, relating mainly to agriculture, radiation protection, 
health and mining, and Zambian institutions were participating in four of the 
Agency's regional projects. Three research contracts had been concluded 
during the past year and five were still under way. 


110. Zambia's experience had shown that qualified personnel was essential 
for technology transfer and for the success of technical co-operation 
projects. The Agency was playing a vital role in that regard, especially 
through a regional project on manpower development in Africa. In particular, 
the Agency had helped the Physics Department of the University of Zambia to 
upgrade its nuclear physics training. During the year, eight Zambian 
scientists and technologists had attended Agency-supported seminars and 
courses. All but two of the Zambians who had received training through the 
Agency's fellowship programme were still working at Zambian institutions, 
where they were using the skills which they had acquired through their 
fellowships. He took the opportunity to thank the Agency for arranging for 
fellowship-holders to go to developing countries where the conditions were 
similar to those in their country of origin, thereby ensuring that the 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 27 


training received was appropriate. That was a good way of strengthening 
South-South co-operation. 


111. Problems of equipment maintenance and repair continued to hamper the 
effective utilization of the facilities provided by the Agency - especially in 
the least developed countries, such as Zambia. His country therefore welcomed 
the efforts being made, through a regional project for Africa on nuclear 
instrumentation maintenance, to address those problems and the problems of 
spare parts. In that connection, he urged donors to support the footnote-a/ 
project for the establishment of an instrument maintenance network in southern 
Africa. Also, he urged that, in future Agency regional training courses in 
that part of the world, use be made of the skills of former Agency 
fellowship-holders and other local experts. 
112. Zambia was continuing its efforts to put in place radiation protection 
regulations and licensing procedures, and for that purpose it still needed the 
Agency's help. The success of the Agency's efforts to strengthen local 
capacities was attested to by the fact that the skills of five Zambians 
trained under the Agency's fellowship programme had been used during a local 
workshop held in May 1992. 
113. His delegation hoped that the Agency would continue providing 
substantial support for AFRA projects through the TACF; the economies of most 
countries participating in AFRA were suffering from severe constraints and 
could not provide much support. 
114. Zambia and other Member States in southern Africa hoped that the 
sub-region (in fact, the whole of Africa) would become a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. All the countries of southern Africa had now acceded to the NPT and, 
with the exception of South Africa, none of them had nuclear power programmes, 
uranium enrichment plants or conversion plants. 
115. His delegation was pleased that South Africa had acceded to the NPT and 
had submitted its nuclear installations to Agency safeguards. However, it was 
concerned about the lack of decisive progress on the political front in South 
Africa, where the situation remained uncertain. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 28 


116. His delegation approved the efforts being made by the Agency to reduce 
the costs of safeguards while maintaining quality and effectiveness. It 
particularly welcomed the compilation of inventories of nuclear materials and 
equipment as a way of ensuring full accountability. It was in that spirit 
that it had supported resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/567, in which the Director 
General had been requested "to verify the completeness of the inventory of 
South Africa's nuclear installations and material". The report presented by 
the Director General pursuant to that resolution was encouraging, as it 
reflected a desire for transparency on the part of South Africa. Zambia hoped 
that South Africa would continue to co-operate with the Agency in meeting its 
international obligations under the NPT and other agreements. 
117. His delegation was still very concerned about the fact that the 
discussions in the Board of Governors on the question of amending 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute were not resulting in significant progress. He 
urged that the current imbalance in the geographical representation on the 
Board be corrected in such a way that the statutory principle of equitable 
geographical representation applied to Africa and to the Middle East and South 
Asia, and he reiterated his country's position that that issue was distinct 
from the question of revising Article VI of the Statute as a whole. 
118. Zambia supported the proposals aimed at making the financing of 
technical assistance reliable and predictable, for it believed that there 
should be a balance between the Agency's promotional and regulatory 
activities. As had been highlighted in the report of the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Committee (document GOV/2559), owing to a lack of reliable 
and predictable resources some planned technical co-operation activities had 
had to be cancelled or deferred. Also, his country noted with regret that 
some countries which had traditionally been major contributors were not 
pledging and paying as they had in the past. For its part, Zambia had been 
pledging and paying its full share of the TACF targets, and it would do so 
again in 1993. 
119. In conclusion, he expressed concern about the financial crisis which 
the Agency had been going through in the past few years - and especially the 
current year, during which Financial Plans had had to be reduced by 13%, which 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 29 


had resulted in the cancellation of planned activities. He appealed to all 
Member States to meet their financial obligations in a timely manner and 
promised that, despite the economic difficulties which it was facing, Zambia 
would continue to meet its obligations. 


120. Mr. DALKHSUREN (Mongolia), expressing approval of the Agency's 
Annual Report for 1991, said that positive trends in the field of the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy were evident. In a number of countries there 
was growing interest in the NPT and in disarmament, which suggested the 
possibility of switching resources from military to peaceful uses. At the 
same time, many delegates had urged that the Agency's safeguards be 
strengthened, but the Agency should not neglect its equally important role in 
promoting the utilization of atomic energy in the interests of sustainable 
development. 
121. Mongolia favoured the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones. The NPT, 
which was the most universal international treaty in the field of disarmament 
and arms limitation, was doing much to help prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, thereby promoting peace and stability throughout the world. 
His Government subscribed to all international instruments concerned with the 
monitoring and verification of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
122. Mongolia needed considerable energy resources in order to maintain a 
reasonable rate of economic growth and meet the growing needs of its 
population. In that regard, the enormous energy needs of developing countries 
were very much a problem which the Agency could play a leading role in helping 
to resolve. The Senior Expert Symposium on Electricity and the Environment 
held in 1991 in Helsinki had highlighted the need to reduce the amounts of 
carbon dioxide produced through the use of fossil fuels in electricity 
generation. The use of nuclear power was an obvious way of achieving a 
reduction. Accordingly, his country was pleased that the Secretariat proposed 
devoting attention to the development of small and medium power reactors - an 
activity which deserved very high priority, for such reactors could to a 
considerable extent meet the needs of developing countries. 
123. Mongolia was making extensive use of nuclear techniques in industry, 
agriculture, medicine, environmental protection and hydrology. Various 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 30 


tracers were being used in agriculture for studying the efficiency of 
fertilizers, the aim being to increase cereal yields and accelerate plant 
growth. In mining and geology, extensive use was being made of neutron 
activation analysis, X-ray fluorescence analysis and other methods for 
determining the composition of rocks rapidly and reliably. 


124. With technical support from the Agency, a microtron was being 
constructed in Mongolia for use in developing nuclear techniques to meet the 
needs of different sectors of the economy. As nuclear techniques were being 
widely used, it was important to pay close attention to questions of nuclear 
safety and environmental protection. With the Agency's help, a number of 
national courses and seminars had been held in Ulan-Bator on radiation 
protection and safety infrastructures, nuclear spectrometry, nuclear 
electronics and other topics. They had provided very useful training and 
helped in propagating the utilization of nuclear techniques. 
125. The Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation and a group of 
experts had visited Mongolia in order to discuss the implementation of 
projects and of the plan for co-operation between the Agency and Mongolia. 
His country believed that such visits were very necessary. 
126. Mongolia considered regional co-operation agreements to be an excellent 
way of promoting co-operation among developing countries, which was why it had 
recently decided to become a party to the RCA. Its decision had already been 
communicated to the Director General through official channels. 
127. Mongolia attached considerable importance to the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities, which it regarded as an excellent mechanism for 
contributing to the development and modernization of Third World countries. 
The Agency's Annual Report for 1991 demonstrated convincingly that the Agency 
had achieved satisfactory results in that field. His delegation was grateful 
to the Director General and the Secretariat, and especially the Department of 
Technical Co-operation, for their untiring efforts despite the constraints 
imposed by zero real budgetary growth. He endorsed the recommendations of the 
Board regarding the Agency's Programme and Budget for 1993 and the TACF 
in 1993. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 31 


128. For several years, Mongolia had been encountering serious economic 
difficulties which were hampering its participation in the work of 
international organizations. However, it was pursuing a policy of 
co-operation with all countries and all international organizations, and the 
latter were giving it substantial aid. For example, the Agency's technical 
assistance was enabling it to maintain the level already achieved in the field 
of nuclear applications and to retain its qualified personnel. 
129. In conclusion, he was convinced that the Agency would continue to be 
successful in promoting the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 
Mr. Ryzhov (Russian Federation) took the Chair. 


130. Mr. AMOO-GOTTFRIED (Ghana), after congratulating the President on 
his election and welcoming Croatia, Slovenia and Uzbekistan, said that South 
Africa's nuclear programme had until recently been a constant threat to the 
countries of the African continent. It was therefore with relief that those 
countries welcomed the accession of South Africa to the NPT and its signing of 
a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency. Africa could now look 
forward to becoming a nuclear-weapon-free zone - an objective which should be 
pursued with vigour and determination. 
131. His delegation also welcomed the accession of China and France to 
the NPT. With the NPT due to undergo a crucial review in 1995, Ghana urged 
all signatories to ensure its extension at that time. Also, it appealed once 
more to all those States which were still not parties to the NPT to accede to 
it and submit their nuclear installations to full-scope Agency safeguards. 
132. The Agency's annual report pointed to commendable achievements in many 
areas, and the Director General and the Secretariat were to be congratulated 
on the way in which they had implemented the various programmes. His 
Government appreciated the role being played by the Agency both in the 
safeguards area and in promoting peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
However, recent unfortunate events had led to an increase in public anxiety 
and to outcries against the use of nuclear power. The Agency should intensify 
its efforts to free the public of its prejudices against nuclear power and to 
promote the use of that energy source - the only one which met legitimate 
environmental concerns. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 32 


133. That presupposed the establishment of international standards for the 
storage and disposal of radioactive wastes. His delegation noted with 
satisfaction the progress made under the RADWASS programme and hoped that the 
first phase of the programme would be completed on schedule. It also hoped 
that the Agency would play a catalytic role in promoting international 
co-operation, which was essential to greater nuclear safety. In that 
connection, one should not overlook the very real dangers posed by the nuclear 
materials contained in nuclear weapons which were to be dismantled as a result 
of the end of the cold war. A mechanism should be put in place for ensuring 
that those lethal materials were subjected to international verification. 
Despite its financial difficulties, the Agency seemed to have the know-how and 
resources necessary for assuming that task. Ghana therefore recommended that 
appropriate measures be taken in order to enable the Agency to play its proper 
part when the time came. 
134. Emphasizing the importance of the Agency's technical co-operation 
programmes for many developing countries, he recalled that AFRA had entered 
into force with a 16-year delay. The enthusiasm with which the event had been 
greeted had soon given way to disappointment; for lack of financial support, 
many excellent projects had not been implemented. His delegation again called 
upon donor States to support those projects. In that connection, it wished to 
thank once more the Governments of France and Spain for supporting AFRA 
financially; it hoped that they would maintain their support in the years to 
come and that other Governments would follow suit. 
135. Ghana was grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance which had 
been provided by it and to the Governments of the United States and the United 
Kingdom for helping to finance two footnote-a/ projects - one on nuclear 
instrumentation and computer interfacing and the other on the genetic 
improvement of cacao and coffee trees. He appealed to other donor countries 
to finance other footnote-a/ projects. 
136. The fellowships and expert services provided by the Agency and the 
regional and interregional seminars and training courses organized by it were 
greatly assisting in the transfer of technology to developing Member States. 
Ghana believed that there was room for improvement and expansion in those 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 33 


activities and appealed to the Agency to ensure maximum funding for them. 
Also, he expressed the hope that the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste would continue to receive assistance from the Agency. 


137. With the Agency's help, Ghana was making steady progress in the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy (especially in mutation breeding, food 
preservation by gamma irradition, the radiation sterilization of medical 
products, the control of harmful insects using the sterile-insect technique, 
and nuclear medicine). Considerable progress had also been made in the use of 
analytical methods such as X-ray fluorescence analysis and tracer techniques. 
Ghana was in the process of constructing a laboratory for the local 
preparation of radiopharmaceuticals. It had placed its SSDL at the disposal 
of neighbouring countries for training and calibration activities. Also, it 
was continuing to participate in several Agency research contracts, and its 
facilities would continue to be available to the Agency for the holding of 
regional courses. 
138. All progress in the application of nuclear technology had, of course, 
to be accompanied by stringent radiation protection measures. Ghana was 
therefore grateful to the Agency for having assisted it in the formulation of 
a law on irradiation protection, the promulgation of which would open the way 
for a project involving a miniature neutron source research reactor supplied 
by China with Agency assistance. In order to ensure the smooth implementation 
of that project, his Government had taken steps to strengthen the necessary 
institutional and legal infrastructures. Thus, the Board of the Ghana Atomic 
Energy Commission, which had been suspended for almost a decade, was now 
reconstituted. Such measures demonstrated his Government's conviction that 
nuclear technology had a pivotal role to play in Ghana's development. 
139. The next few years would be crucial for the Agency, as it would be 
called upon to play an increasing role in the area of international security. 
Although the end of the cold war had opened up numerous prospects for 
international co-operation, it had unfortunately not put an end to anxieties 
and fears regarding security. Was Superpower rivalry to be replaced by more 
explosive regional rivalries? Would the coming years see increased 
proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world? Would it become relatively 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 34 


easy to obtain materials suitable for clandestine nuclear weapon programmes? 
In order to provide reassuring answers to those questions, the Agency would 
have to be able to play an increasing role in verifying that materials from 
dismantled nuclear weapons were not diverted to clandestine nuclear programmes 
or did not otherwise fall into the wrong hands. The close monitoring of 
stored materials would also be essential. Given its resources and technical 
expertise, such tasks would necessarily fall to the Agency. 


140. In a period of budgetary difficulties, the Agency would need to be more 
innovative and to demonstrate a greater capacity for adaptation. Under the 
Director General's leadership, it had already shown that it could rise to the 
occasion when the circumstances required it to do so. It was up to Member 
States to provide the necessary support. As in previous years, his Government 
pledged its full co-operation. 
141. He nevertheless considered it necessary to emphasize that, while the 
close monitoring of materials and facilities might be essential, care should 
be taken not to prevent developing countries from making progress in the 
peaceful applications of nuclear techniques. Unwarranted restrictions on 
peaceful nuclear programmes would have a negative effect on technological 
progress through the use of nuclear energy in agriculture, medicine, industry 
and other areas. The Agency's role was to help expand the use of such 
applications and not restrict them. 
142. Mr. TALHOUNI MAJADA (Jordan), after welcoming the admission of 
Croatia, Slovenia and Uzbekistan to the Agency, called on Member States to 
work for the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and weapons of 
mass destruction in the Middle East. He stressed the need for Israel to 
refrain from the production of military nuclear material and the development 
of military nuclear devices, to sign the NPT and to submit all its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards. 
143. Member States were increasingly determined to expand and strengthen the 
safeguards system; that reflected their firm desire to develop their peaceful 
nuclear capacities. While welcoming the progress already made, his delegation 
hoped that North Korea would implement as soon as possible the measures 
envisaged in the Joint Declaration made by it and South Korea, which provided 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 35 


for Agency safeguards activities and was aimed at the denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula. 


144. Jordan, a small country with limited resources, greatly appreciated the 
assistance which the Agency provided to developing countries, and it invited 
Member States to maintain their efforts to provide assured resources for the 
technical assistance and co-operation programme, so that the programme did not 
have to depend entirely on voluntary contributions. His delegation was 
pleased to announce that Jordan had taken the necessary steps to pay its 
arrears of assessed programme costs. It had paid part of the amount in 
question during the current year and undertook to pay the remainder in the 
years to come. 
145. His delegation supported the Agency's efforts in the field of nuclear 
safety and radiological protection, and it called upon all Member States to 
co-operate fully with the Agency in that field and, if possible, to provide 
more information as counter-arguments to the opposition of certain parties to 
the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
146. He commended the Agency's efforts to evaluate the technical and 
economic potential of the utilization of nuclear energy in the desalination of 
seawater; he hoped that the project in question would continue to receive the 
necessary support and that part of the costs would be met from the Regular 
Budget. 
147. The Director General had made commendable efforts to increase the 
representation of developing countries on the staff of the Secretariat. He 
should continue with his efforts, for Member States which considered 
themselves to be well represented would take a greater interest in the running 
of the Agency and in sharing responsibility for it. 
148. While endorsing the Agency's Programme and Budget for 1993 and 1994, he 
reiterated the importance of development-related projects designed to meet the 
needs of Jordan and other developing countries. His country undertook to pay 
its assessed contribution to the Regular Budget. Regrettably, it could not at 
present pay its share of the TACF target, but it would try to remedy the 
situation as soon as possible. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 36 


149. Mr. SAETI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) paid tribute to the efforts of 
the Director General and his colleagues to enable the Agency to perform its 
functions successfully. He took the opportunity to congratulate the countries 
which had become Members of the Agency during the year. 
150. The Agency had set itself the task of promoting the utilization of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in order to ensure the well-being and 
prosperity of mankind, and it had spared no effort to strengthen international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear safety and radiation protection, while at 
the same time keeping abreast of events and changes on the international 
scene. Since its establishment, it had done its utmost to help its Member 
States. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya greatly appreciated the efforts of the 
Agency and would co-operate with it as far as it could in the performance of 
its functions. 
151. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was making the best use it could of its 
available resources in order to ensure the well-being and prosperity of the 
Libyan people, and the peaceful utilization of atomic energy was one of the 
paths which it was following. That had been confirmed by the Director General 
at the beginning of February 1992, in a statement which he had made after 
talks with the Leader of the Revolution during which the latter had made it 
clear that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had no intention of using nuclear energy 
for non-peaceful purposes. It should also be mentioned that the Director 
General had visited Libya's Nuclear Research Centre, where he had seen the 
laboratories and other facilities. 
152. Among the activities undertaken by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in 
co-operation with the Agency, the screwworm control project had been crowned 
with success. The insect in question had been completely eradicated, and a 
disaster that would have affected not only Libya but all other countries of 
Africa and the Mediterranean basin had been avoided. In that connection, he 
mentioned that his country had met about 70% of the costs of the project and 
was currently participating in a Mediterranean fruit fly eradication project 
together with other Agency Member States, including the Maghrebian countries. 
Other important projects relating to food irradiation, radioactive waste 
treatment, medicine, agriculture and the environment were also under way. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 37 


153. At the thirty-fourth session of the General Conference, the Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya had submitted to the Agency a proposal concerning the desalination 
of seawater using nuclear energy; in doing so it had drawn attention to the 
importance of potable water supplies in several parts of the world. At the 
time of the thirty-fifth session, the Agency had published the results of an 
initial technical study whose conclusions appeared in document GOV/2465. That 
evaluation had been followed by meetings and negotiations at several levels 
which had led to a second study; the report on that study - in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1013 - showed that the use of nuclear energy for seawater desalination 
was technically and economically possible. Given the importance of the 
project, his delegation urged all States and organizations to support it. 
154. Security Council resolution 487 had required that Israel place all of 
its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards without delay. If Israel had 
complied with that resolution, the situation now would be completely 
different. More than ten years had passed since then, and Israel had had the 
time to acquire a nuclear arsenal. Although there was an urgent need to 
implement that resolution and establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone, Israel was 
persisting in its refusal and not talcing account of the wishes of the 
international community. His delegation hoped that pressure would be put on 
Israel to comply with the resolutions of the international community. 
155. Since South Africa had signed the NPT and concluded a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency, remarkable changes were taking place in the 
relations between South Africa and the other countries of the African 
continent. His delegation hoped that the policy of racial discrimination 
would disappear in that part of the world and that the population of South 
Africa would soon be embarking upon a new era, characterized by freedom and 
equality. 
156. In his statement, the Director General had mentioned a number of 
important problems to which he had proposed solutions. They had included 
problems related to the safeguards system and ways of strengthening it, the 
final storage of radioactive wastes and the establishment of an international 
register of storage sites, and the growing stocks of plutonium resulting from 
the dismantling of nuclear weapons and the treatment of irradiated nuclear 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 38 


fuel and the formulation of international standards for ensuring their 
safety. The rapid resolution of those problems would increase the confidence 
of the international community and dispel fears regarding nuclear energy. 


157. With regard to radioactive wastes, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had 
consistently emphasized the need to resolve that problem at international 
conferences and seminars; the Agency should continue to provide the 
assistance required by developing countries on whose territories such wastes 
had been discharged. 
158. In conclusion, in the light of the financial situation as described by 
the Director General, he called on Member States to pay their contributions in 
a timely manner in order that the Agency might continue to achieve its 
objectives. 
159. Mr. JAMAL (United Republic of Tanzania) congratulated the 
President on his election and thanked the Director General for his statement. 
Also, he commended the Secretariat for the excellent work which it was doing. 
160. The United Republic of Tanzania was very grateful to the Agency for the 
technical assistance provided to it in various fields. At its request, the 
Agency had organized a programme review mission to Tanzania which had taken 
place in December 1991. The services of the four experts who had participated 
in the mission had been greatly appreciated, and their report would constitute 
a blue-print for the transfer of nuclear technology to his country. 
161. Tanzania did not plan to embark on nuclear power generation in the 
foreseeable future. However, it wished to acquire certain nuclear techniques 
appropriate to its needs and its level of technological development in order 
to accelerate its social and economic development. In that connection, aware 
that manpower development was an essential precondition for the tranfer of 
nuclear technology, his country hoped that its technical co-operation with the 
Agency and with various regional groups would enable it to achieve its goals 
in that area. 
162. He paid tribute to the efforts of the Agency to achieve its statutory 
objectives and of Member States to enable the Agency to continue with its 
activities. However, for nearly ten years a number of Member States had been 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 39 


pressing for the financing of technical assistance from the Regular Budget or 
from other predictable and assured sources. The major contributors to the 
Agency had remained deaf to their appeals, and it seemed that the issue was no 
longer of great current interest. It was to be feared that the new needs 
emerging in the field of safeguards would lead to a decline in contributions 
to the TACF and make them even less predictable, thereby paralysing the 
Agency's promotional activities in developing Member States - especially the 


least advanced among them. Tanzania therefore appealed to all developed 
Member States to bear in mind the difficulties of those countries. 


163. The efforts of the Agency to promote not only North-South co-operation 
but also South-South co-operation were particularly commendable. In that 
connection, while noting that the Agency was supporting AFRA as well as ARCAL 
and RCA, he deplored the fact that AFRA projects did not seem to be attracting 
sufficient financial support. Also, he emphasized that the technical 
assistance approach to Africa should take into account the low technical and 
economic level of the region and its history. He thanked France and Spain for 
the extrabudgetary contributions which they had made for the AFRA programme 
in 1991-92 and 1993-94 and Egypt and Tunisia for having hosted courses 
organized within the framework of the AFRA programme - and especially for 
having provided the cost-free services of many local lecturers. He appealed 
to other donors to make contributions and to support the remaining projects. 
164. Understandably, the public considered that the Agency - given the 
specialized nature of its activities - should keep out of politics. However, 
in carrying out its statutory functions, and especially in applying NPT 
safeguards, the Agency was faced with questions of a political nature which 
were often very important and which could not be evaded. When that happened, 
the main issues should be discussed frankly and in good faith in order to 
achieve harmony, peace and security. His delegation was convinced that, if 
that were done, more and more Member States would accede to the NPT. 
165. The debate on the nuclear capacities of all Member States, whether or 
not parties to the NPT, should continue in order to promote wider compliance 
with safeguards obligations. Deterrent measures should be formulated for 
detecting non-compliance with safeguards obligations, and they should be 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.350 
page 40 


debated not only within the Agency but also in other bodies belonging to the 
United Nations system and within the framework of bilateral relations. 


166. As was frequently being stated, the present international situation was 
very conducive to the taking of far-reaching measures to prevent the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. The opportunity should be taken to 
establish a credible and effective safeguards regime which strengthened 
confidence in the process of regulation while permitting the promotion of 
peaceful nuclear technology. 
167. Ms. BOH (Slovenia) congratulated the President on his election and 
commended the Director General and the Secretariat on the work which they had 
done during the past year. It was a great honour for her to be addressing the 
General Conference on behalf of Slovenia. She thanked in particular the Board 
of Governors and the Secretariat for the confidence which they had displayed 
in her country when endorsing it for Agency membership. She also thanked the 
Agency and its Director General for intervening promptly when the former 
Yugoslav army had threatened the nuclear power station at Krsko in July 1991. 
Her country unreservedly supported the measures taken by the European 
Community and by the Security Council and the General Assembly of the United 
Nations, which had decided not to recognize the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
(Serbia and Montenegro) as the successor to the former Socialist Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia. 


168. Slovenia wished to assure the General Conference that it would fulfil 
the obligations assumed by it under the Agency's Statute, the NPT (to which it 
had acceded during the year) and various bilateral and multilateral agreements 
regarding peaceful applications of nuclear energy to which it was party in 
accordance with the Vienna Convention on Succession of States in Respect to 
Treaties. 
169. Aware of its responsibilities as a new Member of the Agency, Slovenia 
was confining itself strictly to peaceful nuclear activities and doing all it 
could to promote the aims of non-proliferation. It fully supported the 
Agency's efforts to strengthen safeguards and greatly appreciated the 
excellent work being done by the Secretariat in that connection. It believed 
that all violations of commitments relating to the peaceful utilization of 
atomic energy should be severely condemned by the international community. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 41 


170. Slovenia believed that the Agency had an increasingly important role to 
play in enhancing nuclear safety and radiation protection. In that 
connection, she recalled that the only nuclear power plant in the former 
Yugoslavia was situated in Slovenia, at Krsko, and that it had been in 
operation since 1981. It had been constructed, as a joint project of Slovenia 
and Croatia, within the framework of a trilateral agreement between the 
Agency, the United States and the former Yugoslavia. It had been under Agency 
safeguards ever since going into operation. In 1991, it had produced 24% of 
the electricity consumed in Slovenia. As attested to by OSART, ASSET and 
WAMAP missions, its performance was excellent and it had a good safety 
record. Slovenia was also engaging in extensive nuclear research, mainly with 
the help of a TRIGA research reactor. 
171. Slovenia attached great importance to OSART missions, which it regarded 
as an essential part of efforts to enhance nuclear safety. They provided 
opportunities for a very fruitful exchange of information and experience 
between operating personnel and Agency experts, and they were an efficient 
means of disseminating the best possible practices and eliminating defects and 
misunderstandings. Her Government would strongly support all efforts to 
render safety missions still more efficient, with a view to promoting mutual 
confidence. It believed that further international co-operation was necessary 
in nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
172. In particular, Slovenia fully endorsed the work being done on revising 
the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection, drawing up a nuclear 
safety convention and revising the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damage, and the work being done on radioactive waste safety standards 
and the project for enhancing the safety of WWERs in Eastern Europe. In the 
context of European Community activities, Slovenia was about to sign the 
European Energy Charter together with the Basic Agreement and the respective 
protocols. 
173. Stressing the importance which Slovenia attached to the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme, she announced that her country would be 
paying its share of the TACF target for 1992 and was ready to pledge its share 
for 1993. In order to overcome their difficulties, the new countries of 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 42 


Eastern Europe would have greater and greater need of assistance through the 
Agency's technical co-operation programme. Slovenia would continue to 
participate actively in the programme, including training courses for 
participants from developing countries, and would continue to put its experts 
at the Agency's disposal. 


174. The Agency was also playing an important role in promoting the 
non-power uses of nuclear energy. Slovenia believed that the development of 
advanced nuclear techniques for use in agriculture, medicine, food production 
and industry was a vital activity for many countries. Her own country was 
deeply involved on research on such applications, which it strongly encouraged. 
175. Recalling that a devastating war was raging in parts of the former 
Yugoslavia, where the number of victims already ran into the tens of thousands 
and vast areas had been destroyed and "ethnically cleansed", she appealed to 
the General Conference to help put an end to the violence and the bloodshed 
and help ensure the safety of all the peoples living on the territory of the 
former Yugoslavia, wherever they were and whatever their religion or 
nationality. Slovenia was convinced that the international community could 
end the war. 
176. In conclusion, she said that it was important to extend and strengthen 
the non-proliferation regime and the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
Non-proliferation controls and safeguards inspections were necessary for the 
safe development of nuclear energy, which itself was a pre-condition for the 
public acceptance of nuclear power. Slovenia would pay its contribution to 
the Regular Budget for 1992 and intended to play a positive role within the 
Agency. It was sure that the Agency would respond successfully to the new 
challenges facing it. 
177. Mr. STEMPEL PARIS (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America and the Caribbean), after congratulating the President and 
the Vice-Presidents on their election, recalled that at the thirty-fifth 
regular session of the General Conference he had held out the prospect of the 
imminent establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free zone envisaged in Article 4 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty. As a result of various events that had taken place 
in recent months, that goal had now almost been achieved. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 43 


178. In accordance with the provisions of Article 13 of the Tlatelolco 
Treaty, a safeguards agreement had been concluded at the end of 1991 between 
Argentina, Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control 
of Nuclear Materials and the International Atomic Energy Agency. In February 
of the current year, on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
opening of the Tlatelolco Treaty for signature, St. Vincent and the Grenadines 
had signed and ratified the Treaty and made the declaration provided for in 
Article 28 in order that the Treaty might enter fully into force for it. 
Belize had also signed the Treaty on that occasion. On 24 August 1992, France 
had submitted to the Depository State its instrument of ratification of 
Additional Protocol I to the Treaty. Also in August 1992, St. Lucia had 
signed the Treaty, and amendments to Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 20 of the 
Treaty which had been proposed by Mexico, Argentina, Brazil and Chile in order 
to facilitate the full entry into force of the Treaty for the three 
last-mentioned countries had been adopted during the seventh extraordinary 
session of OPANAL's General Conference. 
179. Thus, the Tlatelolco Treaty was on the point of applying fully to the 
whole of Latin America and the Caribbean. As regards Cuba, that country had 
announced that, although none of the reasons preventing it from signing the 
Tlatelolco Treaty had disappeared, it would sign in the interests of regional 
unity when all the countries of Latin America had assumed the responsibilities 
deriving from the Treaty. 
180. As had been emphasized by Argentina, Brazil and Chile during the fourth 
meeting of signatories of the Treaty, it was to be hoped that consolidation of 
the Tlatelolco system would also serve as the point of departure for regional 
co-operation in the field of peaceful nuclear applications, for the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone did not mean the renunciation of 
such applications by the States concerned. 
181. With regard to Additional Protocol II, during the seventh extraordinary 
session of OPANAL's General Conference the representative of the Russian 
Federation had declared that his country, as a successor State, assumed all 
the international rights and obligations of the former Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, including those deriving from the signing of that 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 44 


protocol. In the opinion of OPANAL's General Secretariat, that declaration 
resolved the legal problems of the assurances which should be given by the 
nuclear-weapon States regarding respect for the nuclear-weapon-free status of 
Latin America and the Caribbean. 


182. When the nuclear status of Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan had been 
clarified, OPANAL would take the decisions and initiate the negotiations which 
it considered most appropriate in each case. 
183. Thanking the Agency and the Director General for their valuable 
co-operation in the process of amendment of the Tlatelolco Treaty, he said 
that the amendments that had been adopted would undoubtedly result in an even 
more important role for the Agency in monitoring the implementation of the 
Treaty. Finally, he appealed once more to all States party to the Treaty that 
had not yet done so to conclude as soon as possible the safeguards agreements 
provided for in Article 13 of the Treaty. 
184. Mr. COLL (Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials) recalled that in July 1991 Brazil and Argentina had signed, 
in Guadalajara (Mexico), a bilateral agreement for the exclusively peaceful 
use of nuclear energy whereby the two countries undertook to use the nuclear 
material and facilities under their jurisdiction or control exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. They also undertook to prohibit and prevent in their 
respective territories - and to abstain from carrying out, promoting or 
authorizing, directly or indirectly, or from participating in any way in - the 
testing, use, manufacture, production or acquisition by any means of any 
nuclear weapon and the receipt, storage, installation, deployment or any other 
form of possession of any such weapon. The agreement had entered into force 
in December 1991, after being ratified by the Parliaments of the two 
countries. It established a Common System of Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials (SCCC), which would be applied in the two countries in 
verifying that the nuclear materials in all their nuclear activities were not 
diverted to the purposes prohibited by the agreement. 


185. To that end, the agreement established the Brazilian-Argentine Agency 
for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC), the headquarters of 
which were in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil). As an international organization, 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.35O 
page 45 


ABACC enjoyed the privileges and immunities necessary for the performance of 
its tasks. The privileges and immunities of its officials were set out in an 
additional protocol. ABACC had two organs: the Commission, consisting of 
four members (two designated by each party), was the policy-making organ; the 
Secretariat was the executive organ. 


186. The first meeting of the ABACC Commission had taken place in 
December 1991, in Buenos Aires (Argentina). The Secretariat consisted of a 
Secretary and a Deputy Secretary, a body of experienced officials, a group of 
administrative assistants and about 50 temporary inspectors (25 per country) 
who were attached to ABACC only when carrying out inspections. As stipulated 
in the agreement, the inspection activities were to be carried out on a 
reciprocal basis, with Argentine inspectors visiting Brazilian facilities and 
vice-versa. 
187. The Secretariat was divided into a technical unit and an administrative 
and financial unit. The technical unit was responsible for nuclear material 
accounting, for planning and evaluation, for operations and for technical 
support. The agreement also provided that the parties should furnish, on an 
equal basis, the resources necessary for the functioning of ABACC. After the 
signing of a headquarters agreement with Brazil, ABACC had begun its 
activities on 1 July 1992. It had started by examining the general procedures 
of the SCCC and technical questionnaires about facilities, establishing the 
databank necessary for nuclear material accounting, planning inspections and 
determining what equipment would be needed. It had already organized two 
seminars for its inspectors and had begun, in co-ordination with the national 
authorities of each country, to verify facility designs. 
188. As happened whenever an organization was being established, numerous 
difficulties had been encountered during the establishment of ABACC. In the 
light of the results to date, however, he was optimistic about achieving the 
envisaged objectives. 
189. Lastly, he emphasized the importance of the signing, in December 1991, 
of a quadripartite agreement between Argentina, Brazil, the Agency and ABACC 
whereby the Agency undertook to apply full-scope safeguards in the two 
countries, in co-operation with ABACC and taking account of the technical 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.350 
page 46 


effectiveness of the SCCC. The agreement would enter into force on the date 
when the Agency received from ABACC and the States parties written 
notification that the necessary conditions had been fulfilled. Given the 
importance of the agreement for the parties, it was to be hoped that those 
conditions would be fulfilled soon. 


The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m. 



GC(XXXV1)/OR.351 
13 October 1992 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 25 September 1992, at 10.30 a.m. 
President; Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
24 South Africa's nuclear capabilities 1-16 
26 Examination of delegates' credentials 17 - 27 
25 Iraq's non-compliance with its 
safeguards obligations 28 - 91 

[*] GC(XXXVI)/1027/Rev.1. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI)/INF/313/Rev.2. 


92-03756 
0519n/0035n 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 2 


SOUTH AFRICA'S NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES (GC(XXXVI)/RES/567; GC(XXXVI)/1015, 1029) 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that the present item had been included in 
the Agenda pursuant to resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/567 adopted by the General 
Conference the previous year. The Director General's report, prepared in 
pursuance of operative paragraph 2 of that resolution, was contained in 
document GC(XXXVI)/1015. 
2. The Conference also had before it, in document GC(XXXVI)/1029, a draft 
resolution submitted by Nigeria on behalf of the Group of 77; it contained a 
typographical error in preambular paragraph (c), where the reference number of 
the United Nations General Assembly resolution should be amended to read 
"A/RES/46/34/B". 
3. Mr. LAMAMRA (Algeria), introducing document GC(XXXVI)/1029 on 
behalf of the Group of 77, said that the past year had seen major developments 
with regard to the technical aspects of the matter - developments which the 
Board and General Conference should welcome and take into account when 
considering their approach to the subject in the future. 
4. The draft resolution before the General Conference was the result of 
extensive consultations both within the African Group and in the Group of 77. 
Because of the broad-based agreement achieved on its wording, the Group of 77 
considered that the resolution warranted adoption by the General Conference by 
consensus. 
5. With regard to operative paragraph 3, he pointed out that the OAU and 
the United Nations had created a group of intergovernmental experts to draw up 
a treaty or convention on the establishment of an NWFZ in Africa. That group 
had held two meetings, at which the Agency had also been represented. The 
aim of the paragraph was to formulate a legal basis for the assistance already 
being provided by the Director General to the OAU and the United Nations with 
a view to the elaboration of such a treaty or convention. In other words, the 
paragraph should be interpreted as an invitation to the Director General to 
fulfil the Agency's mandate in accordance with its Statute. 
6. As to operative paragraph 4, the report which the Director General was 
then requested to make should relate to the second as well as the third 
operative paragraph of the draft resolution. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.351 
page 3 


7. The sponsors felt that the positive developments which had prompted 
the draft resolution dictated that a new approach, in terms of both form and 
content, be adopted in discussing the present item, which in future should 
accordingly be entitled "The denuclearization of Africa". 
8. Finally, the sponsors of the draft resolution considered it to be a 
well-formulated and carefully balanced text designed to deal with a 
transitional period in South Africa's nuclear development. They hoped that, 
in its discussions and resolutions, the Agency would be able to reflect the 
rapid process of normalization taking place in South Africa in the nuclear 
sphere. 
9. Mr. CHEN (China) expressed appreciation for the efforts made by 
the Secretariat pursuant to resolution GC(KXXV)/RES/567 and welcomed the 
co-operative attitude displayed by the South African Government in that 
regard. Complete transparency and the assurance that all South Africa's 
nuclear installations and materials were placed under safeguards were 
preconditions for the eventual establishment of an NWFZ in Africa. 
10. Since South Africa had possessed nuclear capabilities for approximately 
15 years it would be unrealistic to expect to be able to form a complete 
picture of its nuclear programme immediately. However, the Agency had made a 
good start, and it was to be hoped that South Africa would continue to show 
the political will to co-operate fully with it in meeting its recently 
acquired obligations. 
11. His delegation looked forward to hearing the Director General's report 
on the progress made in implementing resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/567 and supported 
the adoption of the draft resolution submitted in document GC(XXXVI)/1029. 
12. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) also supported the draft 
resolution and hoped that it could be adopted by consensus. He was satisfied 
with the thoroughness and vigour of the efforts already undertaken by the 
Agency in verifying South Africa's nuclear inventory and he commended South 
Africa, in turn, for its co-operation. He trusted that both sides would 
continue the good work they had begun. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.351 
page 4 


13. With reference to operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, he 
said that it was his country's intention to support and encourage the Director 
General's efforts to assist the African States in establishing an NWFZ in 
Africa, as that would constitute an important contribution towards peace and 
security in the African continent and throughout the world. 
14. Mr. BAKSHI (India) expressed his country's full support for the 
aspiration of the people of Africa to secure equality and lasting peace on 
their continent. However, his delegation believed that any proposal regarding 
the establishment of an NWFZ should be the result of consultations and 
negotiations among the States of the region concerned rather than emanating 
from a proposal by the Agency or the Director General. Notwithstanding that 
position of principle, he noted that no State in the African region had 
objected to the proposals in the draft resolution and accordingly assumed 
that all those States consented to the establishment of an NWFZ. His 
delegation could therefore support adoption of the draft resolution. 
15. The PRESIDENT said he took it that the Conference wished to adopt 
the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV1)/1O29. 
16. It was so decided. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXXVI)/1044) 


17. The PRESIDENT drew attention to document GC(XXXV1)/1O44, which 
contained the General Committee's report on its meeting to examine delegates' 
credentials, as provided for in Rule 28 of the General Conference's Rules of 
Procedure. Paragraphs 2 to 9 of the report described the manner in which the 
Committee had approached its task and conveyed the opinions expressed during 
the discussion. The Committee had agreed to recommend the adoption of the 
draft resolution contained in paragraph 10 of its report. 
18. Since the report had been issued, credentials in proper form had also 
been received from Cote d'Ivoire and the Dominican Republic. 
19. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar), on behalf of the Arab delegations members of 
the League of Arab States participating in the current session of the General 
Conference, read out the statement circulated as an Attachment to document 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 5 


GC(XXXVI)/1034, and reproduced in Annex 2 to the General Conference 
Committee's report, concerning those delegations* reservations about the 
credentials submitted by the Israeli delegation. 


20. Mr. ONSY (Egypt) said that, in accordance with his country's 
policy of not recognizing Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, he wished to 
state his delegation's reservation regarding the credentials of the Israeli 
delegation, whose documents had been issued in Jerusalem. 
21. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that in the light of 
the progress being made in the Middle East, which he hoped would continue 
apace, his delegation regretted that reservations regarding the credentials of 
the Israeli delegation had been expressed at the General Committee's meeting. 
22. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) fully endorsed the 
statements made by the delegates of Qatar and Egypt in expressing their 
reservations concerning the credentials of the Israeli delegation. His 
country had already clearly stated its position on the matter, namely that it 
had not yet recognized the regime now occupying the Holy Land through a policy 
of brutal aggression. The issue of the Israeli delegation's credentials 
should continue to be discussed by the General Conference until the threat 
posed by Israel's nuclear capabilities was eliminated. Moreover, the 
negotiations aimed at securing peace in the Middle East region should not be 
allowed to "blackmail" the General Conference by preventing it from taking 
action for fear of jeopardizing those negotiations. 
23. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) associated himself with the reservations 
expressed by the delegations of Qatar, Egypt and the Islamic Republic of Iran 
concerning the credentials of the Israeli delegation. 
24. Mr. LAMAMRA (Algeria), after reading out the declaration of the 
African Group of Member States concerning their reservations about the 
credentials of the South African delegation which had been circulated as an 
Attachment to document GC(XXXVI)/1033 and was reproduced in Annex 1 to the 
General Committee's report, said that the declaration should be interpreted as 
a message of the African Group's hopes for the future and its readiness to 
assume its share of responsibility for realizing those hopes. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.351 
page 6 


25. Ms. BECKER (United States of America) reiterated the regret 
expressed by her delegation in the General Committee that reservations should 


be stated with regard to South Africa, especially in view of the positive 


developments that had taken place recently in that country. 


26. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference wished to adopt the 
draft resolution set forth in paragraph 10 of document GC(XXXVI)/1044. 


27. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1044 was adopted. 
IRAQ'S NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ITS SAFEGUARDS OBLIGATIONS (GC(XXXV)/RES/568; 
GC(XXXVI)/1014 and Add.1 and 2, 1043) 


28. The PRESIDENT, noting that the item had been included in the 
General Conference's agenda pursuant to resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/568, pointed 
out that the Director General, in response to the request in operative 
paragraph 5 of that resolution, had submitted the report contained in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1014 and Add.1 on his efforts to implement Security Council 
resolutions 687 and 707. He had also referred to the matter in his opening 
statement to the Conference. The matter had been considered by the Board of 
Governors the preceding week on the basis of the Director General's report, 
and the summary record of the Board's discussion was contained in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1014/Add.2. In addition, the Conference had before it document 
GC(XXXVI)/1043, which contained a draft resolution on the matter. 


29. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that at the previous 
year's session of the General Conference his Government had co-sponsored a 
resolution essentially identical with that in document GC(XXXVI)/1043. The 
earlier document had had 14 co-sponsors, whereas the present one had 24. 
During the previous year's debate on the matter, his Government had sincerely 
hoped that the Government of Iraq was being forthright and accurate in its 
statements before the Conference to the effect that it had made a "complete 
and definitive declaration of all aspects of its nuclear programme". 
Unfortunately, however, that had not been the case. Immediately afterwards, 
in the week following the Conference, the sixth Agency inspection team had 
discovered massive documentary evidence of Iraq's clandestine nuclear weapons 
programme at an office building in Baghdad. Later, through the persistent 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.351 
page 7 


efforts of the Agency's inspection teams, under the overall direction of 
Professor Zifferero, direct evidence had been uncovered of additional 
violations by Iraq of its safeguards agreements with the Agency relating to 


its safeguarded nuclear activities at Tuwaitha. Even now, Iraq still refused 
to provide the Agency with essential information about its nuclear procurement 
and other activities. 


30. The record of Iraq's compliance with the relevant United Nations 
Security Council resolutions concerning its nuclear activities was one of 
continuing obstruction, obfuscation and misrepresentation. It could only be 
hoped that the assurances Iraq was now making regarding its willingness to 
co-operate fully with the Agency, and in particular its promise to submit to 
intrusive and long-term inspection and monitoring arrangements, were not shown 
yet again to be grounded in deception. Nothing short of full co-operation 
over a considerable period of time could dispel the suspicions raised. Iraq 
had not yet earned the trust of the international community with regard to its 
unlawful nuclear weapons activities. The Agency must therefore continue to 
verify that country's assertions in the most vigorous manner possible. 
31. Accordingly, his Government hoped that the draft resolution submitted 
in document GC(XXXV1)/1O43 would be adopted swiftly and unanimously. 
32. Mr. AL-SAEID (Kuwait) asked that his country's name be added to 
the list of co-sponsors of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1043. 
33. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that the previous year's session of the 
General Conference had seen a political drive by the United States to have a 
resolution adopted that was against the interests of the people of Iraq. The 
United States wished to maintain an embargo against Iraq and thus deprive its 
people of the right to live. Unfortunately, with the appearance of a similar 
draft resolution at the present session, the Agency seemed to be slowly 
drifting to the point of becoming an instrument of United States foreign 
policy. 
34. With regard to the title of the draft resolution, neither he nor the 
Agency's Department of Safeguards was aware of any non-compliance with 
safeguards obligations on the part of Iraq since the 1991 session of the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 8 


General Conference. As everyone knew, two cases had been brought against Iraq 


in the Board of Governors and the General Conference. Both so-called cases of 
non-compliance had been properly discussed and action had been taken. Nothing 
else of the kind had occurred since 1991. Therefore, the draft resolution now 
before the Conference reflected not so much the present reality as the 
determination of the United States to pursue its political aims through every 
means possible, regardless of legality and legitimacy. 


35. As there had been no non-compliance by Iraq during the past year, and 
since there was no legal basis on which the Agency's General Conference could 
implement the provisions of Security Council resolution 687, his delegation 
suspected that the title of the present draft resolution must have been chosen 
specifically to bypass the Agency's Statute. 
36. Thus, operative paragraph 13 of Security Council resolution 687 
entrusted the task of on-site inspection of Iraq's nuclear capabilities to the 
Director General, through the United Nations Secretary-General, with the 
assistance and co-operation of the Special Commission. The task had not been 
given to the Agency alone because it did not fall under the Agency's Statute. 
In his delegation's view, that was why the strange title of the present draft 
resolution had been chosen despite the fact that there had been no further 
non-compliance by Iraq. 
37. Turning to the text of the draft resolution submitted by the United 
States and others, he noted that preambular paragraph (a) referred to Security 
Council resolution 687. In order to be more precise, it should have referred 
specifically to operative paragraphs 12, 13 and 14 of resolution 687, since 
the remainder of that resolution had no connection at all with the Agency's 
Director General or his activities. 
38. Preambular paragraph (c) of the draft resolution had no basis in 
reality. It contradicted all the known facts regarding the activities of the 
inspection teams. Moreover, the entire draft resolution completely ignored 
the passages concerning Iraq in the Director General's opening statement to 
the Board of Governor's on 16 September 1992, and in the subsequent discussion 
by the Board as reflected in document GC(XXXVI)/1014/Add.2, from which it 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 9 


emerged clearly that much progress had been made in the implementa- tion of 
Security Council resolution 687 during the past year. The extent of the 
progress achieved had also been highlighted by Mr. Ghafour, head of the Iraqi 
delegation, in his general debate statement on 22 September[l]. 


39. With regard to operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution, it was 
generally accepted in law that sentence was not passed twice as punishment for 
a single violation. The previous year's resolution had "strongly condemned" 
Iraq and, since no further violation had taken place since, it should not be 
condemned again. He challenged the United States, and requested the Director 
General, to produce evidence of any incident whereby Iraq had violated its 
safeguards commitments during the past year. As all Iraqi nuclear facilities 
had been inoperative during that period, he was at a loss to know how any 
possible non-compliance could have occurred. Operative paragraph 1 was thus 
merely a further indication of its authors' political intent. It had no 
connection with the Agency's Statute or safeguards system. 
40. Operative paragraph 2 also departed from reality. Anyone who had read 
the Director General's report on the matter would be aware of how much had 
been achieved towards fulfilling the requirements of operative paragraph 13 of 
Security Council resolution 687. Iraq, contrary to what had been asserted by 
the United States delegation, had co-operated fully with the inspection teams 
which had visited Iraq since September 1991. The reports of the inspection 
teams themselves demonstrated as much and revealed the erroneous nature of the 
information on which operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution was based. 
41. For example, the report by the tenth inspection team[2] stated, in 
section 6 on page 4: "A steady improvement in Iraqi co-operation began during 
the seventh inspection mission.", and "In the course of the tenth inspection 
mission, the Iraqi authorities went a long way to facilitate and expedite the 
IAEA team's work". The report on the eleventh inspection[3], held between 
7 and 15 April 1992, stated on page 1: "The Iraqi side provided all 
equipment, materials and manpower necessary for ensuring efficient fulfilment 
[1] See document GC(XXXVI)/OR.345. 
[2] See document GOV/INF/649. 
[3] See document GOV/INF/655. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.351 
page 10 


of the destruction plan under the supervision of the IAEA team." The report 


further stated, in section 16 on page 12: "The Iraqi side made an 


extraordinary effort to complete [the transfer of irradiated fuel] during the 


eleventh inspection". Similarly, the report on the twelfth inspection[4] 


stated, on page 2: "The Iraqi side's co-operation in implementing destruction 


plans at Al Atheer-Al Hatteen, Tarmiya and Ash Sharqat cannot be faulted and 


should he noted", and the report on the thirteenth inspection^] confirmed, on 


page 4: "As was the case in the eleventh and twelfth mission, the Iraqi side 


provided all equipment, materials and manpower necessary for the efficient 


implementation of the destruction plan under the supervision of the IAEA team." 


42. Furthermore, on 5 June 1992, the Director General had said that Iraqi 
officials had co-operated in the destruction of Iraq's key nuclear weapons 
design complex, the Al Atheer Centre, 65 kilometres (40 miles) south of 
Baghdad, without giving any other information, and on another occasion 
Mr. Hooper, the American head of the thirteenth inspection team, when asked 
how well Iraq had co-operated, had replied "superb, no problems whatsoever". 


43. Many other quotations could be adduced to demonstrate that operative 
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution had no basis in reality. It showed how 
political aims had come to override the facts of life, even to the extent that 
the United States and its co-sponsors had not hesitated to discredit the 
inspection teams they had entrusted to carry out the inspection missions, and 
also the Action Team - which it should be noted comprised five persons, two of 
whom were Americans and none Iraqis. 
44. Turning to operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, he expressed 
the hope that it implied no hidden intention to encourage the Agency to 
continue destroying anything it deemed to be nuclear-related, thus depriving 
the Iraqi people of the very basic tools with which they worked to improve 
their lives. 
[4] See document GOV/INF/662. 
[5] See document GOV/INF/663. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.351 
page 11 


45. As to operative paragraph 4, it was a naked attempt to perpetuate a 
situation which had ended. After leading the fourteenth inspection mission to 
Baghdad, Professor Zifferero had made to news agencies a statement - by which, 
it seemed, he still stood - to the effect that the Iraqi nuclear programme had 
been brought to zero level and rendered harmless. He had further said that he 
had no strong reasons to believe that Iraq was hiding anything of 
significance, and that he had received assurances at all levels of the Iraqi 
authorities that Iraq had departed from all nuclear activities. That had been 
a statement of fact - Iraq had no nuclear facilities, nor would it have any, 
by decision of the Iraqi Government. The question therefore had to be asked 
why the Agency was seeking to perpetuate a political exercise. 
46. In the light of the foregoing, the draft resolution should be rejected, 
because it went against the facts, because it was politically motivated, 
because it discredited the Agency and its inspection teams, and above all 
because it was an attempt, under the guise of safeguards activities, to 
perpetuate the embargo against the Iraqi people. 
47. In conclusion, he proposed amending the draft resolution by deleting 
preambular paragraph (c) and operative paragraph 1, amending operative 
paragraph 2 to read "Demands that Iraq and the IAEA shall intensify their 
co-operation in order to fully implement the relevant paragraphs of Security 
Council resolution 687", and deleting the rest of that paragraph and all of 
operative paragraph 4. He requested that any vote on those amendments be 
taken by roll-call; depending on the outcome, he might subsequently ask for a 
separate vote on each of the operative paragraphs to which he had just 
suggested amendments. 
48. Mr. de LA FORTELLE (France) said his delegation had closely 
studied the Director General's report on the matter and wished to commend him 
and the Agency's experts for the work they had carried out in particularly 
difficult circumstances. 
49. He was pleased to note that the clandestine facilities in Iraq had been 
identified and either destroyed or rendered harmless. Although the Iraqi 
authorities had, on the whole, provided the level of co-operation required 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 12 


under the terms of Security Council resolution 687, it remained a cause for 
concern that some of the Agency's requests had not yet been met. In addition, 
uncertainties remained in a number of areas owing to inconsistencies in the 
technical explanations given by the Iraqi authorities. 


50. It was a matter of particular concern to his delegation that it could 
still not be said with complete certainty that all the facilities which had 
contributed to Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme were now known. It was 
not impossible that further revelations might in the future extend the list of 
identified sites which had been drawn up mainly on the basis of information 
supplied by the Special Commission. 
51. It was clear that Iraq had neither complied with its obligations under 
the NPT and its safeguards agreement with the Agency, nor with all the 
provisions of Security Council resolution 687. That was why his delegation 
had co-sponsored the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXV1)/1O43. 
However, given that those clandestine facilities which had been identified had 
now been destroyed or rendered harmless, the time had come to implement the 
plan for post-destruction monitoring proposed under Security Council 
resolution 715, which of course would not preclude any further inspections 
that might be required in the future. Accordingly, his delegation wished to 
propose an addition to the text of the draft resolution under discussion, to 
be placed between operative paragraphs 3 and 4, and requesting the Director 
General "to take, as soon as possible, the necessary measures for the 
implementation of the long-term monitoring plan, in accordance with Security 
Council resolution 715". 
52. In conclusion, he noted that the amendments to the draft resolution 
proposed by Iraq were completely unacceptable to his delegation. 
53. Mr. GARCIA DE LA CRUZ (Cuba) said that his country's position 
concerning the background to Security Council resolution 687 and its 
implications for the Agency had been clearly stated on a number of occasions, 
so he would give only a brief summary of the basic principles underlying 
Cuba's present position. 

GC(XXXV1)/OR.351 
page 13 


54. Above all, unconditional respect for the sovereignty of States was 
vitally important. Therefore, agreements and international commitments 
voluntarily entered into by sovereign States were sacred and must be complied 
with in the context of international law. However, it was also true that in 
certain cases, even within the Agency, unequal treatment had been meted out 
and a discriminatory element introduced which was governed, at times, by 
interests alien to the spirit and nature of the Agency as an international 
institution. In the conduct of international relations, the non-use of force 
and of economic or any other pressure must prevail, or else the prospects for 
living in the world of peace and justice to which everyone aspired would be 
jeopardized. 
55. Furthermore, his delegation believed that the Agency should focus on 
the tasks and functions which derived from its Statute. It should take care 
to refrain from entering into activities too far removed from the functions 
for which it had been created. That did not mean that co-operation with other 
bodies and organizations was ruled out, nor that the Agency should cease to 
implement its safeguards activities. It meant simply that the Agency should 
not demean itself by agreeing to serve as a policeman. Turning to the draft 
resolution under discussion, he noted, firstly, that since the Agency applied 
safeguards under agreements concluded with the various States, there was no 
need for any reference to obligations under the NPT, which was a matter better 
dealt with in another forum. Secondly, operative paragraph 2 seemed to 
suggest that information was being held in other hands and thereby introduced 
a delicate element which had been discussed on several occasions by the Board 
of Governors, and concerning which there existed diverse opinions. Thirdly, 
operative paragraph 3 commended the Director General and his staff in a manner 
likely to cause controversy for activities which were described only in 
general terms and which did not form part of the Agency's normal work. 
Lastly, as his delegation had stated at the meeting of the Board of Governors 
in May 1991[6], Cuba could not associate itself with the consequences for 
Member States and the Agency that might result from activities carried out 
pursuant to Security Council resolution 687. 
[6] See document GOV/OR.748, para. 27. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 14 


56. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) moved that discussion of 
the amendments proposed hy the representative of Iraq be adjourned under Rule 
59 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. The issue of Iraq's 
non-compliance with its safeguards obligations had already been discussed in 
detail at numerous meetings of the Board of Governors and in the General 
Conference. Furthermore, the proposed amendments were inconsistent with the 
functions of the General Conference and the aims of the United Nations system. 
57. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) noted with regret that the United States 
delegation did not seem disposed to allow free discussion of the amendments he 
had suggested. While he could accept adjournment of the debate under 
Rule 59, he considered that Rule 63 entitled the Iraqi delegation to ask for 
its proposed amendments to be put to the vote, and that in any case Rule 59 
could not be invoked to forestall application of Rule 63, as the delegation of 
the United States was attempting to do. 
58. Mr. LEE (Canada), supported the motion brought by the United 
States, that the General Conference should adjourn consideration of the 
amendments proposed by Iraq. Those amendments were so completely contrary to 
the objectives and essential aim of the draft resolution that they must be 
considered "ultra vires". 
59. Mr. PLUG (Netherlands) also supported the motion put forward by 
the representative of the United States. The amendments proposed by Iraq were 
obfuscatory and ran counter to the thrust of the draft resolution. 
60. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) reiterated his view that Rule 59 could not be 
used to prevent the General Conference from voting on amendments and requested 
a legal opinion on the matter. 
61. The PRESIDENT asked those present whether they were in favour of 
the motion proposed by the United States delegation. 
62. The motion proposed by the United States of America was carried. 
63. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said he had already requested that any votes 
on the item should be taken by roll-call. The decision on the United States 
motion, should therefore have been arrived at by means of a roll-call vote. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 15 


64. The PRESIDENT replied that the representative of Iraq had only 
requested a roll-call vote on the amendments which he had proposed. Also, the 
motion brought by the United States had been put to the General Conference and 
had been carried. 
65. Mr. DONNELLY (United Kingdom) said that his delegation was 
grateful to the IAEA for the contribution it had made to the international 
efforts to uncover and render harmless Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and 
fully supported its continuing efforts to implement Security Council 
resolution 687. It was clear that Iraq had engaged in pursuing an extensive 
nuclear weapons programme over a considerable period of time in breach of the 
NPT and its safeguards obligations. Security Council resolution 687 had 
required Iraq to make a declaration of the locations, types and amounts of all 
its nuclear weapons material, or any subsystems or components, or any related 
research, development, support or manufacturing facilities. Security Council 
resolution 707 had required Iraq to make a full, final and complete disclosure 
of its programmes for the production of weapons of mass destruction. He 
remained unconvinced that Iraq had complied fully with those resolutions. For 
instance, Iraq was still refusing to supply procurement data and to return the 
papers which had been seized from the sixth inspection team by the Iraqi 
military authorities. It was extremely regrettable that Iraq had attempted to 
conceal its activities from the IAEA, the Special Commission and the Security 
Council by persistent and wilful deception and obstruction. There was clearly 
a need for a continued programme of intrusive and rigorous inspections to 
uncover the full extent of Iraq's nuclear activities. He therefore supported 
the draft resolution which had been submitted in document GC(XXXVI)/1043. 
66. The PRESIDENT read out the amendment to the draft resolution 
proposed by France (reproduced in document GC(XXXVI)/1043/Mod.1) and asked the 
Conference whether it wished to adopt that amendment. 
67. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) requested that all votes on the item under 
discussion be taken by roll-call. 
68. The PRESIDENT, complying with the request of the representative of 
Iraq, proposed that the General Conference proceed with a roll-call vote on 
the amendment to the draft resolution proposed by France. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 


page 16 


69. Zimbabwe, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


70. The result of the vote was as follows; 
In favour; Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, 
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, 
Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, 
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Myanmar, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, 
Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, 
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, South 
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, 
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of 
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela. 


Against; Iraq. 


Abstaining: Algeria, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Sudan, Tunisia, Zimbabwe. 


71. There were 67 votes in favour and 1 against, with 9 abstentions. The 
amendment proposed by France was adopted. 


72. The PRESIDENT then invited the General Conference to vote upon the 
whole draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1043, as amended by 


France. 


73. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) moved that a separate vote be taken on each of 
the operative paragraphs of the draft resolution to which he had earlier 


proposed amendments. 


74. The PRESIDENT asked, under Rule 75 of the Rules of Procedure, 
whether there was any objection to the motion for division put forward by 


Iraq. 


75. Mr. LEE (Canada) objected that since the United States motion to 
adjourn discussion of the amendments proposed by Iraq under Rule 59 had been 


carried, the motion just brought by the representative of Iraq was out of 


order. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 17 


76. Mr. WAGNER (Czechoslovakia) and Mr. PLUG (Netherlands) supported 
the objection raised by the delegate of Canada. 


77. Mr. CHEN (China) felt that the General Conference could not simply 
reject a request from a delegation for a vote. As he understood it, the 
motion for division which had just been brought by Iraq was different from the 
amendments to the operative paragraphs of the draft resolution which the 
representative of Iraq had proposed earlier. If a delegation requested a vote 
on an issue under Rule 75 there was no reason why the General Conference 
should refuse that request. 
78. However, in the interests of the smooth working of the General 
Conference, he urged the representative of Iraq not to insist on his motion. 


79. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) thanked the representative of China for his 
remarks, but remained convinced that is was imperative that a separate vote be 


taken on the individual operative paragraphs of the draft resolution. 


80. The PRESIDENT noted that two delegations had spoken against the 
motion for division put forward by Iraq and one in favour. In accordance with 


Rule 75, he therefore proposed that the General Conference proceed to a 


roll-call vote on the Iraqi motion that a separate vote be taken on the 


individual operative paragraphs. 


81. Slovenia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


82. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Iraq. 


Against: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, 
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, 
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, 
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of 
Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, 
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Myanmar, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian 
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, 
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, 
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay. 



GC(XXXVI)/0R.351 


page 18 


Abstaining: Algeria, Bangladesh, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea, Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Libyan Arab 
Jataahiriya, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates[7], 
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


83. 
There was 1 vote in favour and 62 against, with 13 abstentions. The 
motion was rejected. 


84. The PRESIDENT then invited the General Conference to vote on the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1043, as amended by France. 


85. 
China, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


86. 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, 
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Egypt, 
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, 
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Myanmar, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, 
Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, 
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, South 
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, 
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of 
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela. 


Against: Iraq. 


Abstaining: Algeria, China, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea, Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya, Sudan, Tunisia, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


87. 
There were 67 votes in favour and 1 against, with 11 abstentions. The 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1043. as amended by France, 


was adopted. 


88. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said the day on which that resolution had been 
adopted would come to be remembered as a black day in the history of the 


Agency. The General Conference had failed to respect its own Rules of 


Procedure. His requests for roll-call votes had been misrepresented and 


overruled, and his request for a legal opinion had been ignored. The United 


[7] 
The delegation of the United Arab Emirates subsequently informed the 
Secretariat that it had intended to vote against the motion. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.351 
page 19 


States of America had once again demonstrated its hegemony over the Agency and 


the General Conference. It had forestalled a free discussion of the item and 
prevented the General Conference from studying the amendments proposed by 
Iraq. The vote in favour of the United States position was a vote against the 
credibility of the inspection missions and in favour of continuing the embargo 
against the Iraqi people. Despite the policies of provocation and aggression 
of the United States Government, however, Iraq would continue to respect its 
international commitments and its obligations under Security Council 
resolution 687 and would continue to co-operate with the inspection missions. 


89. Mr. CHEN (China) said that his delegation's abstention from voting 
did not mean that China had changed its position on the Iraq issue and 
Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715. The Security Council had 
adopted its resolutions in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the 
United Nations as a restrictive measure on Iraq. Within the context of the 
Agency, Iraq had violated its safeguards agreement. Those two situations were 
different. The full co-operation of Iraq had to be obtained if it was to be 
persuaded to honour its safeguards obligations and to implement the 
resolutions of the Security Council. Without that co-operation the Agency 
would not be able to carry out its tasks, and it was imperative that any 
measures which were adopted should be such as to encourage Iraq to 
co-operate. 
90. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his delegation 
had made quite clear its position with respect to the issue of non-compliance 
and the vital importance of all Member States adhering strictly to their 
international obligations. However, he had already abstained from voting on 
the amendment to the resolution which had been adopted, and he had 
consequently felt obliged also to abstain from the vote on the resolution as a 
whole. 
91. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that his Government 
categorically rejected the unfounded and outrageous allegations made against 
his country by the representative of Iraq. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
9 October 1992 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


THIRTY-SIXTH (1992) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 25 September 1992, at 3.25 p.m. 


President:
later: 
Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 
Mr. BISLEY (New Zealand) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 
9 Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat 1 2 
Oral report by the Chairman of theCommittee of the Whole on the 
following items: 
3-41 
The Agency's accounts for 1991 23 
Harmony and compatability of 
programme and budget and 
accounts documents 24 
Measures to strengthen international 
co-operation in matters 
relating to nuclear safety and 
radiological protection 25 27 


[*] GC(XXXVO)/1027/Rev.1. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVI/INF/313/Rev.2. 


92-03762 
0497n/0034n 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 2 


Item of theagenda* 
Paragraphs 
  
- Strengthening of the safeguards 
system 28 
- Strengthening of the Agency's 
main activities 29 
The financing of safeguards 30 
- The financing of technical 
assistance 31 
Plan for producing potable 
water economically 32 
The Agency's programme and 
budget for 1993 and 1994 33 35 
Scale of assessment of Members' 
contributions towards the 
Regular Budget 36 37 
Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 38 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute 39 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute 
as a whole 40 41 


27 Report on voluntary contributions pledged 
to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1993 42 


10 Application of IAEA safeguards in the 
Middle East 43 - 111 


Closing of the session 112 - 129 


Abbreviations used in this record 


NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 3 


ISRAELI NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES AND THREAT (GC(XXXV)/RES/570) 


1. The PRESIDENT said that his extensive consultations with various 
groups and delegations over the past few days had revealed a general feeling 
among delegations that, in view of the peace process already under way in the 
Middle East, the aim of which was to conclude a comprehensive and just peace 
in the region, and which included in particular discussions on the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, it would be 
desirable not to consider the present agenda item at the thirty-sixth regular 
session. In the absence of any objection, he would take that to be the view 
of the General Conference. 
2. It was so agreed 
ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


3. Mr. EL-SAEIDI (Egypt), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the Committee's report on items 12 to 23 of the agenda. 
4. Under item 12, "The Agency's accounts for 1991", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution on page III 
of document GC(XXXVI)/1005. The Committee also recommended adoption of the 
draft resolution entitled "Harmony and compatibility of programme and budget 
and accounts documents", which was to be found in document GC(XXXVI)/1028. 
5. Under item 13, "Measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection", the Committee 
recommended that the General Conference adopt the following four draft 
resolutions: 
(a) 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1046, which related to 
sub-item 13(c), "Report on the preparation of possible elements of 
a nuclear safety convention", and sub-item 13(e), "Implementation 
of resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/553 as a whole"; 
(b) 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1042, entitled 
"Revision of the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection"; 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 4 


(c) The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1048, entitled 
"Education and training in radiation protection and nuclear 


safety"; and 


(d) 
The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1047, entitled 
"Liability for nuclear damage". 
6. With regard to sub-item 13(f), "Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material", the Committee recommended that the General Conference 
take note of the report by the Director General in document GC(XXXVI)/INF/311, 
and also that the Conference request the Director General to report to it at 
its thirty-seventh regular session on the results of the conference to review 
the Convention which was to take place in Vienna during the following week. 
7. The Committee also recommended that the Conference request the Director 
General to submit to the Board of Governors the summary record of its discussion 
regarding the draft resolution on "Measures to strengthen international 
co-operation in matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection" 
in document GC(XXXVI)/1046. 
8. Lastly, from the discussion on the agenda item in the Committee of the 
Whole, he understood it to be the wish of many Member States to request the 


Secretariat to prepare a report on the subject of the notification and 


recording of nuclear accidents. 


9. Under item 14, "Strengthening of the safeguard system", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1050. 
10. Under item 15, "Strengthening of the Agency's main activities", the 
Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
in document GC(XXXVI)/1051 and also the draft resolution entitled "Practical 
utilization of food irradiation in developing countries" in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1030. 
11. Under item 16, "The financing of safeguards", the Committee recommended 
that the General Conference adopt the draft resolutions set out documents 
GC(XXXVI)/1036 and GC(XXXVI)/1037. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 5 


12. Under item 17, entitled "The financing of technical assistance", the 
Committee recommended that the General Conference adopt the draft resolution 
in document GC(XXXVI)/1038. 
13. Under item 18, entitled "Plan for producing potable water 
economically", the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1049. 
14. Under item 19, "The Agency's programme and budget for 1993 and 1994", 
the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt draft resolutions A, B and 
C in Annex IV to document GC(XXXVI)/1006 - the Blue Book. 
15. In the Committee's discussion, two delegations had expressed 
reservations concerning draft resolutions A and B, but had not pressed for a 
vote. Their reservations would be reflected in the summary record of the 
eighty-third meeting of the Committee of the Whole. 
16. Under the same agenda item, the Committee recommended that the 
Conference adopt the draft resolution entitled "Appropriations in the Agency's 
budget" in document GC(XXXVI)/1032. 
17. Under item 20, "Scale of assessment of Members' contributions towards 
the Regular Budget", the Committee recommended adoption of the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1011 with the addition of the footnote 
contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1011/Mod.1 and with the second sentence in 
footnote (b) on page 7 of document GC(XXXVI)/1011 amended to read as follows: 
"The inclusion of Yugoslavia does not affect the question of the membership of 
Yugoslavia ..." 
18. Under item 21, "Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1031 and the draft resolution entitled "Women in the Secretariat" in 
document GC(XXXVI)/1040, to which there was a Corrigendum. 
19. Under item 22, "Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in 
document GC(XXXVI)/1039. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 6 


20. Under item 22, "Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a Whole", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference take note of documents 
GC(XXXVI)/1024 and 1024/Add.1 and that it request the Board to establish a 
successor informal working group with the mandate set out in Conference 
resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/566. 
21. In conclusion, he thanked the members of the Committee for their 
co-operative spirit and also the two Vice-chairmen, Mr. Strulak of Poland and 
Mr. Verbeek of the Netherlands, for their support. 
Mr. Bisley took the Chair. 


22. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conference take one by one the 
items considered by the Committee of the Whole. 
The Agency's accounts for 1991 


23. The draft resolution on page III of document GC(XXXVI)/1005 was adopted. 
Harmony and compatibility of programme and budget and accounts documents 


24. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1028 was adopted. 
Measures to strengthen international co-operation in matters relating to 
nuclear safety and radiological protection 


25. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1046 and the draft 
resolutions entitled "Revision of the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation 
Protection" in document GC(XXXVI)/1042, "Education and training in radiation 
protection and nuclear safety" in document GC(XXXVI)/1048 and "Liability for 
nuclear damage" in document GC(XXXVI)/1047 were adopted. 
26. The PRESIDENT assumed that the Conference also wished to take note 
of the report of the Director General in document GC(XXXVI)/INF/311 on the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and that it wished 
to request the Director General to report to it at its thirty-seventh session 
on the results of the conference to review the Convention, which was to take 
place in Vienna the following week. 
27. It was so decided. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 7 


Strengthening of the safeguards system 


28. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1050 was adopted. 
Strengthening of the Agency's main activities 
29. The draft resolutions in documents GC(XXXVI)/1051 and GC(XXXVI)/1030 
were adopted. 
The financing of safeguards 


30. The draft resolutions in documents GC(XXXVI)/1036 and GC(XXXVI)/1037 
were adopted. 
The financing of technical assistance 


31. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1038 was adopted. 
Plan for producing potable water economically 
32. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1049 ws adopted. 
The Agency's programme and budget for 1993 and 1994 
33. Draft resolutions A. B and C in Annex IV to document GC(XXXVI)/1006 
were adopted. 
34. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference also wished to adopt the 
draft resolution concerning appropriations in the Agency's budget, which was 
set out in document GC(XXXVI)/1032. 
35. It was so decided. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1993 
36. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1011 with the addition of the footnote contained in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1011/Mod.1 and with the second sentence in footnote (b) on page 7 of 
document GC(XXXVI)/1011 amended to read: "The inclusion of Yugoslavia does 
not affect the question of the membership of Yugoslavia". 
37. It was so decided. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 8 


Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 


38. The draft resolutions in document GC(XXXVI)/1031 and the draft 
resolution entitled "Women in the Secretariat" in document GC(XXXVI)/10A0 and 
Corr.1 were adopted. 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 


39. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1039 was adopted. 
Revision of Article VI of the Statute as a whole 
40. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note of documents GC(XXXVI)/1024 
and 1024/Add.1 and that it wished to request the Board of Governors to 
establish a successor informal working group with the mandate set out in 
resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/566. 
41. It was so decided. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVI)/1026/Rev.4) 


42. The PRESIDENT said that by 7 p.m. on 24 September 1992 the 
voluntary contributions pledged by Member States to the Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation Fund for 1993 had reached a total of US $15 465 149. Since 
then, the Republic of Korea had pledged $244 755, which took the total amount 
pledged for 1993 to $15 709 904. 
The meeting was suspended at 4.10 p.m and resumed at 5.10 p.m. 


Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria) resumed the Chair. 


APPLICATION OF IAEA SAFEGUARDS IN THE MIDDLE EAST (GC(XXXV)/RES/571; 
GC(XXXVI)/1019, 1045, 1045/Rev.1 and 1045/Mod.1) 


43. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the proposals now before the 
Conference. Document GC(XXXVI)/1045, dated 24 September 1992, contained a 
draft resolution entitled "Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle 
East". Document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1, dated 25 September 1992, proposed the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 9 


addition of a paragraph between operative paragraphs 5 and 6 of the draft 
resolution. Document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1, dated 25 September 1992, 
incorporated the proposed new paragraph. 


44. Under Rule 63 of the Rules of Procedure, the texts of draft resolutions 
had to be distributed not later than the day preceding the meeting at which 
they were to be discussed. As document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1 did not satisfy 
that rule, he suggested that the Conference base its deliberations on documents 
GC(XXXVI)/1045 and Mod.1. 
45. Mr. BAKSHI (India) endorsed that constructive suggestion. As the 
President had pointed out, document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1 had only been 
distributed that very day. The provision in Rule 63 of the Rules of Procedure 
regarding submission of draft resolutions one day in advance was motivated by 
practical considerations, among other things by the need for delegations to 
seek instructions from their capitals. 
46. Even document GC(XXXVI)/1045, dated the previous day, had not actually 
been made available until 25 September. It might therefore be argued that 
Rule 63 applied to that document as well. Yet, in the interests of achieving 
consensus, he would urge that the General Conference take up that document, 
which closely followed the wording of resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/571, adopted by 
consensus in 1991. 
47. Mr. CLARK (United Kingdom), speaking on behalf of the members of 
the European Community, said that they fully endorsed the comments made by the 
representative of India. 
48. The PRESIDENT noted that, under Rule 63, the presiding officer 
could at his discretion, permit the consideration of amendments or procedural 
motions even if they did not satisfy the rule requiring distribution a day in 
advance. Document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1 was an amendment and was therefore 
covered by that rule: that was not the case with document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1. 
49. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) said the General Conference had 
already embarked upon a discussion of the draft resolution submitted by a 
number of countries, including his own, in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1. It 
should continue that discussion, and those who opposed the text should simply 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.352 
page 10 


say so. Some countries apparently had no wish to see stability in the Middle 
East and, accordingly, did not favour wider adherence to the NPT. Yet in view 
of the crisis currently afflicting the region, the move to achieve greater 
stability should be welcomed by all. As a country in the Middle East, Saudi 
Arabia was fully cognizant of its responsibilities to promote peace: that was 
why it was a sponsor of the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1. 
If Rule 63 of the Rules of Procedure was to be invoked as a pretext for 
blocking consideration of the draft, his delegation would request a 24-hour 
suspension of the debate so that the draft resolution could be considered the 
following day. 


50. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) said that, as the representative 
of a country well known for its sincere interest in peace and stability 


in the Middle East - a depositary State of the NPT, moreover, and a country 


that followed the rule of law - he fully supported the position taken by the 


representatives of India and the United Kingdom. 


51. Mr. ONSY (Egypt) said that, in the light of the foregoing 
discussion, he would appreciate an opportunity to introduce the draft 


resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1045, of which his country was a sponsor. 


52. Ms. MACHADO QUINTELLA (Brazil) said she was sure that all delegations 
shared the view expressed in document GC(XXXVI)/1045 that 
non-proliferation enhanced international peace and security and that the 
Agency's safeguards system provided a reliable means of verification of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Brazilian Government, for its part, 
firmly believed that bilateral and regional systems of verification were 
important confidence-building measures. It had actively participated in 
recent initiatives aimed at the full entry into force of the Tlatelolco 
Treaty, and was entirely in favour of the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 
53. The issue was of such importance, however, that reaching consensus on 
it was essential. She did not see how that could be achieved if the 
Conference were to consider an amendment introducing an idea that was not 
acceptable to all. Brazil was not a party to the NPT and its position on the 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 11 


subject was well known: the Treaty was not universal, and it was discriminatory. 
She would therefore urge the President not to permit consideration 
of the text contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1. The text in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1045, however, was closely aligned on the resolution adopted at the 
thirty-fifth session, and stood an excellent chance of winning consensus. 


54. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia), speaking on a point of order, 
recalled that his delegation had proposed the suspension of debate for 
24 hours, so as to permit discussion of document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1. He 
would like to know why his motion had not been entertained. 
55. The PRESIDENT referred the Saudi Arabian delegation to item 5(b) 
of the agenda, entitled "Closing date of the session and opening date of the 
next session", which clearly indicated that the closing date of the 
thirty-sixth regular session was today's date - 25 September 1992. 
56. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) endorsed the comments 
made by the representative of Saudi Arabia and said it was unfortunate that 
time constraints might preclude a thorough consideration of the application of 
IAEA safeguards in the Middle East. The scheduling of the item at the very 
end of the General Conference was ill-considered. A way should be found of 
extending the Conference's session for one more day so that the item could be 
debated seriously. 
57. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America), speaking on a point of 
order, noted that Rule 66 of the Rules of Procedure stipulated that, when a 
proposal had been rejected, it could not be reconsidered at the same session. 
To his way of thinking, the Conference had already concluded its discussion of 
the item on application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East. He had also 
understood the President to have ruled that document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1 
could not be considered. That ruling was entirely appropriate. The 
Conference had initially had before it the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1045 and an amendment thereto in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1. 
Under the Rules of Procedure, an amendment must be considered before the text 
to which it applied could be taken up. Yet document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1 had 
incorporated the amendment as if it had been approved, which was certainly not 
the case. 

GC(XXXVI)/0R.352 
page 12 


58. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) said he endorsed the statement made by the 
delegate of Saudi Arabia concerning document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1. 
59. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said it was clear that the 
Conference was prepared to approve document GC(XXXVI)/1045 by consensus: the 
document was, in essence, merely a repetition of the resolution adopted at the 
previous session. The only difficulty with the revised version incorporated 
in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1 lay in the appeal to all States in the Middle 
East to accede to the NPT. That request obviously represented a source of 
concern for some. The text did not call for all States of the world to become 
parties to the NPT. Rather, it called for the establishment of a nuclearweapon-
free zone in the Middle East, an area in which several wars had been 
fought in the past 45 years. One of the States in the region had recently 
acquired nuclear weapons, making the threat to peace even more serious. 
Adherence in the Middle East to the NPT had accordingly become a matter of 
critical importance. 
60. The sponsors respected the right of each and every State to decide 
whether or not to sign the NPT. The draft resolution did not depart 
significantly from the text approved at the thirty-fifth session of the 
General Conference. It was to be hoped that the Conference would take a 
historic step by approving the additional operative paragraph calling upon 
States in the Middle East to accede to the NPT. The threat represented by 
nuclear weapons transcended national boundaries, going far beyond the Middle 
East to affect all States and humanity as a whole. 
61. Mr. GUTIERREZ LEYTON (Chile) said the Conference was now in the 
throes of a battle over interpretation of the Rules of Procedure, particularly 
Rule 63. Yet under that Rule it was the presiding officer's prerogative to 
decide, if he considered it right to do so, that an amendment could be 
admitted for consideration even when it failed to satisfy the rule requiring 
distribution the previous day. Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure was 
really secondary to the fundamental consideration, namely the establishment of 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. His delegation attached great 
importance to that objective, and accordingly favoured the adoption of the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1045. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 13 


62. Mr. LEE (Canada) fully supported the ruling of the President to 
reject debate on document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1. Furthermore, the very late 
introduction of document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1 had brought unfortunate devisive 
factors into the discussion. His delegation, for one, would need to seek 
instructions on how to vote if the amendment set out in that document were 
considered; yet there was no time to do that. He supported the constructive 
suggestions made by the delegates of India, Egypt and Chile, who favoured an 
attempt to reach consensus on the basis of a resolution similar to the one 
adopted at the previous session (GC(XXXV)/RES/571); the draft the Conference 
should be considering was thus the one set out in document GC(XXXVI)/1045. 
63. Mr. TALIANI (Italy), associating himself with the remarks made by 
the delegate of the United Kingdom, said it was clear from the discussion so 
far that documents GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1 and Rev.1 presented difficulties to 
some Member States. In view of the fact that nearly all delegates were in 
agreement on the original document, GC(XXXVI)/1045, he appealed to the 
President to rule that discussion should be based on that uncontentious 
document. 
64. Mr. MAJADA (Jordan), referring to the point of order raised by the 
delegate of the United States with regard to Rule 66 of the Rules of 
Procedure, pointed out that, since the proposal had not yet been either 
adopted or rejected, it must still be under consideration. He, like the 
representative of Saudi Arabia, was of the view that the document under 
consideration was in fact GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1. Operative paragraph 6 of that 
document had been based on the Director General's report contained in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1019. From footnote 1 on page 1 of that document it was clear that 
the NPT was still an integral part of safeguards application in the Middle 
East, since the Syrian Government had declared that it would accept safeguards 
pursuant to Article III of the NPT. It followed, therefore, that the 
amendment incorporated in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1 was in the spirit of 
that report. 
65. Mr. MONDIMO (Argentina) said his delegation supported all those 
who had spoken in favour of considering document GC(XXXVI)/1045, which was the 
one on which consensus appeared likely. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 14 


66. Mr. SALLOUKH (Lebanon) said that his country had been making 
tireless efforts in pursuit of a consensus on the application of safeguards in 
the Middle East. He hoped that concerned Member States would respond to the 
spirit of the resolution, which laid down the first steps towards reducing 
armaments and establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. Although 
the efforts of the Agency had been commendable, no progress had yet been made 
because of the intransigence of certain parties. He believed that the 
application of full-scope safeguards would help to bring about the desired 
peace. His country had therefore co-sponsored document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1, 
which was intended to strengthen the original document particularly in view of 
the fact that the Middle East was such a sensitive area. He believed that 
adoption of that draft resolution would help bring peace to the region. 
67. Mr. CHEN (China) said that his Government's policy on the issue of 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East was very clear. It supported 
all constructive proposals to establish such a zone in that region. Hence, 
his delegation had participated in the consensus on resolution 
GC(XXXV)/RES/571 the previous year and hoped that consensus would be reached 
by the present meeting. From the procedural point of view, his delegation 
felt that documents GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1 and Rev.1 presented no problem since 
they had been drawn up by the sponsors of the original document, 
GC(XXXVI)/1045, who had every right to make amendments. Rule 63 of the Rules 
of Procedure allowed written or oral amendments to be introduced, and 
over-zealous application of the 24-hour rule would have the unreasonable 
consequence of prohibiting effective discussion on any draft resolution at a 
General Conference in the 24-hour period prior to closure of the session, 
since it meant that no amendments would be permissible. 


68. Mr. AL-SAEID (Kuwait) and Mr. ONSY (Egypt), speaking as 
co-sponsors of the draft resolution in documents GC(XXXVI)/1045 and 
GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1, supported the request made by the delegate of Saudi 
Arabia to extend the General Conference by a day and requested that a vote be 
taken on that proposal in accordance with Rule 66 of the Rules of Procedure. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 15 


69. Mr. MAYORSKY (Russian Federation) suggested that the President, in 
order to put an end to fruitless discusssion, make a ruling, as allowed for 
under Rule 63 of the Rules of Procedure, on the question whether the two draft 
resolutions and the amendment could be considered. 
70. In that connection he drew attention to the omission in the Russian 
version of the draft resolution set out in document GC(XXXVl)/1045/Rev.1 of 
paragraph 6, the very paragraph that had been the subject of intensive 
consultations. Unfortunately, the present occasion was not the first when 
omissions and serious mistakes had turned up in documents in Russian at the 
most crucial moment, and he felt bound to alert the Secretariat to the matter. 
71. Mr. RAZLEY (Malaysia) said that his country had no difficulty in 
supporting the amendment proposed in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1 and felt it 
would be regrettable if other countries who favoured strict adherence to the 
NPT had objections. 
72. Mr. BELLO (Philippines) pointed out that procedural rules were 
meant to help, not obstruct, discussion and decision-making. He advocated 
invoking Rule 102 of the Rules of Procedure, which allowed for the suspension 
of rules. There appeared to be a clear choice between adhering slavishly to 
the rules or enhancing the chances for peace in the Middle East. 
73. Mr. KEUNEDY (United States) said it was his understanding that the 
President had declared document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Rev.1 out of order. In the 
interests of concluding the debate in good time, he suggested that the 
Conference give its attention immediately to finding a consensus on document 
GC(XXXVI)/1045. 
74. Mr. KARIM (Bangladesh) joined the delegate of China in expressing 
the view that all amendments should be admissible. It was the prerogative of 
the President to make a ruling. 
75. The PRESIDENT ruled that documents GC(XXXVI)/1045 and Mod.1 would 
be considered. He invited the General Conference to vote first on the 
amendment contained in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 16 


76. Mr. CLARK (United Kingdom) moved that the General Conference not 
proceed to a vote on document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1, for three reasons. 
Firstly, introduction of the additional operation paragraph contained in that 
document would break the consensus for which the Conference was striving. 
Secondly, as a Depositary Government of the NPT, his country regretted that 
the scope of the appeal contained in the amendment was restricted to a 
particular area of the world and was not universal. Thirdly, the amendment 
had been proposed too late, although it seemed that the President had ruled 
otherwise. 
77. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudia Arabia), Mr. AL-SAEID (Kuwait) and 
Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) supported the President's suggestion that 
the amendment in document GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1 be put to the vote. 
78. The PRESIDENT said that the relevant Rule as regards the motion 
put by the delegate of the United Kingdom appeared to be Rule 59. If the 
motion was carried no further, action could be taken by the General Conference 
with respect to the amendment. 
79. Mr. KENNEDY (United States) fully endorsed the motion introduced 
by the delegate of the United Kingdom and pointed out that three speakers, one 
more than the rule provided for, had already spoken against it. 
80. The PRESIDENT said that, in accordance with a request he had 
received, a roll-call vote would be taken on the motion of the United Kingdom 
delegate. 
81. Iceland, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
82. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, 
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian 
Federation, Slovenia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 17 


Against; Algeria, Bangladesh, China, Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, 
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, 
Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, 
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, 
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 


Abstaining: Cameroon, Chile, Cuba, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, Ghana, 
Mexico, Nigeria, Spain, Thailand, Uruguay, Venezuela. 


83. There were 46 votes in favour and 28 against, with 13 abstentions. The 
motion was carried. 
84. The PRESIDENT said that, since the United Kingdom motion had been 
carried, the Conference would no longer consider document 
GC(XXXVI)/1045/Mod.1; it must now take a decision on the basis of the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1045. 
85. Mr. ONSY (Egypt) commended the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1045 to the General Conference and expressed the hope that it would 
be adopted by consensus. 
86. Mr. VILIAN XIIII (Belgium) said that his delegation attached great 
importance to the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1045 and could 
therefore join Egypt in recommending it strongly to the Conference. 
87. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) seconded the proposal to 
adopt the draft resolution by consensus. 
88. Mr. MONDINO (Argentina) said that his delegation also supported 
the draft resolution and was in full agreement with the suggestion that it 
should be adopted by consensus. 
89. Mr. PELEN (France) said that his delegation also wished to join 
those who had supported the appeal of Egypt. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1045 was a useful proposal, and very similar to the one which his 
delegation had supported the previous year. He also hoped that it would 
command a consensus. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 18 


90. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) said that his delegation also wished 
to join Egypt in asking for consensus. He had voted in favour of the 
procedural motion introduced by the United Kingdom delegation, but wished to 
emphasize that in doing so he had been motivated by purely procedural 
considerations; on the substance of the issue, his delegation wished to 
reiterate its full support for the NPT. 
91. Mr. CSERVENY (Hungary) said that in principle his delegation 
shared the views of those who had spoken in favour of the NPT. Politics, 
however, had often been defined as the art of the possible, and the divergent 
views which had been heard on the subject of the three documents presented to 
the Conference made it perfectly plain that if the Conference wished to unite 
it would have to do so on the basis of document GC(XXXVI)/1045. The 
resolution thus represented a compromise. His delegation was joining the 
consensus in the hope that it would bring concrete results in the coming year. 
92. Mr. BALANESCU (Romania) said that his delegation also supported 
the Egyptian proposal and hoped that a consensus would emerge in favour of it. 
93. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said his delegation was 
pleased to note that the draft resolution on the application of IAEA 
safeguards in the Middle East was meeting with a positive response from the 
various States in the region. The Israeli regime of course remained an 
exception. A point to be stressed was that all the Middle East States with 
peaceful nuclear programmes had in fact submitted their programmes to 
full-scope safeguards. It was to be hoped that, following measures to 
strengthen the regulatory functions of the Agency, there would be no further 
violation of safeguards agreements in the region of the Middle East and that 
all States with comprehensive safeguards agreements would honour their pledges. 
94. His delegation further hoped that all Middle East States which at 
present did not have a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency 


would reconsider their position and their policies and accept full-scope 


safeguards as a step towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone 


in what was a very sensitive part of the world. The only major obstacle to 


achieving that aim was, and remained, Israel. His delegation had emphasized 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 19 


that point before and wished to do so again: unless Israel accepted the 


United Nations and IAEA resolutions on the subject, no real progress could be 


achieved. His delegation accordingly requested all States in the Middle East 


to support the regulatory functions of the Agency in a spirit of international 


co-operation, as a step towards the establishment of peace and security in the 


sensitive region of the Middle East. 


95. The world was confronted with numerous problems and complex issues; 
that being so, it needed peace and security to overcome its ills. The 
international community should not and would not tolerate attitudes which were 
plainly in defiance of the wishes of the majority. 
96. His delegation accordingly believed that the real issue was not the 
implementation of comprehensive safeguards in the Middle East but rather the 


implementation of nuclear control and verification mechanisms in States which 


at present still lay beyond the reach of such mechanisms. Concerted 


international co-operation and co-ordination would be needed to solve that 


long-standing problem. 


97. Finally, his delegation wished to reiterate its belief that the draft 
resolution lacked an operative paragraph which would urge those States in the 
Middle East that had not yet acceded to NPT to do so as soon as possible. 
Even so, it would support the draft resolution. 
98. Mr. ALP (Turkey) said that his delegation also wished to add its 
voice to those who had spoken in favour of the draft resolution. 


99. The PRESIDENT said that, in the absence of any objection, he would 
assume that the General Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution set 
out in document GC(XXXVI)/1045 without a vote. 
100. It was so decided. 
101. Mr. BAKSHI (India) said that India's historical, consistent and 
strong support for the establishment of a just and honourable peace in the 
Middle East was too well known to need any further repetition. He could 
assure the Conference that, whatever discussions were held and whatever 
decisions taken in a technical organization like the Agency, India's support 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 20 


for that cause would continue. India sincerely hoped that all the peoples of 
the region would be able to live in peace and harmony, with dignity and honour. 


102. His delegation noted that the resolution just adopted by the Conference 
requested the Director General to facilitate the application of full-scope 
Agency safeguards to all nuclear activities in the Middle East. Reference was 
also made to the preparation of model agreements for the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. In that context, he wished to 
reiterate the position which India had long adopted as a matter of principle. 
India firmly believed that, under its Statute, the Agency could apply 
safeguards only "... at the request of parties, to any bilateral or 
multilateral arrangement, or at the request of a State, to any of that State's 
activities in the field of atomic energy". The basic principle involved in 
that connection was that the Agency's activities must be undertaken in 
response to a request made by a State or States from the region concerned. It 
followed that any proposal for a nuclear-weapon-free zone in a particular 
region must emanate from the region itself; that it must have the consent of 
all the States in the region; and that it must evolve as a result of 
negotiations among them. India did not believe that other States, or the 
Agency, could or should try to impose on a region a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in the absence of an initiative emanating from the States of the region 
concerned. 
103. With regard to the resolution just adopted, it was to be noted that no 
State from the region concerned had expressed disagreement with the call for 
application of IAEA safeguards to all nuclear activities in the region, or to 
the call for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. In view of that 
implied consent, his delegation had gone along with the resolution. At the 
same time, however, he wished to state for the record that its assent in the 
present case was without prejudice to India's consistent and long-standing 
position of principle as outlined by his delegation. 
104. Mr. AL-MATOOQ (Iraq) said that his delegation approved in 
principle of the application of safeguards to all nuclear activities in the 
Middle East and also supported the idea of creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in that region. Nevertheless, it had reservations about the draft resolution 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 21 


in document GC(XXXVI)/1045 because the text did not clearly and specifically 
mention the nuclear potential of Israel, the only country in the region which 
possessed nuclear weapons. The text seemed to equate Israel, a country in 
possession of nuclear weapons, with the Arab States which had none. 


105. Mr. ETTINGER (Israel) said that a major event had taken place 
since the last session of the General Conference, namely the Madrid Peace 
Conference. That Conference was paving the way to direct talks among the 
States of the Middle East on all problems affecting their region, including 
regional security and arms control. The common purpose of those initiatives 
was to launch a confidence-building process which, it was to be hoped, would 
ultimately lead to peace. 
106. One of the main tasks of all international organizations, including the 
IAEA, should be to support such endeavours, aimed as they were, in the present 
instance, at a peaceful resolution of conflicts between States in the Middle 
East. In that context, it was most important to maintain the principle of 
credible and equitable treatment of Member States. Israel expected such an 
approach on the part of the Agency's governing bodies with regard to Israel's 
standing in the Agency. 
107. Israel had joined the consensus on the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVI)/1045 concerning the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle 
East. However, it wished at the same time to put on record its position on 
that important matter. Israel believed that the application of IAEA 
safeguards in the Middle East should be an integral part of the process of 
establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in accordance with certain definite 
principles, among which were the primacy of zonal initiatives, direct 
negotiations among the States in the region, and verification of the agreement 
through mutual inspections complemented by IAEA safeguards. The Agency could 
render assistance to the negotiating parties by offering ideas Which might 
lead to the establishment of models for the deliberations to be conducted by 
the negotiating States. Those were the essential conditions for a credible 
non-proliferation regime in the Middle East - one which, as everyone hoped, 
would bring peace, security and stability. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 22 


108. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) congratulated the General 
Conference on its adoption by consensus of the draft resolution set out in 
document GC(XXXVI)/1045. The United States delegation wanted to make it clear 
that it considered the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to 
be one of the most important legal instruments in all of history; it was 
beyond any doubt the instrument which had attracted the widest adherence, and 
in fact accession to the NPT was a signal event in the life of a country. His 
own country stood solidly by the principle that the NPT should command 
universal adherence: all countries should belong to it, and that applied not 
just to the Middle East but to all regions of the world. 
109. The position adopted by his delegation with regard to the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXVI)/1045 had been dictated by its vision of 
consensus as a real possibility. That consensus had now been achieved, and he 
once again congratulated the General Conference on its wisdom. 
110. Mr. CLARK (United Kingdom) said that he wished to second the 
sentiments just expressed. As a Depositary Government of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the United Kingdom was second to none in 
its support for the Treaty and well understood the desire to include a 
reference to it in the resolution. The United Kingdom, like others, had been 
consistently in favour of universal application of the NPT, and urged all 
countries which had not yet done so to adhere to the Treaty, which, as the 
delegate of the United States had said, was a particularly important 
instrument for the preservation of world peace. 
111. Mr. MAYORSKY (Russian Federation) said that his country had also 
been designated as a Depositary Government of the NPT and as such was 
particularly interested in universal participation. Russia was in fact doing 
its utmost to ensure that that most important legal instrument could be 
applied not only to all countries in the Middle East but indeed to all 
countries of the world. His delegation's vote should be regarded as having 
been dictated by concern for proper procedure, as had been made clear during 
the discussion preceding the vote. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 23 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


112. Ms. MACHADO QUINTELLA (Brazil), speaking as the representative of 
a country Whose Head of Delegation had presided over the General Conference at 
its thirty-fifth regular session, wished to express deep appreciation to the 
President for the signal competence and ability with which he had guided the 
Conference's work. Some difficult and controversial issues had had to be 
confronted in the course of the week, and it was greatly to the President's 
credit that he had conducted the discussion of those issues in such a helpful 
and impartial manner. He deserved the thanks of all. 
113. Mr. AHUMADA (Colombia), speaking on behalf of the Latin American 
and Caribbean group, thanked the President for the supreme skill with which he 
had guided the work of the Conference. It was thanks to the President's wise 
stewardship that the Conference, despite the many shoals it had had to 
negotiate, had concluded its business successfully. 
114. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) thanked the President on behalf of 
his own delegation, and also on behalf of the Asian group which he 
represented, for the masterly way in which he had presided over the 
Conference. It was very much thanks to his wisdom and patience that the 
Conference had ultimately been steered into the right port. The delegates 
were unanimous in wishing him every success. 
115. Mr. KENNEDY (United States of America) wished to add his voice to 
those who had paid tribute to the President's wise guidance. He had been the 
perfect chairman in fact, highly skilled as he was in obtaining consensus, and 
delegates wished him all the best for the future. 
116. Mr. MAYORSKY (Russian Federation), speaking on behalf of the 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe, congratulated the President warmly on 
the superb work he had done. His shrewdness, wisdom and tireless efforts had 
made the Conference a success, and it was to be hoped that he would himself 
enjoy success and happiness in the future. 
117. Mr. LAMAMRA (Algeria) said that he had had the pleasure, earlier 
in the week, of proposing the President's candidature for office and was 
pleased to say that, in the course of five days, the President had 
magisterially demonstrated the qualities mentioned in the nomination speech. 

GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 24 


118. Mr. SEEBERG (Norway), speaking on behalf of the Western Europe and Others Group, 
congratulated the President on his supremely competent and skilful guidance of the Conference's 


business. 


119. The PRESIDENT thanked all delegations for the kind words addressed 
to hint on behalf of the Conference. It had been an honour and a privilege to 
serve as President of the General Conference at its thirty-sixth regular 
session. The day-to-day business of the Conference had involved a number of 
problems, and he was extremely grateful for the close co-operation which had 
made it possible to dispose of those problems successfully. 
120. He had assumed the Presidency of the Conference in full confidence that 
he would continue to receive the kind of support so amply demonstrated by the 
acclamation he had received at the time of his election. After five days of 
hard work, it was indeed heartening to recall the practical demonstration of 
that support. He wished to thank all delegates who had been able to share 
their thoughts with him and assured them that their ideas had been invaluable. 
121. The Conference had heard speakers detailing the progress made by 
national agencies responsible for IAEA affairs in implementing the decisions 
of the thirty-fifth regular session and in advancing the goals and objectives 
of the Agency. Delegates had also shared ideas on the important issues of the 
moment, such as nuclear safety, and had reaffirmed the need to exploit fully 
the benefits of nuclear energy. The Agency's safeguards system had received 
deserved emphasis, and the desirability of ensuring its effectiveness and 
efficiency as a means of strengthening the non-proliferation regime had been 
generally acknowledged. Delegates had also grappled with the complex issues 
of financing the activities of the Agency, and had done so with a sense of 
responsibility and with candour. The potential of nuclear applications for 
solving mankind's pressing problems in the areas of food and agriculture, 
industry, medicine and so on seemed never to have been greater, and the 
Agency's ability to assist in those areas was hardly in doubt. 
122. It was reassuring to see that all delegates continued to have 
confidence in the Agency's staff and paid well-deserved tribute to the 


Director General for his leadership and his commitment to the Agency's goals. 



GC(XXXVI)/OR.352 
page 25 


Those qualities had also been seen in the skill with which the Agency had 
carried out the tasks assigned to it by the United Nations Security Council, 
as well as in the imagination with which it had confronted its financial 
problems - problems, one must firmly hope, that would prove to be only 
temporary. 


123. He had been struck with admiration by the display of unity and candour 
among all delegations, in negotiating resolutions to advance the goals of the 
Agency, and also in providing signposts for future action. That unity, which 
he called the Vienna spirit, augured well for the Agency. It would be much 
needed during the months and years ahead, particularly when the problem of 
providing the Agency with the wherewithal to carry out its tasks had to be 
tackled. 
124. Delegates would recall that, on assuming the Presidency of the session, 
he had referred to the honour done to his country by his election. As the 
Conference neared the end of its session, he was indeed appreciative of the 
manner in which that statement had received practical demonstration. Nigeria, 
his own country, took its role in the Agency seriously and had always 
endeavoured to discharge its obligations faithfully. As a party to the NPT, 
it considered the Agency's role in that area to be of primary importance. 
Thus, Nigeria continued to have confidence in the Agency's safeguards system. 
But perhaps even more germane was what the Agency had done for Nigeria by 
providing assistance for development. Nigeria's commitment to the Agency's 
goals and objectives would remain unshaken, and its active participation in 
the pursuit of those goals was certain. 
125. At the threshold of a new era it would be folly to shy away from the 
task of expanding the frontiers of nuclear science and technology, or from the 
challenge of bringing their fruits to humanity at large. Those goals should 
be pursued with resolve. The new spirit of co-operation should be exploited 
to advance the goals and objectives of the Agency, so that both developed and 
developing Member States could share in the bounties that lay ahead. 
126. He would not wish to conclude without expressing the Conference's 
appreciation to the Secretariat, whose tireless efforts had done so much to 

6C(XXXVI)/0R,352 
page 26 


make the Conference run smoothly. Last, but certainly not least, gratitude 
was due to the Secretary of the Conference, whose professional competence was 
so familiar that it was in danger of being taken for granted. 


127. Finally, he wished, on behalf of the Conference, to thank the Austrian 
authorities and the city of Vienna for the traditional hospitality which had 
been enjoyed by all during the week past. 
128. Before closing the session he invited delegations to observe one minute 
of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation, in accordance with Rule 48 of 
the Rules of Procedure, and to include in their thoughts Ambassador Gaston 
Ponce-Caballero, Resident Representative of Bolivia to the IAEA, who had 
passed away in La Paz the previous week. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


129. The PRESIDENT declared the thirty-sixth regular session of the 
General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m. 



